Psychosis and schizophrenia Psychosis and TENÓRIO, Fernando. Psychosis and schizophrenia: effects schizophrenia: effects of changes in psychiatric classifications on clinical and of changes in psychiatric theoretical approaches to mental illness. História, Ciências, Saúde – Manguinhos, classifications on Rio de Janeiro, v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016. Available at: http://www.scielo.br/hcsm. clinical and theoretical Abstract approaches to This article discusses changes in the diagnostic classification systems for mental illness mental illness, especially the conceptual weakening of the “psychosis” category while schizophrenia became the only psychosis.
Current pathological classifications prioritize a physicalist approach. Consequently, conditions that previously were associated with neurosis and subjectivity are being medicalized, conditions previously recognized as psychotic are relocated under the heading of personality disorders, and psychosis has been reduced to schizophrenia and considered a deficit of psychic functions. This article indicates the clinical and operational validity of the notion of “psychosis” as a nosographic category permitting a more complex approach to “schizophrenia”, which in psychiatry is the last concept that bears the symbolic weight of madness.
Keywords: psychosis; schizophrenia; psychiatry; psychoanalysis; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Fernando Tenório Disorders. Professor, Department of Psychology/ Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro. Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225/sala 201-L 22451-900 – Rio de Janeiro – RJ – Brasil fernandotenorio@terra.com.br Received for publication in November 2014.
Approved for publication in September 2015. Translated by Tracy Miyake. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0104-59702016005000018 v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016 1Fernando Tenório This article discusses the changes which have occurred in the diagnostic classification systems for mental illness, especially regarding the conceptual weakening of the psychosis category, at the same time that schizophrenia has become dominant as the only condition recognized as psychotic. Although the adjective “psychotic” remains in the classifications, since the third revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III) published in 1980 by the American Psychiatric Association (APA, 1980), the notion of “psychosis” as a category was abandoned. This term had designated a class of disorders opposed to the “neuroses” (a concept which in turn was also discarded from the new classifications).
This new inflection represented a paradigm shift, weakening the description of mental illnesses based on assumptions we could call psychodynamic in favor of a physicalist approach to mental pathology. At least three major consequences of this change can be seen, in terms of disease classification and clinical application. The first is the medicalization of conditions which had previously been associated with subjectivity, such as anxiety, sadness, obsessive thoughts, phobias, sexual behaviors and others – all of which had previously been approached from the framework of the neuroses as conceived by psychoanalysis.
The second consequence is that conditions which had previously been recognized as psychotic have been relocated to fit under the heading of personality disorders. The third consequence, which we will discuss in detail, is the reduction of psychosis to schizophrenia; in other words, schizophrenia became the only condition which is currently recognized as psychotic. We will discuss this last aspect, emphasizing the consequences of the fact that the “only psychosis” remaining is a condition approached from the viewpoint of a deficit of psychic functions.
We are addressing the practical field of mental health in which we work, where we notice that the proliferation of diagnoses generated by the DSM has frequently had a disorienting effect in relation to diagnosis and the clinic – mainly the effect of a lack of familiarity with psychosis where it often appears. We will attempt to indicate, within both the description of diseases and psychiatric classification, how current leanings make psychosis more difficult to recognize, except when disruptive or deficit-related symptoms occur. In this sense, our approach lies within psychiatric doctrine and the dialog between psychoanalysis and psychiatry, although it does not neglect to consider and mention the convergence of economic and social processes which have contributed to the transformations we discuss.
We know from Canguilhem (2012) that it is impossible to separate the internal reading of a scientific discourse from its external reading, since this latter creates the conditions which make the referred discourse possible, and that often the multiple processes which unfold in a particular historical, social, and economic context decisively determine the phenomena within that discipline (cf. also Latour, Woolgar, 1997).1 Our objective is to indicate, in a way which can be useful to the work of mental health professionals, the clinical validity of the division between neurosis and psychosis, its great value in terms of practical guidance, and above all, the need to pursue a deep understanding of psychosis as a psychopathological condition that does not define a “handicap” type situation in terms of mental function, but instead a subject’s specific logic for functioning in the face of the demands of life and subjectivity. 22 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia Psychosis as a category of psychiatry The notion of psychosis was the category that determined psychiatry for almost two centuries.
In its strong sense, it defined or defines a deep psychological structure – a specific mode of subjective constitution and functioning – as opposed to neurosis, and its expression in symptoms can vary greatly. In this meaning, psychosis demarcated the specific field of psychiatry, its most suitable object. However, this concept has been abandoned by current classifications – the DSM, currently in its fifth edition, and the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Diseases (ICD) – for reasons which we will discuss.
Instead, a “descriptive” or “empirical” classification of mental disorders was proposed, one that would abandon any psychodynamic reference, and limited itself to the supposedly objective identification and quantification of symptoms. Along with the abandonment of this conception and the opposition between neurosis and psychosis, the categories which had expressed the terms for psychiatry in culture for a whole century were also abandoned: paranoia, melancholy, manic depression, hysteria, and obsessional neurosis. The stated intention of these modifications was to create as much consensus as possible in psychiatric classifications, regardless of which school the psychiatrist followed.
To do this, the DSM and then the ICD declared themselves to be atheoretical, excluding the categories which involved theoretical and psychodynamic assumptions and intending to base classification exclusively on symptoms that could be empirically observed and quantified. Some works we will cite show that while this may not have been the intention, in effect these changes certainly suppressed reference to psychoanalysis. They also demonstrate how a diagnostic system exclusively based on symptoms has favored increasing emphasis on pharmacological treatment.
It is not by chance that the only condition currently recognized as psychosis (schizophrenia) is a deficient condition which offers a biological interpretation, pharmacological action, and rehabilitation activities that can be both generous actions of social inclusion and at the same time can shift the balance toward a practice of normalization and adaptation, depending on the interpretation. Psychoanalysis has been charged with sustaining the clinical and doctrinal validity of the psychosis category, to the point of spreading the feeling that this concept pertains more to psychoanalysis than psychiatry. But on the contrary, the “psychosis” category was created precisely to characterize psychiatry, initially with regard to the neurological aspects of mental illness, and later in relation to the “mild mental illnesses” that would become the métier of psychoanalysis itself.
The term “psychosis” was created by the Austrian psychiatrist Ernst von Feuchtersleben in 1845 to describe the psychological manifestations of mental illness, distinguishing them from the supposed alterations of the nervous system which caused them in some cases (and which were called “neuroses”) (Garrabé, 1989, p.186; 2004, p.28). It should be mentioned that the term “psychosis” was created within the sphere of mental medicine precisely to differentiate the “psychic” from the neuronal, and as such was the object that characterized psychiatry. Despite the assumption that for every psychosis (every psychic manifestation) there was a neurosis (a modification in the nervous system that caused the psychic manifestations), the field that was delineated by the advent of this notion entailed the ability to describe, classify, v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016 3Fernando Tenório and treat “various psychoses without concerning ourselves with the changes in the nervous system that cause them” (Garrabé, 2004, p.29).2,3 At the end of the nineteenth century, the advent of neurology showed that for most mental illnesses, the previously assumed injuries did not exist, unlike in neurological diseases; the emergence of psychoanalysis explained neuroses by assigning them to certain psychological mechanisms, capable of modification through psychoanalytic treatment. Although Freud (1994b; 1994a) included paranoia in the “defensive neuropsychoses” he described in 1894 and 1896, he soon would introduce a watershed between paranoia and obsessional neurosis and hysteria: unlike the latter two, paranoia or psychosis were not curable through psychoanalysis. This established the terms psychosis and neurosis as antonyms, each hosting a certain group of psychological diseases.
When it was introduced by Feuchtersleben, the term “psychosis” meant simply “psychic disease,” representing practically any and all mental illness. Through the shifts we have mentioned, the term gradually came to define more severe mental illnesses, leaving the term “neurosis” to designate “milder” diseases in which the patient has “conscience of his morbid character” (Postel, 2003, p.373). According to Postel (2003), the following psychiatric criteria became classic descriptors of psychosis: the severity of the disorders, leading to significant deficiencies or disability; lack of awareness of the morbidity of the disorder (for example, the delusional person’s unwavering belief in his delusion, the absence of criticism of the maniac patient, neither one admitting they need treatment); the strange and bizarre character of the disturbances, which produce a malaise linked to this strangeness in the area surrounding them; difficulty communicating or even total lack of communication ability on the part of the psychotic patient; the retreat, or closing in himself, that accompanies a rupture with the surroundings and with reality; all this culminating in a profound disturbance of the subject’s relationship with reality, of which the delusions and hallucinations are symptoms.
Bercherie (1989, p.150) notes that the work of Charcot and Magnan illustrates this process of delineating psychosis as a more severe condition than neurosis, as true insanity indeed. Charcot was trying to delineate the “permanent mental state” of hysterical patients as quite different from the hysterical patients admitted to psychiatric hospitals: instead of “hysterical insanity,” he emphasized a hysterical “character” marked by “emotionalism, impressionability, and suggestibility,” which was defined in relation to psychosis. During this same period, Magnan distinguished the mixed states (organic brain lesions, senile dementia, neuroses [hysteria], epilepsy, alcoholism etc.) from “true insanity or psychoses” (cited in Bercherie, 1989, p.150).4 Psychosis went on to be the most suitable object of psychiatry, separating neurological diseases pertaining to neurology on the one hand, from the neuroses, which became the area where Freudian psychoanalysis excelled.
If a science or discipline is only characterized by describing its specific object, the notion of psychosis was the one which specified psychiatry from neurology, on the one hand, and psychoanalysis, on the other (even if the initial meaning of the term differed from how it was to be conceived eventually). Regarding psychoanalysis, here we refer to the situation left by Freud, who despite maintaining a theoretical and clinical interest in psychosis, considered it inaccessible for psychoanalysis. Freud himself never had a regular practice with psychotic patients.
As a 44 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia neurologist, he was interested in the enigma that hysteria represented for this specialty, and the invention of psychoanalysis corresponds to the rupture that Freud introduced into the understanding of this disease (hysterical neurosis). This rupture eventually inverted the very meaning of the term neurosis, which no longer alluded to the neuronal system but instead came to designate a psychopathological state characterized by the absence of organic disease in the nervous system. Regarding psychosis, Freud placed all his hopes into the work of his colleagues Karl Abraham and Carl Jung, both psychiatrists dedicated to applying psychoanalysis to this pathology.
However, despite their significant contributions – first, regarding psychosis-manic depression (Abraham, 1970), and second, with regard to schizophrenia (Jung, 1986) – it can be said that only with Lacan did psychoanalysis come to develop a theory of psychosis that was not based on notions borrowed from the neurosis clinic. Another of Freud’s counterparts in the area of psychosis, Eugen Bleuler, played a prominent role in psychiatry, but not in psychoanalysis, as we shall discuss below. While the terminology was undergoing these adjustments, in which the notion of psychosis indicated severe mental diseases separated from neurological diseases and neurosis, Emil Kraepelin reordered the psychiatric classification of diseases in terms of three major clinical entities: “manic-depressive insanity,” “paranoia,” and “dementia praecox” (which Bleuler soon renamed “schizophrenia”).
In this way, the term psychosis came to be used for this group of diseases. Psychosis (or psychoses) was understood to mean maniac-depressive psychosis, paranoia, and schizophrenia. It can be said that throughout the twentieth century, these three disorders characterized the field of psychiatry.
Emil Kraepelin: dementia praecox, paranoia, and manic-depressive insanity The nosographic structure established by Emil Kraepelin around the turn of the twentieth century guided psychiatry for the next hundred years. By emphasizing the criteria for evolution and prognosis (introducing the dimension of the course of the disease over time), Kraepelin: (1) formalized maniac-depressive insanity as a single disease; (2) isolated paranoia as an independent clinical condition, reducing the extent of this morbid entity; and (3) grouped together into a single clinical entity diseases which had previously been considered separated: hebephrenia, catatonia, and much of what had been called paranoia. This new entity, dementia praecox, would later be called schizophrenia.
The condition that many authors recognize as “the schizophrenia before schizophrenia” (Garrabé, 2004, p.17-20) was described by Bénédict-Augustin Morel in his Études cliniques of 1851-1852, and was named “dementia praecox” ten years later, in his 1860 Traité des maladies mentales. According to Garrabé, Morel (cited in Garrabé, 2004, p.19) described this “curious intellectual degradation of the second age” that evolves by successive stages of torpor and agitation until reaching the “terminal phase of psychological dissolution”, indicating the traits which even today are found in descriptions of the disease: suggestibility, stereotypy of attitudes, gestures, and language, catatonia, smirks and bizarre tics, negativity (which he called nihilism), and “the strange way of walking”. Morel stated that “the outcome of idiocy and dementia is the sad crown of evolution.” This princely description was renewed in 1871 by Ewald Hecker, who described this clinical condition as hebephrenia v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016 5Fernando Tenório (in reference to Hebe, daughter of Zeus and goddess of youth): a psychosis that erupts at puberty, characterized by intellectual impairment, psychomotor inhibition, negativism, irregular moods, with manic, depressive, and confused states, hetero and auto-aggression, progression to dementia, and, most notably, immaturity (cf. Nobre de Melo, 1979, p.237- 238). What Hecker added was the identification of anomalies in syntactic construction and a tendency to deviate from the normal way of speaking and writing – formal changes in language that, according to Hecker, express a profound breakdown of the Ego and are early indications of the intellectual weakening that will occur later.
Meanwhile, catatonia was described in 1874 by Karl Kahlbaum (1999) as a psychomotor pathology characterized by loss of motor spontaneity and initiative, inertia, negativity, stereotypy of gestures, and catalepsy, which could sharply transform into agitation and impulsive violence, progressing to phases of melancholy, mania, stupor/confusion, and dementia. Using the evolution criterion (clinical-evolutionary method), Kraepelin was able to recognize “intimate analogies” between the two diseases: “emergence in the second age, psychological breakdown, affective indifference, and finally, more or less rapid termination by dementia” (Nobre de Melo, 1979, p.238). Kraepelin made these similarities prevail over the phenomenological differences.
The same criterion allowed him to separate these diseases from maniac-depressive psychosis, notwithstanding the occurrence of manic and depressive states in both, since an essential notion of maniac-depressive psychosis is the full recovery of the personality at the end of each episode, which does not occur in hebephrenia or catatonia. Regarding to paranoia, as it was considered until that time, it encompassed all the psychoses in which there was chronic delirium, whether accompanied by other changes or not, and regardless of evolution. From one extreme to another (from the delusions of Magnan’s degenerates to the mere hypertrophy of certain personality characteristics according to Krafft-Ebing), everything was paranoia (cf.
Cacho, 1991). Kraepelin further refined the notion, distinguishing two types of chronic delusions: dissociated delusions, which are accompanied by sensory errors (hallucinations) and sooner or later end in psychic decline, and interpretative and systematically evolving delusions which are not accompanied by hallucinations, do not compromise other psychological functions, and never end in dementia. He only used the term paranoia to describe the latter case.
He termed the dissociated delusions that move toward deterioration “paranoid dementia”, and grouped them with the hebephrenic and catatonic form to complete the dementia praecox group. With his work, Kraepelin established the precise definitions of “dementia praecox” (which represents what Bleuler will later call schizophrenia), “maniac-depressive psychosis” and “paranoia.” In other words, he established the psychoses of the twentieth century, which would be the setting for psychiatric nosography for the next hundred years. Briefly, Kraepelin’s dementia praecox (2004, p.19) is the mental illness defined by “a peculiar destruction of the internal connections of the psychological personality.
The effects of this damage on mental life predominates in the emotional and volitional areas.” It begins during youth and leads to a state of dementia; its three clinical forms are paranoid, hebephrenic, and catatonic dementia praecox. 66 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia The similarity between the fundamental clinical condition within this new disease classification and Morel’s old description of dementia praecox allows us to confirm some link between the two. However, by grouping Morel’s dementia praecox with other clinical conditions, and sidelining the many differences related to symptomology, Kraepelin gave new existence to a much broader range than Morel’s classification permitted.
Garrabé (2004, p.20) attributes this difference to the fact that Morel’s French tradition favored nosology, or the clinical description of a clinical condition and its distinctive traits, while Kraepelin’s German tradition favored nosography, the description and classification of diseases. For this reason, the German school was noted for producing broad categories of classification, while the French school was known for its description of conditions characterized by their differences and specific qualities. The pseudopods of Kraepelin’s dementia praecox and especially of Bleuler’s schizophrenia came to absorb and relegate to oblivion several conditions that the French tradition had isolated into their discrete elements.
Eugen Bleuler: schizophrenia In 1911, Eugen Bleuler, a psychiatrist who followed Freud’s ideas, proposed a new name, schizophrenia, for the morbid entity Kraepelin had grouped together. The word itself indicates the emphasis on psychological aspects, in particular the splitting of personality (from the Greek skhízein, to separate or split). In creating the name schizophrenia and proposing that it replaced dementia praecox, Bleuler (1993, p.38) stated that he sought to deepen the study of pathology by “applying Freud’s ideas to dementia praecox.” He proposed defining and naming the disease not for its evolution, but for its psychological dynamics: “Unfortunately, we cannot escape from the unpleasant task of forging a new term for this nosological group.
... I call dementia praecox ‘schizophrenia’ because ... the splitting of all types of psychological functions is one of its most important characteristics” (Bleuler, 1993, p.38; emphasis in the original).
Bleuler (1993, p.45) defines schizophrenia as a group of psychoses characterized “by a change in thought, in feeling, and in relations with the outside world of a particular type that we cannot find anywhere else.” There is “a more or less distinct division of psychological functions,” the personality “loses its unity,” concepts lose their integrity and are often reduced to partial representations, and associative activity is fragmented and stops abruptly, losing its connection and instead leading to something bizarre. In the most serious cases, all manifestations of affect are abandoned; in less severe cases, affect is inappropriate. These so-called fundamental symptoms became known as the “three As” of Bleuler’s schizophrenia: ambivalence, split associations, and inappropriate or flattened affect.
Another symptom is added to these, which Bleuler (1993, p.55) introduced a new term to describe: autism, which is “a tendency to place their own fantasy above reality and retreat from the real world.” Finally, “accessory” symptoms, which are not exclusive to schizophrenia, can also be observed: hallucinations and delusional ideas, confused and crepuscular states, manic and melancholic emotional swings, and catatonic symptoms. With regard to this new term, “autism,” Bleuler (1993, p.112, note 80) explains in a note that “autism is more or less the same thing that Freud calls autoeroticism,” but that he coined v.23, n.4, out.-dez. 2016 7Fernando Tenório the new term to avoid misunderstandings that could stem from the Freudian concepts of libido and eroticism.
Bleuler (1993, p.112, note 80) states that autism refers to a disconnect from reality, but that a term other than “loss of reality” was needed because this disconnect is selective; the schizophrenic patient does not disconnect from reality as a whole, he disconnects only from what is “in opposition to the patient’s complexes.” This is, therefore, a libidinal position that alludes to its causality in the psyche, but like other authors Bleuler preferred not to link it to the sexual as posited by Freud, transforming “autoeroticism” into “autism.” In this case, the suppression of the sexual is literal: take “eros” out of the word “autoeroticism” and you have the word “autism.” What we refer to today as schizophrenia corresponds to Bleuler’s description. In his Manual of psychiatry, Henri Ey gives this disease a systematic description which is worth summarizing here (Ey, Bernard, Brisset, s.d., p.534-536, 574-585). Ey defines schizophrenia as a chronic psychosis characterized by a process of mental breakdown that can be called “dementia praecox,” “intrapsychic discordance,” or “autistic dissociation of personality.” It is characterized by the manifestation of a deep tendency to stop constructing one’s own world in communication with the other to get lost in autistic thought.
According to Ey, the absence of a rigorous definition does not prevent most clinicians from understanding it in practice with regard to the diagnosis of schizophrenia: Generally, schizophrenic psychosis is understood to mean a set of disorders dominated by discordance, ideoverbal incoherence, ambivalence, autism, delusional ideas, poorly systematized hallucinations, and profound affective disturbances in the sense of detachment and strangeness of feelings – disorders that tend to evolve into a deficit and a dissociation of personality (Ey, Bernard, Brisset, s.d., p.536). Faithful to Bleuler’s classification, Henri Ey states that schizophrenia develops along a “negative” line, or a deficit of dissociation (dissociation syndrome), and a secondary “positive” syndrome, where delusional ideas, perceptions, feelings, and activity are produced. These two poles are complementary and connected by the following common features which are inherent to the disease: ambivalence, the bizarre, impenetrability, and isolation.
The result of these two poles of symptoms is autism, taken to mean the “particular attitude of the schizophrenic,” the “particular characteristic of schizophrenic psychosis” (Ey, Bernard, Brisset, s.d., p.585). The first line, the one of the dissociation, consists of the breakdown of life related to the psyche, the internal discordance of psychological phenomena. It includes disorders related to the thought process (incoherent, disorganized, elliptical, long winded, and tangential thought, with loosening of the associative connections and the distinct symptom of the block), language (muteness, inappropriate responses, truncated or even inability to participate in conversation, obscene or insulting verbal impulses, neologisms or neological use of words and changes or even interruption of syntax, which can lead to unintelligible combinations or “word salad”), affect (leveling, fading, or even dulling of affect, or paradoxically, great sensitivity or vulnerability, inappropriate or inconsistent affection, ambivalence) and psychomotor abilities (catatonic symptoms: slowness, stereotypy, mannerisms, paradoxical occurrence of negativity and motor passivity, agitation, and stupor).
88 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia The second line, that of positive or productive symptoms, culminates in delirium, at least in paranoid schizophrenia, but includes the entire series of hallucinations and experiences that begin with the feeling of strangeness (or xenopathy) of thought and of mental functioning – delusional intuitions and perceptions, mental automatism, depersonalization, and the experience of influence. In paranoid schizophrenia, these phenomena are important and culminate in some delusional construction, but not to the extent of comprising systematic delirium, as they do in paranoia. Henri Ey’s description (Ey, Bernard Brisset, s.d., p.584) mentions a fragmentary and disjointed delirium, “without discursive progress,” which does not progress, and is labyrinthine and stereotyped, crystallized into its sparse fragments.
Its evolution moves toward impoverishment. “The complete disagreement corresponds to an unspeakable delirium: it is this double regressive movement that imposes the notion of autism.” Autism is, then, the “synthesis of what we have just described,” the general position of the schizophrenic: “We have to understand this word [autism] as the establishment of a world into oneself, one which tends to close it in itself. In their complementary action, the negative and positive structures of schizophrenia will build this ‘own world,’ that is impenetrable, truly alienated” (Ey, Bernard Brisset, s.d., p.585; emphasis in the original).
Although Bleuler’s description was intended to emphasize the psychological aspect, it did not avoid referring to the idea of deficit: damage in the affect, breakdown in thought and in associations, loss of reality, and as a distinctive criterion, the impossibility of restitutio ad integrum. In addition, this description relied on psychological characteristics that were not exclusive to schizophrenia (notably, the idea of “splitting”). Consequently, schizophrenia extended “its pseudopods toward other ‘atypical’ mental disorders of all the other classes,” (Rancher et al., 1993, p.34), and became a notion that was too encompassing, one could say “the only psychosis” (p.14).
Bleuler thought he was being Freudian in proposing the new name, saying that he was applying Freud’s ideas to dementia praecox, but Freud himself soon objected to the new term. In the same year that Bleuler published his article, Freud (1995, p.70) writes that the term “schizophrenia” is not good since it bases the name of the disease on a psychological characteristic – splitting – which is not exclusive to this affection. As a matter of fact, schizophrenia came to replace a wide variety of clinical conditions that can only be gathered into a single entity by their deficient nature.
It became the dominant notion of psychiatry, while at the same time it established the prevalent idea of mental illness as a deficit. The cognitive slant of the DSM will reinforce this approach. Freud and Lacan: psychosis is a condition of the subject, heterogeneous to neurosis It is beyond scope of this work to go deeper into the psychoanalytic reading of psychosis initiated by Freud and formalized by Lacan.
We will recall its fundamental bases that are sufficient for the argument we are pursuing here. Not being a psychiatrist, Freud did not have a significant case-by-case analysis of psychotics, and could not take psychoanalytic theorizing of this disease very far. Yet this did not stop him from inaugurating the psychoanalytical approach to psychosis through the analysis of autobiographical memories of an eminent judge (Schreber, 1995), written during the nine years v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016 9Fernando Tenório of his psychiatric hospitalization, memories which brought in details the patient’s paranoid delusions. In the words of Lacan (1992, p.18), this analysis of Freud’s was more revolutionary than the discovery of the unconscious itself; it had “the boldness... of an absolute beginning.” What was inaugural about Freud’s analysis?
Essentially, it asserted that the delusions and hallucinations of a psychotic are formations that arise from the same issues in face of which a so-called normal subject constitutes himself or herself (cf. Freud, 1995, p.18). And these formations are not, in relation to these issues, a merely haphazard reaction, but in fact quite the opposite: “The formation of delusion, which we consider to be a pathological production, in fact is an attempt at restoration, a reconstruction.” (p.66) In studying the pathology of the adult neurotic, Freud and Lacan were able to formulate that the human subject is produced as a subject by the response that, precociously, at an early time during his subjective constitution, he gives to the injunctions related to the symbolic paternal heritage, and the summons of the sexual (a summons related to both bodily satisfaction as well as the establishment of a position, of assuming responsibilities, of accessing the roles inherent to the subject’s sex).
Freud formulated that the formation of the subject corresponds to the introduction of these subjective elements into the psyche, although they are housed in the unconscious, as unconscious knowledge (i.e. repressed). This knowledge operates on the subject in absentia; it propels him (as desire) to respond to the requirements of life and desire, and produces (as symptom) points of impasse, of the impossibility of permitting a certain dimension, of the difficulty of doing something, or even in the form of symptoms identified by the clinical tradition (related to anxiety, depression, dissociation, obsession etc.).
Hence the difficulty of establishing a sharp border between the normal subject and neurosis as a pathology in psychoanalysis. Therefore, the mechanism is the introduction via identification of unconscious knowledge about desire and the sexual, knowledge that forms the subject himself, but which remains inaccessible to him in terms of consciousness. In the matter of the psychosis, armed with this key of understanding, Freud was able to formulate that paranoid delusion inflected these same elements, but did not know how to explain why they did not appear in the psychological interiority of a subject who could be grappling with his desire, but, instead, appeared disconnected from reality, in the form of a delusion in which the subject was always placed as an object (of persecution, of delusional love, of sexual intent, of a voice in a hallucination that always injures, threatens or commands etc.).
This is what is underscored by the princeps case of Freudian psychosis theory, which we have already mentioned, the Schreber case (Freud, 1995). That’s exactly the question Freud uses to end one of his last works on this topic: “what is the mechanism, analogous to repression, by which the Ego disconnects itself from the outside world?” (Freud, 1993, p.159). Freud’s statements regarding not allowing schizophrenia an exaggerated reach, refusing a deficit conception of psychosis, and asserting that it consists of a specific mode of formation and functioning of the subject, different from neurosis, are very important for the purposes of this article.
As a contemporary of Kraepelin and Bleuler, Freud (1995, p.69-70) appreciated the separation Kraepelin established in the group of paranoid delusions, preserving organized and consistent delusions as paranoia, separated from the schizophrenia group. And he criticized the term schizophrenia created by Bleuler, for being based on a psychological characteristic 1100 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia that is not exclusive to this disorder, the splitting (p.70), foreseeing and criticizing the comprehensive character that this notion was destined to have. It was probably his interest in deciphering order and meaning where psychiatry tended to see disorder that led Freud to grant a higher status as paranoia in the field of psychosis (in other words, to organized delusion) to the detriment of schizophrenia (which implied disorganization, dissociation, deterioration).
Unlike Freud, Lacan was a psychiatrist and entered psychoanalysis through the psychosis clinic. An admirer of Kraepelin’s clinical finesse and the descriptive rigor of his teacher Clérambault, Lacan also prized the distinction made by Kraepelin and corroborated by Freud, the “watershed” between paranoia on the one side and the area of schizophrenias on the other. What is at stake is the same distinction mentioned previously, which we will now call by the contrast of deficit versus structure: “What does the term psychosis cover in the domain of psychiatry?
Psychosis is not dementia. Psychoses are ... what corresponds to that which has always been called, and legitimately continues to be called, insanities.
It is in this domain that Freud makes the division” (Lacan, 1992, p.12). Psychoses are the insanities, and not dementia, which means to say that it is not a deficit, a delay in development, or something like neurosis but just “less.” They are another means of functioning. This difference is illustrated by Lacan’s provocation: “one cannot become mad by deciding it” (p.24).
That is to say, psychosis and neurosis are functional logics to which the subject is submitted. Lacan showed the heterogeneity of these logics, and at the same time the main lines of psychosis as a structure. Producing his work in the same intellectual environment that produced Saussure’s structural linguistics and the structural anthropology of Lévi-Strauss, Lacan proposes that Freud’s theses can only be understood in their full extent through the statement that the human subject is a result of language, that is, of a symbolic system.
The subject is forced to exist in the language which precedes him and which is imposed on him as law. The Freudian terms of intersection between paternal inheritance and assumption of sex by the subject are considered by Lacan as dimensions established by language itself, by the symbolic, for every subject. Within the limits of this study, we will say that while neurosis (which is also our normality) is the structure formed by interiorization, by the subject, of the injunctions established by the symbolic system (father, generational chain, sexual difference), psychosis corresponds to the situation where the subject cannot create a psychological interiority from these dimensions, a symbolized experience of himself.
Consequently, it is not that these dimensions do not exist for the psychotic, since they were also established in their injunctive character for him, and they are what constitute and move the social bond itself. However, they have a particular form of existence, existing outside the general symbolization that structures the subject, outside any symbolization that would allow the subject to have them as the elements of his subjectivity.5 Thus, the psychotic phenomena (hallucinations, delusions, catatonia, the oscillations of an evolution, passages to act, etc.) can be read as responses that the subject produces “without subjectivity,” so to speak, responses that occur by some sort of automated system of language, but are nevertheless articulated, they have logic, and connect a subject in this paradoxical condition of psychosis. This is what lies at v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016 11Fernando Tenório the heart of the distinction between neurosis and psychosis and supports the affirmation of psychosis as a structure, as opposed to the idea of psychosis as a deficit. In this way, as a kind of confluence of work in psychiatry and psychoanalysis throughout the twentieth century, a distinction was established between neurosis and psychosis, with each designating a class of pathology, a background condition, that corresponds to a specific way of being in life and in relation to the other; in Lacanian terms, a structure. Neurosis and psychosis, each one means: a unity of structure (“the” neurosis, “the” psychosis, in the singular) and a variety of clinical manifestations (hysterical and obsessive neuroses, and schizophrenia, paranoia, and maniac-depressive psychoses, for example, if we want to stay within the broad “pre-DSM” psychiatric categories).
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the International Classification of Diseases, and current inflection: “atheoretical”? The advent of the third edition of the DSM in 1980 represented a milestone for psychiatry, a drastic change in course. The objective of the DSM-III was to solve the problem of the reliability of psychiatric diagnoses by establishing a global and “pragmatic accord” with regard to psychiatric nomenclature, a consensus founded on explicit criteria established on empirical foundations that would set aside issues pertaining to the psychopathological processes involved (Pereira, 2004, p.1).
From this perspective, it adopted what was called a descriptive approach: “The DSM-III-R can be seen as ‘descriptive’ to the extent that the definitions of the disorders are generally limited to descriptions of their clinical characteristics,” and clinical characteristics were understood to be only those “easily identifiable behavioral signs and symptoms” that required “a minimal amount of interference on the part of the observer” (APA, 1989, p.XXIV; emphasis in the original).6 This approach is self-described as atheoretical: “The most important justification for the atheoretical approach of the DSM-III and DSM-III-R, with regard to etiology, is that the inclusion of these theories may be an obstacle to the use of this manual by clinicians with various theoretical orientations.” (p.XXIV). For this reason, the diagnostic classes of “neurosis” and “psychosis” were removed; the former, with good reason, since it is entirely associated with psychoanalysis and inseparable from psychodynamic assumptions. The manual’s glossary of technical terms does not include the term psychosis, but only the adjective “psychotic” to designate “gross impairment in reality testing.” Direct evidence of “psychotic behavior” is the presence of delusions or hallucinations (APA, 1989, p.425).
The nosographic entity of maniac-depressive psychosis gave way to the notion of mood disorders. Paranoia was originally replaced by the paranoid disorder category in the DSM-III, but this latter classification did not survive the revision of the manual a few years later (DSM-III-R), since “the term paranoid has several other uses that may lead to confusion” (APA, 1989, p.213). The term adopted was “delusional disturbance [or disorder]” (p.213).
The notion of disease was replaced by disorder (initially translated in Brazil as distúrbio, and finally as transtorno). The definition of mental disorder was intended to avoid theoretical implications of the concept of “disease,” and was the following: “a clinically significant behavioral or psychological syndrome or pattern that occurs in an individual and that is 1122 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia associated with present distress (a painful symptom) or disability (impairment in one or more areas of function) or with a significantly increased risk of suffering death, pain, disability, or an important loss of freedom” (APA, 1989, p.XXIII). This pattern should be generally considered “as a manifestation of a behavioral, psychological or biological dysfunction” (p.XXIII).
This definition remained more or less unchanged in subsequent editions, including the recently published fifth edition (DSM-5), but the reference to social adaptation is less hidden in this latter edition, as we can see in two places in the quote below: the replacement of the expression “psychological” with “cognition” and “emotion regulation and behavior” (we stress the idea of regulation), and the deletion of the reference to suffering or discomfort in favor of an emphasis on difficulty or inability in occupational and social activities: A mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress or disability in social, occupational, or other important activities (APA, 2013, p.20). Regarding to schizophrenia, which interests us more directly, there was an initial attempt to suppress the noun, replacing it with the notion of “schizophrenic disorders,” but this attempt failed and the re-inclusion of this concept was one of the corrections that prompted the revision a few years later in 1987, the DSM-III-R (cf.
Garrabé, 2004, p.211). We can say that the strength of the concept forced the DSM to include it again. Thus, “schizophrenia” (in the singular) is the only classification in the DSM that is not comprised of the designation “disorders” (bipolar disorders, eating disorders, anxiety disorders etc.).7 In the new classification, the diagnosis of schizophrenia is now based on two essential criteria: the presence of characteristic psychotic symptoms (defined as we have mentioned) and inferior functioning at highest previously-achieved levels (or, in children and adolescents, failure to achieve socially expected levels) (APA, 1989, p.199).
The characteristic disturbances in the affect and way of thinking that we have already covered are also mentioned, and are detailed in a very classical manner. However – and this is very important – the criterion adopted “excludes diseases without manifest psychotic features” (that is to say, without delusions and hallucinations) (APA, 1989, p.199). Note how a century and a half of debate, during which the position that prevailed was to consider delusions and hallucinations less important than the profound splitting of mental and emotional functioning, was resolved in a reductionist manner.
From this point on, this new inflection virtually blocked the ability to address psychosis as a background structure or deep mental function of which these manifestations are not the only symptoms, nor the most important. On this point, the manual indicates: “Such conditions may be diagnosed in this manual as personality disorders” (APA, 1989, p.199). In other words, conditions that previously would have been considered psychotic, even in the absence of delusions or hallucinations, for revealing a specific way of responding to critical situations, so to speak, were attributed to the “personality.” The psychiatrist and historian of psychiatry Jean Garrabé (2004, p.211) notes that, since it was impossible for the DSM-III to avoid the reference to Bleuler, it was made in generic v.23, n.4, out.-dez.
2016 13Fernando Tenório terms that mask the psychoanalytic origin of their theses. The DSM states: “Some approaches to defining schizophrenia emphasize ... underlying disturbances in certain psychological processes (Bleuler)” (APA, 1989, p.199).
Garrabé further stresses that one of the clinical criteria used by the DSM for schizophrenia is the response to pharmacological treatment (Garrabé, 2004, p.212; APA, 1989, p.199). The implications are clear: the prompting of a primacy of pharmacological treatment in the clinic, and a dangerous reversal in which the effectiveness of a drug may be the criterion for establishing nosography within classification and research. How can it be said that the positions of the DSM-III are not theoretical?
The impact of the DSM-III in the clinic, in research, and in the theorization of the field of psychiatry and psychopathology was enormous: “all posterior psychopathological elaborations bear the mark of its influence” (Pereira, 1996, p.44). The principles of the DSM-III “have become, in a short time, the foundations of all modern psychiatric research and the organizers of scientific and even lay conceptions of psychopathology” (Pereira, 1996, p.44). The World Health Organization’s International Classification for Diseases, in its tenth revision published in 1992, reflects this influence by adopting the path established by the DSM-III.
In its introduction, the ICD-10 states that its “descriptions and guidelines do not contain theoretical implications,” and are “simply a set of symptoms and comments on which there was agreement by a large number of advisers and consultants in many different countries” (OMS, 1993, p.2). The same term disorder is adopted from the DSM, “in order to avoid even greater problems inherent to the use of terms such as ‘disease’ or ‘illness’” (OMS, 1993, p.5). The division between neurosis and psychosis is abandoned, as it implies an act of naming that extends beyond an empirical statement: Instead of following the neurotic-psychotic dichotomy, the disorders are now arranged in groups according to major common themes or descriptive likenesses, which makes for increased convenience of use.
... ‘Psychotic’ has been maintained as a convenient descriptive term... Its use does not involve assumptions about psychodynamic mechanisms, but simply indicates the presence of hallucinations, delusions, or a limited number of severe abnormalities of behavior, such as gross excitement and overactivity, marked psychomotor retardation, and catatonic behavior (OMS, 1993, p.3).
It is a diagnosis of convenience, assumedly transitory, and openly disclaims deductions about deep functioning. The explicit goal is to be supported by global consensus. The discussion on etiology and psychodynamics is abandoned in favor of points of consensus, the symptoms that would supposedly be seen by any observer.
Consequently, the diagnoses are “syndromic,” in the weak sense of the term, and not “nosological” (Aguiar, 2004, p.77), in other words, they are intended to be the mere objective description of the occurrence of a specific group of signs and symptoms. As we have said, the term “disorder” responds to this new understanding, despite or even because of its inaccuracy. As in the DSM, the diagnosis of maniac-depressive psychosis is no longer used.
The category that appears in its place makes no commitment to the distinction between neurosis and psychosis: bipolar affective disorder requires the specification “with” or “without” psychotic symptoms. Names like melancholy and paranoia were abandoned in favor of depressive disorder (mild, moderate, or severe, with or without somatic symptoms, with or without psychotic symptoms) and persistent delusional disorder, respectively. 1144 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia In both classification systems, among the categories that comprised the field of psychosis (or psychoses) as opposed to the field of neurosis, only schizophrenia remained as the single disorder still recognized as psychotic, although “psychotic” refers only to the occurrence of symptoms of delirium, hallucinations, and widely disorganized or catatonic behavior.
The description of the clinical condition of schizophrenia has generally been based on the same set of symptoms since Bleuler’s time, but with one crucial nuance: any of the manifestations listed, for which Bleuler sought a psychodynamic connection linked to the psychological “complexes,” is now taken as “cognitive or emotional dysfunction,” especially in the DSM, and the association with a “social or occupational dysfunction” is central to the diagnosis (cf. APA, 2002, p.304). A critical analysis Several studies have demonstrated that the DSM-III and its successors are far from being “free of theory.” Pereira (1996) articulates some of them precisely, summarizing many of the criticisms of the new classification model.
The first is that although it claims to be free of theory, the DSM actually is related with the pragmatism of Peirce and empiricist theses. This pragmatism shows itself “in the precept of conclusively excluding all unconfirmed theory,” according to the “empirical validation criteria” (Pereira, 1996, p.50). The very supposition that such an objective description of the clinical facts would be possible, to the point that the intervention of the observer’s gaze would become insignificant, itself is a theoretical assumption affiliated with empiricist theories.
It begs the question: is it possible for this gaze to be neutral? With regard to the psychiatric and psychotherapeutic clinic or psychoanalysis, this assumption is even more absurd, since the clinical fact only reveals itself and is constituted in the relationship between the patient and the clinician, and did not exist before in the natural state (cf. Czermak, 2013).
An important line of criticism concerns the following: the practical commitment that the DSM intended to establish – excluding of the classification and communication among peers the theoretical specificities of each point of view of the psychopathological thought, so that everyone would use the same vocabulary – obliges researchers to abandon the very concepts of their own fields of knowledge. Of course, not only does psychopathology itself depend on the contradictions between different schools and traditions to progress (and we tried to show above that this is how psychiatry progressed), but also each specific discipline can only exist and progress depending on “its ability to theoretical and formally construct its object and its own methods” (Pereira, 1996, p.51). The DSM-III and its successors eventually proposed, to such different disciplines as those linked to psychopathology and mental illness, “one same object, operationally defined, i.e., an object that is common only from a descriptive point of view” (Pereira, 1996, p.51).
This should call the limits of this type of manual into question. As the DSM-III progressed into its subsequent editions, these limits expanded, an expansion we can consider serious. The DSM-III carried the warning that it was not a teaching manual, precisely because it did not include theories about the etiology, management, and treatment of mental disorders (APA,1989, p.XXVI).
The next edition, the DSM-IV, ignored this prudent caveat by incorporating the “additional goal” of facilitating research and being “a didactic v.23, n.4, out.-dez. 2016 15Fernando Tenório tool for the teaching of psychopathology” (APA, 2002, p.21). Finally, the recently published DSM-5 arrived, proclaiming itself “an essential educational resource for students and practitioners, and a reference for researchers” (APA, 2013, p.XLI).
In conclusion, as a matter of fact, the DSM replaced the old “psychiatry manuals” that contained a variety of theories surrounding a mental illness, the etiologic hypotheses, controversies between authors, and a broader psychopathological approach. If in 1996, Pereira (p.52) stated that a pragmatic system of classification is not a deep psychopathological discourse, and that the DSM could not claim to be or to found a psychopathology, we must ask ourselves why the field of psychiatric and mental health consented so widely to abandon the entire tradition of debates in favor of a system based on statistics, cognitive adjustment, and the exclusion of subjectivity. Russo and Venancio (2006) observed that it was not just the professional field that adhered to the DSM.
Culture and society also followed suit. These authors point out a paradigm shift that is not limited to the classification of mental diseases, and reaches the question of hegemony among the knowledge that constitutes the psychiatric and psychological clinic, and the sphere of social representations relative to the individual and to the normal and the pathological. With regard to the first question, the authors demonstrate that the empiricist assumption, which requires so-called objective evidence, has obvious affinities with the physicalist view of mental illness (Russo, Venancio, 2006, p.465).
More important: the format of diagnosis through lists of clearly objectivized symptoms that create clear criteria for inclusion and exclusion in the categories perfectly converges with the randomized clinical trials conducted by the pharmaceutical industry to test the effectiveness of new drugs (p.465). At this point, it is important to point out the aspects that we previously referred to as an “externalist” reading of the processes in question (Canguilhem, 2012, p.7): the success of the DSM-III is linked to a process that involved medicine as a whole, research in pharmacology, and the pharmaceutical market. In the 1960s, randomized double-blind studies were instituted in the United States as the proper procedure for establishing the scientific validity of drugs so that their sale could be authorized by the Food and Drug Administration (cf.
Healy, 1997; Aguiar, 2004). In these studies, patients with the diagnosis for which the drug is being tested are divided into two groups, one receiving the drug and the other receiving a placebo, and neither the doctors nor the patients know who is receiving the active substance (hence the name double-blind). At the end of the study period, participants are evaluated to see if their symptoms have improved, to assess whether the medication has a therapeutic efficacy that is statistically superior to the placebo.
One prerequisite for this type of study is the “reliability” of the diagnosis, the standardization of diagnostics, to avoid variation according to the particularities of doctor’s approach or the doctor-patient relationship. The patients being tested must be diagnosed in a homogeneous manner. The new classificatory logic of the DSM-III made this possible for psychiatry.
The demand for large-scale studies permitted them to be carried out simultaneously in different countries (“multicenter” studies); financing aspects obliged research in these countries to follow the DSM nomenclature. Also at this point, production of a diagnostic which was “uncontaminated” by regional idiosyncrasies and the unique characteristics of 1166 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia doctors and patients was a key condition, made possible by the DSM. Additionally, the fact that any multinational company eager to get its medications approved for the American market must present effectiveness and safety testing according to these same requirements finally led to global compliance with the new manual, promoting the global expansion of American psychiatry at the expense of the French and German traditions which had constituted psychiatry up to this point.
In this sense, if one of the objectives behind the origin of the DSM-III was standardization of language in global psychiatric communication, this goal could be considered fully achieved, and catalyzed the rise of biological psychiatry as a dominant aspect not only in American psychiatry but around the world. Randomized studies have become the mark of “scientific” medicine, and the DSM-III allowed psychiatry to apply the same research methodologies as other areas of medicine, thereby driving a process known as the “remedicalization” of psychiatry. Another part of this process was the transposition of the medical notion of the syndrome, or the syndromic diagnosis, from general medicine to psychiatry (Aguiar, 2004, p.76 e s.).
A syndrome is a set of signs and symptoms that manifest in the occurrence of disease. They themselves are not the disease, they are part of it, but in general they are nonspecific and may belong to other diseases. In general medicine, the passage from syndrome to nosological diagnosis (“disease”) usually takes place by identifying a “biological marker” (for example, using a test to identify the causative agent of a communicable disease, identify an injury etc.).
In psychiatric disorders, the biological marker is not found, so diagnoses are “syndromic”: they designate a set of signs and symptoms while ignoring the pathological process (whether this is biological or psychological). The very substitution of the term disease with the term disorder, as we have stated earlier, is part of this process. However, as we have seen, the DSM-III was a change in order to eliminate the high degree of openness and indeterminacy that psychiatric diagnosis previously had, making it more “objective,” so to speak.
In this sense, and for all the reasons we have just mentioned, the process of “remedicalization” in psychiatry raised medications to the status of being themselves the biological marker that scientifically proved the existence of a particular disorder (Aguiar, 2004, p.82-84).8 It is very suggestive of a biological remedicalization in psychiatry that, regarding the “organic mental disorder” category (that is, one with identifiable organic causation, for example, by intoxication, or vascular, metabolic, or senile causes), the manual has asserted that the existence of this category does not imply that the other disorders do not have an organic origin. “On the contrary, it is supposed that all normal or abnormal mental processes depend on brain function” (APA, 1989, p.106). In other words, the manual is able to proclaim itself “atheoretical”, in the sense of excluding etiological theories, and at the same affirm one, and operationally function in a way that favors this theory.
As for the effects in the sphere of social representations of the individual, Russo and Venancio (2006) stress that the physicalist assumption that permeates the entire logic behind the manual’s approach to mental illness has spread throughout society. The extreme objectification of diagnostic categories has led to a proliferation of categories. The deletion of the neurosis category “unleashed” the various subjective malaises that affect all subjects so they could be “allocated” into these new, hyperspecific categories.
“Transforming them [the subjective malaises of subjectivity] into discernible, delineated, and tangible diseases v.23, n.4, out.-dez. 2016 17Fernando Tenório means abandoning the entire enterprise of self-knowledge and introspective work which are involved in psychoanalysis” (Russo, Venancio, 2006, p.468). The malaises of life were gradually being defined in terms that were no longer subjective but medical, and as the individuals themselves expected, they were treated medically.
On a collective level, this contributed to the engenderment of identity groups, bringing together subjects identified by the fact that they belong to a certain pathology (p.465), which not by chance is a typically American phenomenon, and quickly spread around the world. At the clinical level, this has led to the primarily pharmacological treatment of anxiety, depression, neurotic-obsessive conditions and even the vicissitudes of sexual life, a transition reinforced by the media which reify notions such as “panic syndrome,” “obsessive-compulsive disorder,” “erectile dysfunction,” “post-traumatic stress disorder,” and “attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder,” among others. The greater or lesser clinical validity of these categories deserves to be discussed separately, and is obviously beyond the scope of this article.
Among these categories, however, attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is especially delicate, as it involves the medicalization of children whose individual idiosyncrasies are converted into the diagnostic criteria for an allegedly neuropsychiatric disease, and has specific effects on relationship between the parents and the child’s subjectivity, as demonstrated by Lima (2005).9 The abandonment of the strong nosographic entities of the psychiatric tradition in favor of a classification which is allegedly error-free is full of consequences in the clinic. This is indicated by psychiatrists themselves. Banzato (2011, p.1) affirms that “the type of diagnostic model” practiced by the ICD-10 and the DSMs “leaves clinical judgment in the background” and produces a certain “superficiliazation of psychopathology, as if the symptoms were evident and only needed to be counted.” Aguiar (2004, p.22) cites countless psychiatrists, mainly Americans, who converge in their assertion that with the advent of the criteria based solely on symptomatic descriptions, “the field of psychiatric intervention is progressively restricting itself to pharmacological control of symptoms, setting aside the clinical tradition that placed the therapeutic relationship at center of treatment.” Lima (2012) specifically examines the effects that eliminating certain categories associated with psychoanalysis has on clinical thinking, for example, child psychosis (which was replaced by the class of “global development disorders”) and neurosis: “When this occurs, there is a direct influence on the everyday use of this notion by the professionals – and, secondly, also by the patients and the general population – they use it less and less and, in the end believe that the neurosis ‘does not exist’” (Lima, 2012, p.105; emphasis in the original).
This is the same statement we have maintained regarding psychosis. The disappearance of the psychosis category as a noun, that is, as the name of a psychiatric condition, has produced a growing difficulty in recognizing psychotic functioning, which previously was identified even when hallucinations and delusions were absent. One of the effects that can be felt at work in psychiatric institutions (for example, in reception and emergency psychiatric services) is an increase of the diagnosis of “personality disorder.” We have seen that the DSM-III suggested that certain conditions which were previously recognized as psychotic but did not exhibit delusions and hallucinations might “possibly” be diagnosed as personality disorders (APA, 1989, p.199).
This is one of the most controversial categories of clinical practice, and for sure carries the most risk of a moral approach to the 1188 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia patient. Although it is also necessary to consider the current existence of different types of personality disorder (borderline, schizoid, antisocial, histrionic, and others), Dalgalarrondo (2000, p.165) observes that this has already been called “moral insanity,” “psychopathy,” and “character neurosis or disorder.” In mental health services, this diagnosis eventually comes along with a certain reservation regarding the patient, like: after all, is personality a disease or character? The personality disorder category deserves a more rigorous approach, which is beyond scope of this work, but we hope to address it at some other opportunity.
In an earlier work with the psychiatrist Eduardo Rocha (Rocha, Tenório, 2004), we observed that the fact that schizophrenia has become the model for psychoses lent relevance to an approach to mental illness in terms of the contrast between a break (or crisis) versus stabilization. This favored the view that psychosis is a phenomenon which is always disruptive, and that its treatment addresses rearranging what the break threw into disarray. What is lost is the idea of continuity, a link between the elements that are present underneath and beyond the break.
Treatment was reduced to the suppression of productive phenomena, added to “normalization” or psycho-social rehabilitation. In this matter, the goals of psycho-social rehabilitation that, for good reasons, guide the mental health care finish to be reduced to a functional adjustment. The functional adjustment itself is positive, but the clinical reading of psychotic phenomena as a kind of signature of the subject cannot be left out.
This may allow different splits to be produced, artificial separations in the approach to cases. For example, between treatment (reduced to medicating) and care (reduced to “rehabilitation”); the psychiatrist treats, in other words, reduces the break, and other mental health workers take care of social rehabilitation. Or the reverse: the idea that treating is equal to social rehabilitation, with the consequent disdain for psychopathology and the work of the psychiatrist.
Two major movements have occurred: with schizophrenia, psychosis was equated to the loss of reality (through delusions and hallucinations), dissociation, disintegration, and deficit. With bipolar disorders, psychosis was reduced to the accessory presence of hallucinatory or delusional phenomena. The unity of the psychoses based on the structural elements that delineate their specificity has been lost, along with the clinical rigor that required psychiatrists to pursue the presentation of symptoms and particularities of evolution in every patient, in an attempt to locate the moments of psychosis and the terms with which it was equated (cf.
Rocha, Tenório, 2004). Finally, what has been lost is any approximation to the idea of psychosis as a subjective functioning that, unlike a deficit of psychic functions (affection, sensory-perception, thought, language, will, movement etc.), is a specific way by which the subject responds to the demands of life. In this last sense, the psychotic phenomena presented by a patient, unlike being without order (we allude here to the term disorder), should be read as a production with its own logic and which makes a subject singular, different from others.
Final considerations The fact that schizophrenia has encompassed almost everything that still is considered as psychosis has relegated to oblivion several important semiological references and accurate descriptions of the various clinical forms of psychoses. The near-ubiquity of schizophrenia in the current psychiatric clinic of psychosis, particularly in the field of mental health, v.23, n.4, out.-dez. 2016 19Fernando Tenório forces us to use this category to address patients and clinical developments that, in some situations, would be much better elucidated by other references of the psychiatric tradition.
An important task in the current work with psychoses, therefore, is to take back an approach that recovers the diversity and complexity of what schizophrenia finished to encompass and is now considered as “behavioral, psychological, or biological dysfunction.” In order to do so, we must retake the understanding of psychosis as a one unique condition, along with the diversity of its clinical forms. Accomplishment of this task, initially, demands maintaining the distinction between neurosis and psychosis as designating two ways for a subject to constitute himself or herself and to respond to life. Psychoanalysis has shown that psychopathology is always a symptomatic response to greater requirements which constitute a subject: those concerning the relationship with the other, the relationship with the object of desire, the position in the generational chain, and the responsibilities of subject.
Depending on whether the subject is psychotic or neurotic, he or she will tend to respond to the capital injunctions of life differently. Psychosis is characterized by the subject’s inability to integrate these dimensions into a unified experience as a subject. The hallucinations, delusions, and corporal occurrences of psychosis, according to a Lacanian reading, come in place of the symbolic framing of these elements, which is impossible for the subject.
Rather than being mere “errors” by relating to normal functioning, they can be read as not only the subject’s failure, but also the subject’s specific response to the demands of life. Accordingly, a second step is the following: considering the diversity of the clinical forms of psychosis that we know, how can we understand it in reference to the assumption of psychosis as a deep fundamental psychopathological process? How can we make this diversity compatible with the assumption that psychosis is unique?
Paranoia, schizophrenia, mania, melancholy, mental automatism, false recognition syndromes, sexual or passion delusions, hypochondriac delusions and its extreme form, Cotard’s syndrome: through a psychoanalytical reading, these conditions describe the subject’s relationship with the fundamental elements of our experience as subjects that emerge directly from our dependence on language, which we have already mentioned – the relationship with the other, with the object, with the body, with the sexual, with reason, with the image, with language itself, with experience as oneself. In all these clinical manifestations of psychosis, we can recognize a subject with the inability to integrate and develop these dimensions of the human, but who is still concerned with them. It is interesting to note how paranoia and melancholy are still cultural terms, even though for at least twenty years they have been disowned by official psychiatry.
This shows the symbolic weight that these terms carry and transmit. The strength of these terms – that’s our statement in this article – may have to do with the fact that paranoia and melancholy are dimensions that concern us all, that can happen to everyone at one time or another, even to the “normals;” they are not dimensions we can get rid of by saying that they belong only to the other, so distant. If we draw attention to this fact, it is not in order to cultivate nostalgia for these terms.
It is instead to emphasize the consequences of the formal reduction of psychosis to schizophrenia, which seems to remain as the last notion of psychiatry that may, due to its symbolic weight, still be able to remind society of the gravity of madness. At least 2200 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia as long as it is not entirely neutralized as a mystery by the biological-cognitive perspective. By reducing psychosis to a deficit-type condition or to the occurrence of accessory delusions and hallucinations, not only a clinical ignorance of this condition created, but an operation is produced that separates it from our own condition.
To prevent this, the practical and theoretical knowledge constructed around and based upon the notion of psychosis must continue to be developed for those who are interested in madness, not as a syndrome or a disorder that can be regulated, but as a phenomenon that illuminates the fundamentals of the human condition, and touches its limits and contradictions. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This project was developed within the sphere of research that resulted in the doctoral thesis on psychoanalytic theory entitled Automatismo mental, desespecificação pulsional e morte do sujeito: a condição objetalizada do sujeito na psicose [Mental automatism, drive-despecification, and death of the subject: the objectified condition of the subject in psychosis], defended at the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro in 2012. This research was partially funded by Capes [Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education].
I wish to thank Fernanda Costa Moura for her indispensable guidance in the research and in crafting the thesis, as well as in the final writing of this article. Previously, this issue was addressed within the framework of the Centro de Estudos do Hospital Psiquiátrico de Jurujuba and also in the Tempo Freudiano Associação Psicanalítica. In both places, the work of Eduardo de Carvalho Rocha, Francisco Leonel Fernandes, and Marta Macedo broadly contributed to the issues I addressed in this article.
NOTES 1 Within the scope of this article, it would be impossible to address the complexity of issues involving the constitution and genealogy of psychiatric discourse, as well as psychiatric power (Foucault, 2006). Our emphasis lies in its recent transformations in terms of the description and classification of diseases and their consequences for the comprehension of the major mental illness, psychosis. 2 It is curious to see how today, at the same time that modern psychiatry is getting rid of the psychosis category, it is beginning to lose its specificity in relation to neurology.
By its own initiative, psychiatry has been reduced to neuropsychiatry, and risks becoming a lesser form of neurology. As stated by the French psychiatrist Jean-Jacques Tyszler (personal communication, April 15, 2009): “Psychiatry is the discipline of how subjects live their big questions. Not each pathology, but that lady or that gentleman.
How each one tells us about the way he or she faces their issues. If the doctor doesn’t care about this, he should work in neurology.” 3 In this and other quotes from texts published in other languages, the translation is free. 4 It lies beyond scope of this work to reconstitute the trajectory of the term “neurosis” from its creation by William Cullen in 1769, to affirm the organic origin of nervous diseases in the nascent field of neurology, to the time of Freud, who gave the term its definitive nosological status in designating a condition of psychological origin linked to unconscious conflicts, which came to comprise part of the triad that from that point forward classified the clinic of mental diseases: neurosis, psychosis, and perversion.
For an initial approach, we refer to Postel (2003, p.304-308). 5 This particular form of existence “outside the subject,” without subjectivity, corresponds to the Lacanian notion of foreclosure, the mechanism he considers to underlie psychosis. In neurosis, the subject is comprised by the internalization and symbolization of these elements, which are repressed.
In psychosis, they are not symbolized, they remain “foreclosed,” and according to Lacan they return in the register Lacan calls “the real,” that is to say, as delirious hallucinatory phenomena, which are characterized by their appearance as external to the subject and by the absence of subjective dialectics. We cannot go into detail here about Lacan’s theory of psychosis, and instead refer to Lacan’s work (1992) which we have already cited herein. 6 We cite the revision published in 1987 known as the DSM-III-R (the third revision edition).
7 This situation becomes more complicated in the recent DSM-5 (APA, 2013), in which the chapter on schizophrenia is entitled “Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.” The problem of a spectral diagnosis of schizophrenia deserves a more careful approach, which we hope to undertake eventually, v.23, n.4, out.-dez. 2016 21Fernando Tenório following the repercussions and the practical effects of the DSM-5, which cannot yet be measured, especially in Brazil. Another point of the DSM-5 that requires rigorous analysis is the category “attenuated psychosis syndrome” (APA, 2013, p.783-786), which consists of the presence of attenuated psychotic symptoms which are psychosis-like but do not cross the line into a complete psychotic syndrome.
The dark horizon in this category is preventative medicalization. This category is placed in the chapter on “Conditions for future study,” without official recognition for clinical use. It is known that it replaced “psychosis risk syndrome,” which was initially proposed (cf.
Oliveira, 2012). 8 On the subject of medication in psychiatry, in medicine and in society, we refer to Healy (1997) and Pignarre (1999). 9 We will not address the notion of biopolitics here (Foucault, 1997), which underlies what we are studying.
Although this power exercised by the idea of promoting health and the “normalization of the abnormal” (Birman, 2007), leading to the medicalization of the social, is present in the DSM, it would not be possible to conceptually address this theme in the scope of this article with the rigor and extent required. We hope to be able to approach this discussion at a later time. REFERENCES ABRAHAM, Karl.
BIRMAN, Joel. Teoria psicanalítica da libido: sobre o caráter e A biopolítica na genealogia da psicanálise: o desenvolvimento da libido. Rio de Janeiro: da salvação à cura.
História, Ciências, Saúde – Imago. 1970. Manguinhos, v.14, n.2, p.529-548.
2007. AGUIAR, Adriano Amaral de. BLEULER, Eugen.
A psiquiatria no divã: entre as ciências da vida e Dementia praecox ou groupe des schizophrénies. a medicalização da existência. Rio de Janeiro: Paris: Epel; Clichy: Grec.
1993. Relume-Dumará. 2004.
CACHO, Jorge. APA. De la Verrücktheit à la paranoïa.
Le Trimestre American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Psychanalytique, n.4, p.13-20. 1991.
statistical manual of mental disorders, fifth edition, DSM-5. Washington: American Psychiatric CANGUILHEM, Georges. Publishing.
2013. O objeto da história das ciências. In: Estudos de história e de filosofia das ciências: concernentes APA.
aos vivos e à vida. Rio de Janeiro: Forense American Psychiatric Association. Manual Universitária.
p.1-16. 2012. diagnóstico e estatístico de transtornos mentais, quarta edição, texto revisado, DSM-IV-TR.
Porto CZERMAK, Marcel. Alegre: Artmed. [2000] 2002.
O que é um fato clínico? Revista Tempo Freudiano, n.10, p.111-132. 2013.
APA. American Psychiatric Association. Manual de DALGALARRONDO, Paulo.
diagnóstico e estatística de distúrbios mentais, Psicopatologia e semiologia dos transtornos mentais. terceira edição, revisto, DSM-III-R. São Paulo: Porto Alegre: Artmed.
2000. Manole. [1987] 1989.
EY, Henri; BERNARD, Paul; BRISSET, Charles. APA. Manual de psiquiatria.
Rio de Janeiro: Masson; American Psychiatric Association. Diagnosis and Atheneu. s.d.
statistical manual of mental disorders, third edition, DSM-III. Washington: American Psychiatric FOUCAULT, Michel. Association.
1980. O poder psiquiátrico. São Paulo: Martins Fontes.
2006. BANZATO, Claudio. Entrevista a Com Ciência.
São Paulo: Sociedade FOUCAULT, Michel. Brasileira para o Progresso da Ciência. 2011.
Nascimento da biopolítica. In: Resumo dos cursos Disponível em: http://www.comciencia.br/ do Collège de France (1970-1982). Rio de Janeiro: comciencia/handler.php?section=8&tipo=entrevi Jorge Zahar.
1997. sta&edicao=64. Acesso em: 17 maio 2012.
2011. FREUD, Sigmund. BERCHERIE, Paul.
Puntualizaciones psicoanaliticas sobre un caso Os fundamentos da clínica: história e estrutura do de paranoia (Dementia paranoides) descrito saber psiquiátrico. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar. autobiograficamente.
In: Freud, Sigmund. Obras 1989. completas, v.12.
Buenos Aires: Amorrortu. 1995. 2222 HHiissttóórriiaa,, CCiiêênncciiaass,, SSaaúúddee –– MMaanngguuiinnhhooss,, RRiioo ddee JJaanneeiirrooPsychosis and schizophrenia FREUD, Sigmund.
NOBRE DE MELO, Augusto Luís. Nuevas puntualizaciones sobre las neuropsicosis Psiquiatria, v.2: psiquiatria clínica: aplicações de defensa. In: Freud, Sigmund.
Obras completas, psiquiátrico-legais. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização v.3. Buenos Aires: Amorrortu.
1994a. Brasileira. 1979.
FREUD, Sigmund. OLIVEIRA, Stephan Malta. Las neuropsicosis de defensa (Ensayo de una Os alcances e limites da medicalização de risco teoría psicológica de la histeria adquirida, de para a psicose: a emergência de uma nova muchas fobias y representaciones obsesivas categoria?
Physis, v.22, n.1, p.291-309. 2012. y de ciertas psicosis alucinatorias).
In: Freud, OMS. Sigmund. Obras completas, v.3.
Buenos Aires: Organização Mundial da Saúde. Classificação de Amorrortu. 1994b.
transtornos mentais e de comportamento da CID-10: FREUD, Sigmund. descrições clínicas e diretrizes diagnósticas. Porto Neurosis y psicosis.
In: Freud, Sigmund. Obras Alegre: Artes Médicas. [1992] 1993.
completas, v.19. Buenos Aires: Amorrortu. 1993.
PEREIRA, Mario Eduardo Campos. GARRABÉ, Jean. Nouvelles perspectives pour le diagnostic História da esquizofrenia.
Lisboa: Climepsi. 2004. psychiatrique: les formulations idiographiques.
Campinas: Departamento de Psicologia Médica e GARRABÉ, Jean. de Psiquiatria da Unicamp. (Mimeo.).
2004. Dictionnaire taxinomique de la psychiatrie. Paris: Masson.
1989. PEREIRA, Mario Eduardo Campos. Questões preliminares para um debate HEALY, David.
entre psicanálise e psiquiatria no campo da The anti-depressant era. Cambridge: Harvard psicopatologia. In: Couto, Luis Flavio Silva University Press.
1997. (Org.). Pesquisa em psicanálise.
Belo Horizonte: Segrac. p.43-54. 1996.
JUNG, Carl Gustav. Psicogênese das doenças mentais. Petrópolis: Vozes.
PIGNARRE, Philippe. 1986. O que é o medicamento?
Um objeto estranho entre ciência, mercado e sociedade. São Paulo: Editora KAHLBAUM, Karl. 34.
1999. A catatonia ou a loucura da tensão. In: Alberti, Sonia (Org.).
Autismo e esquizofrenia na clínica da POSTEL, Jacques. esquize. Rio de Janeiro: Rios Ambiciosos; Marca Dictionnaire de la psychiatrie.
Paris: Larousse. D’Água. 1999.
2003. KRAEPELIN, Emil. RANCHER, B.
et al. A demência precoce, 1a parte (do Lehrbuch der Bleuler, entre psychiatrie et psychanalyse? In: Psychiatrie, 8a ed.).
Lisboa: Climepsi. 2004. Bleuler, Eugen.
Dementia praecox ou groupe des schizophrénies. Paris: Epel; Clichy: Grec. p.9-35.
LACAN, Jacques. 1993. O seminário, livro 3: as psicoses.
Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar. 1992. ROCHA, Eduardo de Carvalho; TENÓRIO, Fernando.
LATOUR, Bruno;WOOLGAR, Steve. Considerações sobre a clínica da psicose no A vida de laboratório: a produção dos fatos campo da saúde mental. Tempo Freudiano científicos.
Rio de Janeiro: Relume-Dumará. Associação Psicanalítica. Disponível em: http:// 1997.
www.tempofreudiano.com.br/artigos/detalhe. LIMA, Rossano Cabral. asp?cod=41.
Acesso em: 12 jul. 2012. 2004.
Três tópicos sobre a relação entre DSM e política. RUSSO, Jane; VENANCIO, Ana Teresa. In: Kyrillos Neto, Fuad; Calazans, Roberto (Org.).
Classificando as pessoas e suas perturbações: a Psicopatologia em debate: controvérsias sobre os “revolução terminológica” do DSM-III. Revista DSMs. Barbacena: Editora da Universidade do Latinoamericana de Psicopatologia Fundamental, Estado de Minas Gerais.
2012. v.9, n.3, p.460-483. 2006.
LIMA, Rossano Cabral. SCHREBER, Daniel Paul. Somos todos desatentos?
O TDA/H e a construção Memórias de um doente dos nervos. Rio de Janeiro: de bioidentidades. Rio de Janeiro: Relume- Paz e Terra.
1995. Dumará. 2005.
uuuUUU v.23, n.4, out.-dez. 2016 23
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Psychosis (CBTp) An Introductory Manual for Clinicians Yulia Landa, PsyD, MS Advanced Fellowship Director VISN 2 MIRECC 1Contents I. Introduction Page 3 II. Modules Page 4 A.
Overview of CBTp and Therapeutic Techniques Page 4 B. Working with Delusions Page 15 C. Working with Hallucinations Page 19 D.
Group Intervention for Delusions and Voices Page 21 E. Working with Thought Disorder and Negative Page 22 Symptoms III. Summary and Applications Page 24 IV.
Further Readings Page 25 V. References Page 26 2INTRODUCTION This manual provides clinicians with an introductory knowledge of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Psychosis (CBTp). Developed as a companion to training workshops, it has been created as a reference for mental health professionals as they learn foundational theories and techniques of CBTp, an evidence-based psychological treatment for individuals suffering from psychotic disorders and symptoms.
This manual provides information about the history and development of CBTp, clinical research and evidence base for the treatment, and techniques for applying CBTp in individual and group formats to core psychotic symptoms, including delusions, hallucinations, negative symptoms, and thought disorder. At the end of the manual, users will find selected readings and references to deepen their knowledge of CBTp. This manual is intended as a guide for clinicians who are interested in learning about CBTp as a treatment modality for their patients with psychotic symptoms and disorders.
The goal of the manual is to provide VA clinicians with a secure knowledge base in CBTp so that they can feel confident in their ability to identify patients who may benefit from CBTp, provide information about the treatment to patients and other clinicians, and make appropriate referrals to existing CBTp services. This manual can also serve as an entrée into CBTp for clinicians who may wish to pursue further training in the CBTp and eventually provide CBTp services. It is important to note that CBTp is a more than just a collection of strategies or techniques, and is rather a comprehensive psychological treatment approach comprised of (1) a comprehensive theory of psychopathology and (2) a detailed description of and guide to therapeutic techniques related to this model (Beck, 1976, 2009).
Clinicians who wish to practice CBTp must therefore undergo further training than this manual can provide, so that they can become proficient in CBTp case formulation and treatment approach. That said, the hope is that this manual will provide valuable information to clinicians working with patients with psychotic disorders, as well as new insights and perspectives on the nature and treatment of psychotic symptoms. Clinicians who have been intensively trained in CBTp and those who are currently providing CBTp services may also find this manual useful as a reference point, guide, and refresher to their previous training.
Those who are interested in learning more about CBTp, training opportunities for CBTp clinicians, and CBTp services in the VA System should contact: Yulia Landa, PsyD, MS, CBTp Program Director, or Rachel Jespersen, LMSW, CBTp Program Coordinator. 3TRAINING MODULES This manual is organized into five topic-areas, or modules of study, which align with introductory training workshops for clinicians in CBTp. In the first module, information about the development, research base, underlying theories, and therapeutic techniques is presented.
The second module provides information about CBTp theory and techniques for working with delusions and the third provides information about working with hallucinations. The fourth module expands on these topics by providing information about CBTp group protocols to treat delusions and hallucinations. The fifth module covers treating negative symptoms and thought disorder with CBTp.
A. Overview of CBTp and Therapeutic Techniques A1. History of CBTp and Current State Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Psychosis (CBTp) is an evidence-based treatment approach shown to improve symptoms and functioning in patients with psychotic disorders.
CBTp aims to enhance function despite difficult symptoms and experiences such hallucinations, negative symptoms, thought disturbances, and delusions. CBTp forms a collaborative treatment alliance in which patient and therapist can explore distressing psychotic experiences and the beliefs the patient has formed about these experiences, with the goal of reducing Figure 1: Aims of CBTp distress and disability caused by these experiences. CBTp is a structured, time-limited, and goal-based treatment modality.
CBTp can be delivered in individual and group modalities, has long-lasting benefits after the termination of therapy, and is cost effective. CBTp was developed by Dr. Aaron Beck, an American psychiatrist who is largely regarded as the father of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.
The first documented application of CBT to psychotic symptoms was Beck‘s outpatient treatment of chronic schizophrenia patients with delusions, published in 1952(Beck, 2009). Clinician-scientists in the UK especially began to study the effectiveness of CBTp, and in 1994 the first clinical trial of CBTp was published (Garety, Kuipers, Fowler, Chamberlain, & Dunn, 1994). Within the last 15 to 20 years, CBTp has gained traction in the United States as the intervention has become manualized and more widely applied (Chadwick, Birchwood, & Trower, 1996; Fowler, Garety, & Kuipers, 1995; D.
Kingdon, Turkington, & John, 1994). Currently, there are more than 40 randomized clinical trials and multiple meta-analyses of these trials published. CBTp is a clinically validated intervention for psychosis, with research indicating a 20-40% reduction in distress related to psychotic symptoms when CBTp is employed in conjunction with medications, and 50-65% of patients displaying reduced symptomology when treated with CBTp 4(R.
A. Gould, Mueser, Bolton, Mays, & Goff, 2001; Pilling et al., 2002; Wykes, Steel, Everitt, & Tarrier, 2008). Furthermore, studies have indicated that treatment with CBTp is related to improvements in therapeutic relationships, changes in beliefs about self and others, changes in reasoning style, improvements in functioning, and learning to cope among people with psychosis (R.
A. Gould et al., 2001; Pilling et al., 2002; Wykes et al., 2008). A study which compared the efficacy of CBTp to befriending interventions in medication-resistant schizophrenia demonstrated that both interventions significantly reduced positive, negative and depressive symptoms, but that there was sustained improvement at follow-up seen with CBT only (Sensky et al., 2000).
CBTp has been recommended as a frontline treatment in treatment guidelines for schizophrenia published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA), Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT), and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the United Kingdom. American Psychiatric Association – “persons with schizophrenia who have residual psychotic symptoms while receiving adequate pharmacotherapy may benefit from cognitive behaviorally oriented psychotherapy.” (Lehman et al., 2004) Patient Outcome Research Team – ―persons with schizophrenia who have persistent psychotic symptoms while receiving adequate pharmacotherapy should be offered adjunctive cognitive behaviorally oriented psychotherapy to reduce the severity of symptoms. The therapy may be provided in either a group or an individual format and should be approximately 4–9 months in duration” (Dixon et al., 2010; Kreyenbuhl, Buchanan, Dickerson, Dixon, & Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research, 2010) National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines -“CBT should be offered to all patients with schizophrenia.
This can be started either during the acute phase or later, including inpatient stay.” (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009) A2. Theoretical Models of Psychosis and CBTp A2.1. The ABC Model: CBT works by (1) collaboratively identifying problems that are most troublesome, (2) looking at how a person tends to think about them (―thinking habits‖), (3) looking at how a person reacts to them (―behaving habits‖), (4) considering whether or not these thinking and behaving habits are unrealistic or unhelpful and deciding whether there are other ways of thinking or reacting that would be more helpful in solving the issue, and (5) ultimately trying out these new ways of thinking and behaving, and choosing the ones that work.
CBT operates on the principle that an individual‘s emotional reactions are determined by their perception of events (Beck‘s Model of Emotional Difficulties). Figure 2: Example of ABC Model 5For the purposes of CBT, the cognitive process can be simplified into the acronym ―ABC,‖ wherein: A is an activating event - any specific, observable experience. B is a belief – it includes both thoughts and beliefs about the aforementioned event.
C is a consequence – the emotional and behavioral consequences of thoughts and beliefs. Core beliefs are interpretations based on long-standing beliefs about ones‘ self and the world, and may also be a part of the model, as they may impact the beliefs generated by an activating event. The ABC model is taught to patients so that they can learn to construct their own ABC models of distressing experiences and become more adept at recognizing the relationship between beliefs and emotional/behavioral consequences.
A2.2. The Stress-Vulnerability Model: The Stress-Vulnerability Model (Zubin & Spring, 1977) is another central concept of CBTp, which serves to highlight the relationship between stress and symptomatology, as well to help normalize anomalous experiences by illustrating that at different levels of distress all people are capable of having such experiences. The Stress-Vulnerability model posits that there is a bi-directional relationship between stress and vulnerability to psychotic experiences, whereby the more vulnerable people are to certain types of stress, the more prone they are to developing Figure 3.
The Stress Vulnerability Model psychotic symptoms. The stress-vulnerability model accounts for both biological predisposition and various stressors that patients experience throughout life, including formative events in childhood, environmental factors, cognitive factors, and reasoning and attribution deficits which, cumulatively, may trigger psychosis. Psychotic experiences themselves also have the potential to increase level of stress, thereby creating a negative feedback loop in which psychotic symptoms and related distress feed one another in vicious cycle.
Thus, the goal of CBTp is to reduce distress caused by psychotic symptoms by changing patient interpretations and beliefs about the nature and consequences of the symptoms. 6A3. Therapeutic Process In CBTp, the therapeutic process is conceptualized through a series of essential steps that can help reduce the patient‘s symptoms and disability by changing beliefs about these symptoms.
In CBTp, the development of a strong therapeutic alliance is essential to the success of the treatment. The therapist takes an approach of ―collaborative empiricism,‖ working together with the patient as equals to better understand their experiences, thoughts, feelings and goals. The therapist utilizes empathy and normalizing to engage the patient, and works to understand the problem as the patient sees it.
Rather than using an authoritative, directive, or exert style, the therapist uses what is called ―Columbo Style‖ (after the famous television detective) to gently help the patient describe their experiences, how they arrived at their conclusions, and how they developed their specific beliefs. Engagement continues throughout the therapeutic relationship, but can be thought of as the first step in the therapeutic process. The therapeutic process of CBTp is outlined below: Engagement: Empathy, normalizing, resolving ambivalence, & Columbo style Assessment: Understanding the first episode in detail, ABC assessment model, & narrative approach Formulation: Information on current beliefs and how the patient were arrived at these beliefs is assembled into a formulation.
The goal of formulation is to develop a shared psychological understanding of the patient‘s problem(s)/symptom(s) Goals: Goals are based on the patient‘s problem list and formulation Interventions: Set appropriate interventions and evaluate effectiveness (e.g. reality testing/behavioral experiments; focusing on reasoning style, schema, and automatic thoughts) Relapse Work: Relapse cognitions, assessment, personal pattern of relapse, and relapse prevention interventions Within each session, maintaining the CBTp structure is crucial, as it maximizes predictability (thereby decreasing anxiety), increases patient investment and involvement in the treatment, helps exercise memory and meta-cognitive skills, and serves as a role model on how to behave/function. Below is an outline of CBTp session structure.
In the first few minutes of the session, the patient and the therapist:  Complete mood check.  Quantify symptom severity.  Set up session agenda.
 Set up order of topics to be discussed. 7During the session, the therapist:  Reviews homework assignment (if applicable).  Assesses progress during session and transitions.
 Relates topics discussed to previous sessions.  Relates topics discussed to agenda of entire treatment. Then, in the final minutes of the session, the following points are addressed:  Review topics that were discussed in the session.
 Make plans for next session.  Assess patient‘s view of the session (what was helpful what was not helpful?)  Complete mood check.  Review homework assignment (if applicable).
More detailed explanations of each step in the therapeutic process are outlined below. A3.1. Engagement In the engagement stage of CBTp (which continues throughout the therapeutic process) the therapist begins to develop a rapport with the patient, build the patient‘s level of trust and openness, and increase motivation to engage in treatment.
CBTp techniques to be employed during this stage include Resolving Ambivalence, Normalizing, and Columbo Style, defined below. Resolving ambivalence is a strategy that the CBTp clinician employs if the patient is ambivalence about a course of action to help them make choices. Resolving ambivalence may entail any or all of the following: • Eliciting and exploring what the patient considers to be the available options for action • Suggesting options for action that the patient may have overlooked • Eliciting and exploring what the patient considers to be the good and bad aspects of the options • Suggesting benefits and drawbacks that the patient may have overlooked • Discussing any apparent discrepancies between the patient‘s present or planned behavior and their broader values and goals • Focusing on and reinforcing adaptive attitudes and behaviors by: - Reflecting selectively - Reframing - Summarizing - Encouraging the client to expand on their adaptive attitudes - Using paradoxical interventions or role changes (i.e.
asking the client to adopt the role of the therapist) Normalizing experiences is another technique used to engage with the patient in order to avoid catastrophic or stigmatizing cognitions about insanity and to recognize that psychotic experiences are shared by other people who are not ill and are on continuum with normal experience. Normalizing aims to help the patient understand that despite their distressing experiences, they are not radically different from other people and should not be treated in radically different ways than other people (e.g. being incarcerated).
Often times, therapists use 8famous or distinguished figures who experience psychotic symptoms to show that success is attainable despite life-long psychiatric problems. For reference, lists of confirmed voice-hearers can be viewed on websites such as http://www.intervoiceonline.org. An explanation of the vulnerability-stress model may aid this process, emphasising that all people have some level of vulnerability to psychotic symptoms and that even people with a low vulnerability could develop psychotic symptoms if they face sufficient stress.
(See section A2.) Furthermore, studies have indicated that particular kinds of stress (e.g. sleep deprivation, sensory deprivation, solitary confinement) can lead to hallucinations and paranoid ideation in almost any individual displaying otherwise ‗normal‘ functioning. Normalizing cognitive processes may help patients feel more confident in their cognitive processes, and is accomplished by discussing the ‗understandability‘ of a patient‘s explanation of the situation.
It may help to point to evidence that indicates that people who hold strong beliefs (e.g. political beliefs) select information that supports their beliefs, ignore information that appears to contradict them, and interpret ambiguous information in line with their beliefs. It may also be helpful for the therapist to discuss the ways in which long standing beliefs or strong emotions can influence the way everybody perceives and makes sense of any new information—especially in ambiguous situations.
Columbo Style refers to a non-confrontational way of eliciting information from patients regarding their beliefs and experiences. It can be contrasted with the ―Sherlock Holmes‖ style, which tends to use direct questions to deduce implicit meanings from the individual‘s account. When employing the Columbo Style, the therapist shows interest in the patient‘s account, keeping in mind that empathic communication may make the patient more willing to disclose distressing experiences.
The therapist should avoid confronting the patient directly with the gaps, contradictions, and inconsistencies in their accounts and should instead take the approach that the patient‘s perception of events is logical but that the therapist is confused or missing something and needs further explanation from the patient to fully understand. Finally, the therapist determines the series of events and assumptions upon which the beliefs are based on and the evidence that is used to maintain them. A3.2.
Assessment: Assessment is an important part of the therapeutic process in CBTp, and is itself an intervention. The success of treatment depends upon collaboratively creating with the patient a formulation of the development and maintenance of psychotic symptoms, for which information discovered during the assessment process is crucial. Assessment in CBTp involves: assessing psychotic experiences, longitudinal assessment of early experiences, core beliefs, and dysfunctional rules or assumptions; cognitive components (e.g., biases, distortions, intrusions, appraisals); behavioral components (e.g., safety behaviors); affective components; physiological components; and triggers and mediators.
The primary goals in CBTp assessment are:  Identifying problems  Gathering information to guide the formulation  Gathering information to test hypotheses  Monitoring symptoms 9A3.2.a. Assessing Psychotic Experiences In assessing psychotic experiences, the main goal is to understand the first episode of psychosis in detail. There are two main ways to do this: the ABC Model and a Narrative Approach.
In order to use the ABC Model in assessment, the activating event, belief, and consequence(s) must be identified as they relate to the first episode. There are a number of details to be uncovered about each psychotic symptom:  Form  Content  Frequency  Duration  Conditions under which they typically occur(ed)  Consequences  Impact  Ascribed meaning  Conviction in this meaning  Quality/intensity  Distress  Preoccupation Using the narrative approach, clinicians help patients to construct a narrative account of their experiences as a meaningful sequence of events. With the narrative approach, clinician and patient are:  Developing an evolutionary story to try and make sense of a series of often seemingly unrelated experiences  Focusing on a sequence of events and experiences to help the patient to ‗stand back,‘ observe the pattern, and develop a new perspective.
 Switching between a narrow and a broad focus to help the patient to develop an understanding of underlying themes and causes.  Introducing other information or perspective and integrating it with the patient‘s version. A3.2.b.
Recognizing Problems An important technique during the assessment process of CBTp is recognizing problems and assisting patients in identifying problems. Insight is often poor among people suffering from schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, and in some cases may even be completely absent. Poor insight can make it difficult for the therapist to engage patients in discussions about their problems if the patient does not recognize any or all of the problems that exist.
Within a CBTp framework, the therapist remains empathic and open when recognizing problems. It is important that the patient lead the therapeutic process and feel empowered, and the discussion about problems should always be collaborative. Below are guidelines for recognizing problems in CBTp treatment.
Recognizing Problems- How To Do It • Highlighting the ―stress‖ that the patient has been experiencing as one rational for further discussion and enquiry. 10• Normalizing and validating particular experiences and helping the patient to feel safe to discussing particular problems without fear of judgment. • Contrasting the patient‘s perspective with that of important people in his/her life and exploring possible reasons for any discrepancies.
• Pointing out that some of the experiences that the patient has reported or some of the behaviors the therapist has observed, or heard about, might be considered to be problems requiring solutions. • Highlighting inconsistencies between the patient‘s denial of problems and other statements or behaviors of the patient (e.g. such as willingly accepting medication in a psychiatric hospital).
A3.3. Formulation After assessment, the next step in the therapeutic process is developing a Formulation, or explanatory model of the development and maintenance of psychotic symptoms. According to Persons (1989), ―Case Formulation is a hypothesis about the nature of the psychological difficulties underlying the problems on the patient‘s problems list‖.
The goals of developing a formulation are: (1) to validate the patient‘s existing explanation of their experiences by presenting an understandable account of why they came to conclusion they did, and (2) to explore alternative explanations of experiences that may be more adaptive and less distressing. Figure 3. Model of Formulation of Maintenance of Voices Some examples of information that may be part of a formulation include the patient‘s current problems, hypotheses about underlying mechanisms, precipitation of the current problems, the maintenance cycle of the current problems, the origins of the central problems, and predicted obstacles to treatment.
11A formulation is important because it helps:  Understand the relationships between problems  Choose a treatment modality  Choose an intervention strategy  Choose an intervention point  Predict behaviors, understanding and managing non-compliance  Redirect an unsuccessful treatment There are two types of formulations: the “here and now” account of symptom maintenance and the historical account of symptom development. Developing a formulation involves the following steps:  Normalizing information  Introducing models to help patient understand current feelings of distress  Introducing models of particular symptomatology (e.g. voices, delusions, anxiety, etc.)  Understanding problem occurrence: stress-vulnerability model  Constructing historical formulations for understanding problem development and vulnerability In developing a formulation, therapists consider patient‘s goals, patient‘s needs for information, patient‘s priorities at the time, patient‘s stage of treatment, and patient‘s cognitive deficits and limitations.
In CBTp, therapists take the following approach in developing a formulation:  Ask patient about his or her own formulation.  Provide information and ideas a little at a time and wait for the patient‘s reactions before proceeding.  Try to express the ideas in language (and diagrams) that would be easy for the patient to understand -- use his or her own terms and avoids terms that the patient objects to.
 Convey that everything said is open to negotiation. Assess the effectiveness of formulation together with the patient. A3.4.
Goals: The course of treatment for CBTp is based on the patient‘s goals, which they identify collaboratively with the therapist based on their problem list. Goals are generated in the beginning phase of treatment and may be returned to throughout the course of therapy as certain goals are met and new needs and issues arise. Goal identification comes from setting both general and specific goals.
The problems are negative, exist in the past and future, and are usually generalized, whereas the goals should be positive, based on the future, and very specific. These goals can be short-term, medium-term, or long-term, but they must be specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time-limitedIt is important to note that the patient may identify goals that seem unrealistic or at odds with the therapist ideas of the course of treatment. In this case, the therapist should work to frame patient goals in such a way that they are feasible.
Again, the ultimate goal is to reduce patient distress and disability caused by psychotic symptoms. In outlining goals the therapist should use the techniques outlined in the Identifying Problems technique, section A3.2.b. 12A3.5.
Interventions: Interventions selected will be based on the patient‘s goals and the case formulation. Often a case formulation will highlight a number of different intervention points, such as working with a patient to identify and reduce triggers; helping patient to gather evidence for and against various beliefs; setting up reality testing and behavioral experiments; providing education on cognitive distortions; teaching reasoning skills; and working on core beliefs and automatic thoughts. Interventions should always be applied within the context of the therapeutic relationship and at the patient‘s pace and level of comfort.
Suggesting a behavior experiment or challenging a belief without first developing a rapport and demonstrating that the patient‘s understanding of events and situations makes sense given the current information is unlikely to be successful and may cause the patient to feel defensive. Although CBTp is a structured intervention, the CBTp therapist remains flexible and can also assist the patient with non- therapy related tasks that relate to larger goals and improve quality of life, such as completing an application for supported housing or fixing up a resume. The overall role of the therapist in CBTp is to create an alliance, let the patient lead the process, set treatment goals, promote homework, offer structure, understand the patient‘s beliefs, protect and enhance self-esteem, and help the patient to discover their own best way of coping.
The CBTp therapist avoids imposing their own view, acting as an expert, minimizing the patient‘s experience, and being interpretive or inconsistent. A3.6. Relapse Work: Relapse work ensures that the patient can feel reasonably confident in their ability to utilize skills and techniques to ensure that psychotic symptoms are managed.
The therapist begins by assessing for previous relapse(s), which may involve the following considerations:  What is the form, content and duration of the previous relapses  What are antecedents of the previous relapse?  What are the patient‘s appraisals of this experience?  What is the impact of previous relapse?
When assessing for these factors, the therapist should also consider the patient‘s appraisal of the most recent relapse. What caused it? How and to what extent was the patient able to control the relapse?
Are there any aspects of the relapse that patient finds exciting or rewarding (e.g. enjoyed the sensation of finding the world‘s answers, beautiful hallucinations, conviction that they have special talents)? Next, the therapist assesses for any early warning signs and triggering events for relapse.
They may introduce examples of early warning signs to help the patient determine the typical timeline of a relapse. The therapist may also encourage the patient to review any changes in their thoughts, perceptions, emotions and behaviors that preceded the most recent relapse. They may also try to invoke a recollection of any events that may have triggered the recent relapse.
Finally, the therapist assesses the patient‘s relapse cognitions. Identifying the cognitions relating to the relapse will inform the development of a relapse prevention plan. The patient‘s knowledge of the process by which relapse occurs, as well as their thoughts, assumptions and beliefs about relapse are all related to the cognitive basis of the relapse prevention plan.
13The therapist‘s goal is to work with the patient to develop shared psychological understanding of their relapse profile. The formulation includes:  The context and triggers of relapse  Early warning signs, subtle emotional changes  The nature/characteristics of relapse  The patient‘s appraisals of relapse, impact of appraisals  Common features between relapses and general vulnerability and how they may play out in the context of patient‘s life experiences  Areas for relapse prevention interventions  Rationale for relapse prevention plan Relapse prevention interventions are formulated in a number of steps. After assessing for relapse and devising a formulation, the therapist develops individually appropriate relapse prevention strategies (action plan) based on the formulation.
Next, CBT techniques are employed to challenge and re-appraise maladaptive cognition around relapse. Next, the therapist reviews the patient‘s current use of self-regulatory strategies and making a plan that they continue to use effective ones if needed in the future. Then, the therapist discusses with the patient how to monitor warning signs or who could monitor them.
Finally, the therapist discusses difficulties implementing the plan and works collaboratively with the patient to resolve any problems that they might foresee. 14B. Working with Delusions Delusions are a major symptom of schizophrenia.
According to the DSM-IV definition, delusions are false beliefs based on incorrect inferences that are firmly sustained despite evidence to the contrary and not accepted by other people within the same culture. According to the DMS-5, delusions are fixed beliefs that are not amenable to change in light of conflicting evidence. The distinction between a delusion and a strongly held idea is sometimes difficult to make and depends in part on the degree of conviction with which the belief is held despite clear or reasonable contradictory evidence regarding its veracity.
Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible, not understandable to same-culture peers, and do not derive from ordinary life experiences. B1. Understanding Delusions Karl Jaspers, one of the key figures in psychosis research, theorized that a delusion is a combination of sensory experience and implicit meaning and is incomprehensible due to its origin in direct experience of new meaning.
This also led to a belief that delusions are impossible to work with because we cannot understand them (Jaspers, 1963). Delusions can be perceptual or reasoning deficits and biases that cause an individual to misunderstand what is happening in the world (Bental, 1994; Frith, 1992; Blackwood et al., 2001). They can also be motivated beliefs that serve some intra-psychic function: paranoid delusion may be a product of complex processes of defense against negative schemata and in order to protect self-esteem (Chadwick et al., 1996; Taylor & Kinderman, 2002) (Faught & Parkinson, 1979).
Another way to perceive delusions is complex behaviors contributing to formation and maintenance of beliefs: isolation, avoidance, not sharing feelings and experiences (Freeman et al., 2005; 2001). More recent understanding of delusions has been more positive: Maher asserted that impossible explanations are rather common in general, and delusions are attempts to make sense of abnormal experiences (Maher, 1974) (Maher, 1988). In essence, Maher claimed that a delusional person‘s ability to apply logic to their experience is perfectly functional – their experiences cannot be explained otherwise.
Indeed, magical explanations for external phenomena are also quite common, as evidenced by one survey that indicated over 25% of respondents believed in ghosts, over 50% believed in foretelling of the future, over 50% believed in telepathy, over 60% believed in God, and over 85% believed in angels (Gallup & Jones, 1989) Thus, illogical explanations themselves are not indicative of delusions, but certain cognitive mechanisms underlying such beliefs can indicate delusions. Finally, the most recent breakthrough in the study of delusions came with the application of cognition to the understanding of the role of attentional, attributional, and reasoning biases (Richard P. Bentall, 1992; Freeman & Garety, 2003)(Garety, 1989).
The cognitive processes (or cognitive biases) that may be related to the formation and maintenance of delusional beliefs include: a tendency to jump to conclusions; emotional reasoning; decreased belief flexibility; negative beliefs about self; theory of mind deficits; tendency to make external personal attributions for negative events; selective attention to threat. 15B2. Working with Delusions When working with patients displaying delusions, the therapist may need to concentrate on working with cognitive biases prior to working with delusional content.
In the context of the therapeutic relationship, the following techniques may be employed: B2.a. Delusion–specific assessment of beliefs: In assessing beliefs, a comprehensive understanding of the patient’s belief structure must be obtained, including: ● Content ● Conviction ● Preoccupation ● Distress (emotional impact) ● Behavioral impact (safety behaviors) ● Current triggers ● Initial formation ● Positive and Negative Consequences ● Current coping strategies B2.b. Formulation: After the belief is assessed, a formulation must be made collaboratively with the patient.
Reasons for adapting the belief must be weighed against the reasons for maintaining the belief, which will help build a foundation from which to challenge the belief. Figure 4. Example Formulation of Delusions B2.c.
Re-evaluating beliefs: Here it is vital to help the individual review the evidence they have presented. Start with evidence for the delusions on a day-to-day basis. It can be helpful to offer alternative explanations for the patient‘s beliefs, and to gently point out inconsistencies and fallacies in the patient‘s belief structure.
The alternative explanation can either be pointed out by the therapist or elicited from the patient. Through this collaborative process, the therapist 16encourages the patient to weigh out delusional beliefs and alternative interpretations in the light of available evidence. Remember that delusion is a reaction to puzzling or threatening experiences, and thus it follows that the patient would attempt to find meaning when frightened, anxious, or confused.
Offering alternative explanations may reduce these feelings. B2.d. Reality testing: Encourage the patient to engage in specific behaviors for the purpose of testing the validity of her/his belief.
Make predictions about external events so that outcome of these events could serve as tests of those predictions. The therapist will develop an experiment collaboratively with the patient. The following questions should be considered when devising the experiment.
● What is the thought that you need to test out? ● What would be a good way of finding out what you need to know? ● What exactly information is needed?
● How may this be measurable? After the experiment: ● How does the outcome relate to the original thought? ● How much do you believe that thought now?
● To what extent were your original predictions confirmed or disconfirmed? ● On the basis of the experiment, what is the most realistic and helpful view of the situation? The ―3 C‘s‖ is one way to teach patients to begin practicing reality testing on their own.
An outline of the process is below. Catch It:  What is the automatic thought?  What was going through your mind?
 Is this thought helping me reach my goal? Check It:  How did it make you feel/do?  What is the evidence for/against it?
 What would you say to a friend with that thought?  Is this a mistake in thinking (e.g., ―jumping to conclusions‖; ―all or none‖)? Change It:  What is an alternative?
Another possibility?  Could you think anything else about it?  Does the new thought help you reach your goal?
B2.e. Verbal Challenges of Delusions: In CBTp, clinicians verbally challenge patients‘ delusions in a gentle and unintimidating manner. The therapist can gently point out inconsistencies in the patient‘s belief system and then elicit alternative interpretations of the evidence.
If necessary, the therapist can also gently offer alternative explanations. The therapist 17then encourages the patient to weigh out the delusional beliefs and the alternative beliefs in light of the existing evidence. B2.f.
Normalizing Cognitive Processes: To help patients make sense of and deal with delusions, the therapist needs to convey that a delusion is a reaction to a puzzling or threatening experience, such as hearing a voice or panic. The therapist portrays the delusion as a reasonable attempt to find meaning when the patient was frightened or anxious, and highlights that in the moment it functioned to reduce the sense of confusion and feelings of fear. C.
Working with Hallucinations A hallucination happens when people hear, smell, feel or see something – but there isn‘t anything (or anybody) actually there to account for it. Despite being a key feature of schizophrenia, hallucinations are not unique to schizophrenia, and have been identified in a host of other disease states such as alcoholism, stroke, epilepsy, syphilis, AIDS dementia, nutritional deficiency, and more. Thus, researchers have deduced that hallucinations most likely arise from a capacity latent in the normal brain, widely distributed throughout the general population.
C2. Voice Hearing Phenomenology The most common type of hallucination among schizophrenia sufferers is auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH), with around 53% of sufferers hearing voices (Landmark, Merskey, Cernovsky, & Helmes, 1990). Despite its high prevalence among schizophrenia patients, voice- hearing is not only experienced by individuals with schizophrenia.
Around 2-5% of the general population hears voices. (Tien, 1991) To most who experience AVH, the voices sound real and seem to be coming from outside the individual‘s body, although other people can't hear them. Some voice-hearers may hear them in different places or may hear them coming from a particular object, such as a television.
To others, voices may talk to a person directly, or they may talk to each other about a person, as if the voice-hearer is overhearing a conversation. Finally, voices can be pleasant but are often rude, critical, abusive or irritating. For many voice- hearers, AVH can become a prevalent aspect of one‘s life but may cause varying amounts of distress depending on the individual.
A variety of cognitive process can explain the prevalence of AVH. First, AVH can be viewed as the verbal thoughts of inner speech, externally attributed mental events (Gallagher, Dinan, & Baker, 1994; L. N.
Gould, 1948; Inouye & Shimizu, 1970). Next, misattribution of intrusive thoughts can influence AVH, because they are incompatible with meta-cognitive beliefs (Morrison, 1995). Finally, AVH can be attributed to the failure of source monitoring (the skill of identifying the source of experience) (R.
P. Bentall, 1990). The following statistics can be shared with patients to help normalize voice hearing (Nayani & David, 1996) • Number: 66% of people hear more than 1 voice • Timbre: 57% crowds talking; 34% middle aged man;10% young adult female • Accent: 71% of voices have a different accent than the voice hearer 18• Class: 30% of upper class people hear voices, 17% of middle class people hear voices, and 11% lower class people hear voices • Identity: 15% delusional identity; 46% real people • Distress:47% of individuals are severely distressed by voices, and 53% experience moderate to no distress • Recurrence: 68% of people experience the same voices recurring • Conscience: 46% of people said the ‗voices‘ have replaced the ‗voice of conscience‘ • 68% reported abusive voices 25% approving • 70% of patients initiated a dialogue in response to the voice‘s judgments • 50% reported ‗voices‘ asking questions.
• All but a few patients reported getting answers to their questions. • 47% heard ‗voices‘ telling them something they didn‘t already know C3. Working with Voices in CBTp In CBTp the aim is to work with distress caused by voices by exploring beliefs about the voices.
As indicated by a study by Chadwick and Birchwood (1994), voices themselves do not cause distress. Rather, the presence of voices influences beliefs regarding the voices, which in turn cause distress (Chadwick & Birchwood, 1994). Research has shown that appraisals of voices are stronger predictors of distress and response to voices that the frequency and severity of voice hearing experiences.
Beliefs about omnipotence of voices are related to distress, and beliefs about malevolence of voices are related to resistance to treatment (Emmanuelle Peters, Sally Williams, Michael Cooke & Elizabeth Kuipers, 2006). When working with patients who are experiencing hallucinations, a clear understanding of the distress caused by hallucinations must be established. Utilizing the ABC model of cognition, the therapist starts with the consequence (C), then works back to activating event (A), then explores the belief (B).
During this process, the following should be considered: When working with hallucinations, therapists and patients collaborate to:  Gently challenge beliefs about voices  Establish the identity of voices (malevolent or benevolent)  Understand the power of voices  Learn how to control the voices  Recognize resistance or compliance to the voices  Uncover the origins of the voices o One way to do this is through reality testing (e.g., ask if others can hear them, tape record them, etc.) Outlined below are aspects of the therapeutic process in working with hallucinations in CBTp. 3C.a. Establish whether hallucinations are distressing: The goal in addressing hallucinations is to work on beliefs that are not correct, not productive, and not adaptive.
Once identified, the therapist will attempt to work with these beliefs to hopefully change the original thought. Thus, it is essential to understand everything about the voices--the behavioral (resistance vs. compliance with the voices), emotional (level of distress), and impactful (on functioning) aspects of the hallucination.
193C.b. Clarify nature of voices/visions: Assess the hallucination for information regarding frequency, loudness, content, number, and location. Ask the patient about any visions they may have had.
3C.d. Review beliefs about the focus and origin of hallucinations: Triggers of a hallucination must be identified. For instance, environmental (where, when), internal (anxiety), cause/origin (what causes them?
Where do they come from?). Then, the nature of the voices must be determined: Identity (who are they? Are they helpful or harmful?), power (how powerful are they?), control (how much control does person have over the voices?) 3C.e.
Introduce „normalizing‟ alternatives: Research supports the idea that hallucinations occur in other diagnoses and even within an otherwise healthy population. The therapist should convey the message that it‘s possible to experience voices and still lead a normal, productive, and happy life. Normalizing the patient‘s experience may entail referring to famous and successful people such as Anthony Hopkins.
Such examples may potentially inspire hope Figure 5. Elyn Saks (left), law professor at the Gould Law School; Sir and reassurance for the Anthony Hopkins (right), Academy Award-winning actor. Both are voice- patient‘s future wellbeing.
hearers. 3C.d. Aim to assist in the appropriate attribution of voices: If assessed voices are shown to be associated with anxiety or depressed mood, techniques for anxiety and depression should be employed to target associated symptoms first.
If the patient misattributes ambiguous stimuli such as noise from outside as voices and has distressing beliefs about this experience, the therapist should explore cognitive explanations and evidence using CBT interventions. 3C.e. Examine the content of voices / visions: Can the content of the voices be shown to be untrue (e.g.
is patient always a bad person)? Do voices tell lies? As in working with thought disorder (see below), the therapist must gather contextual evidence to examine beliefs, fears, and meaning underlying hallucinations.
3C.f. Enhance coping: The therapist should work with the patient both to enhance existing coping strategies and to find new techniques. Some examples of coping strategies for auditory hallucinations include: self-monitoring (noticing triggers), anxiety management, and distraction (talking to someone, listening to music, going for a walk).
Another coping technique is focusing. In focusing, the individual will focus on cognitive distortions, which are maladaptive beliefs about 20voices, and try to respond to them rationally. They could also respond rationally to the voice content if it is negative and attempt to dismiss the voices, and then list evidence in favor of the voice content and against the voice content.
When practiced for ten minutes at a specific time each day, this intervention has been shown to decrease distress. Some other aspects of focusing include reminding oneself that no one else can hear the voice(s) and giving the voices a ten minute time slot each day. The therapist should be aware that coping may not be effective if and when (1) voices have clear meaning or represent a long-standing relationship, and (2) coping conflicts with central beliefs (the voices have malevolent power, religious beliefs).
D. Group Interventions of Delusions and Hallucinations A number of CBTp group-based treatment manuals have been developed to treat various symptoms of psychosis. Research has shown that Group CBTp can result in: a reduction in negative symptoms (Andres, Pfammatter, Garst, Teschner, & Brenner, 2000) (Johns et al., 2002;); reduced co-morbid social anxiety and avoidance, as well as improved mood and quality of life (Halperin et al., 2000); reduced positive symptoms and an increase in coping (Lecomte, 1999; 2006); improvement in symptoms and a lower relapse rate (Bechdolf et al., 2004); reduced feelings of hopelessness and reduced rates of low self-esteem (Barrowclough et al., 2006); and a decrease in delusional severity, delusional conviction and changes in cognitive biases targeted in treatment (Y Landa, Silverstein, Schwartz, & Savitz, 2006).There are several possible benefits of Group CBTp Interventions.
Groups can: (1) reduce isolation and provide support; (2) help normalize patients‘ experiences; (3) provide unique learning opportunities; (4) help patients may more easily recognize thinking errors made by others and learn from them; (5) allow patients to give feedback to one another; and (6) allow more patients to receive treatment. The following models have been tested in clinical trials:  Group CBT for Auditory Hallucinations (Chadwick, Sambrooke, Rasch, & Davies, 2000; Wykes, Parr, & Landau, 1999)  Group CBT for Negative Symptoms (Andres et al., 2000) (Johns, 2002)  Group Cognitive Social Skills Training for Older Adults (McQuaid, (2000))  Group CBT for First Episode Patients (Lecomte et al., 2007)  Group CBT for Delusions (Y Landa et al., 2006)  Family and Group Based CBT for Youth at Risk for Paranoia (Y. Landa et al., 2016) D1.
Selecting Patients for CBTp Groups The following considerations should be made when selecting patients for CBTp groups:  Target specific domains for treatment & recruit patients with need in target area (e.g. paranoia)  Maximize patients‘ level of shared experience (e.g. same phase of illness)  Minimize heterogeneity in cognitive ability  Counterbalance motivated and unmotivated individuals The primary exclusion criteria for CBTp groups is when patients do not wish to be in the group.
Depending on the therapist and group model, other exclusion criterion may apply, such as aggressive behavior or active substance use. 21E. Working with Thought Disorder and Negative Symptoms E1.
Working with Thought Disorder The Cognitive Model of Thought Disorder is central to CBTp treatment attitudes in thought disorder, and posits that communication disorder may be a more apt name for the phenomenon. Research indicates that thought-disordered patients are not always disordered. In one study, patients were retrospectively asked to explain thought disordered passages of speech, and were often able to explain their cognitive processes (Harrow & Prosen, 1979).
In another study, patients were found to be more incoherent when discussing emotionally salient topics(Tai, Haddock, & Bentall, 2004). This research implies that it may be the language rather than the thought process that is idiosyncratic. Thus, it is the therapist‘s job to help the patient identify and verbalize their experiences.
In addressing thought disorder, it is imperative to demonstrate a desire to understand the patient. When patients present as thought-disordered, working on communication may be the first step in the therapeutic process before a formulation can be developed. First, the following must be established: Is emotional disturbance a significant feature of the disordered thought?
This can be assessed by noting whether thought disorder worsens when emotional salient topics are discussed. Next, could the thought disorder be related to substance abuse? Hallucinogenics correlate with increased rate of speech and distractibility, which may mimic or elevate the typical characteristics of thought disorder.
Finally, what is the conversational style of the patient? For example, grandiosity may be related to certain speech patterns, ie ―I am unique and speak in hyper-intelligent language. Just see if you can understand me‖.
After assessing for these factors, communication can then be clarified. The following are guidelines for consideration when clarifying communication with a thought disordered patient. Listen: Be nondirective, then structured.
Enable a person to express their point of view. Link key words and reflect back in order to make an educated guess based on the context that has been provided. If flow of conversation incomprehensible, look for themes.
● Example: ―she died‖ ―Accident‖ ―Painful‖ ● ―Do you mean your mother?‖ ● ―Are you referring to an accident that happened to you?‖ Clarify: Ask for meaning of neologism, metaphor. Provide possible alternative words that may help gain a better understanding of the context or emotion. For example, if the patient uses the word ―discrenting‖ saying, ―I don‘t really understand what you mean by ‗discrenting,‘ but it sounds unpleasant,‖ and then later when it becomes clear, ―I see--you mean disappointing.‖ Closed (“yes” or “no”) questions: You may begin with closed questions first in order to gather initial context, then continue to more open questions once the conversation progress.
Keep patient on topic by interrupting: Redirect the conversation by asking for clarification on the context that has already been provided. ● Example: ―…Hold on a minute… let‘s just see If I understood what you said about your concern about the FBI… Sorry if I am a bit slow today.‖ If further clarification is not proving successful, it may be necessary to move on and return to the topic at a later time. If questions are unwelcomed, the therapist may need to simply sit with the patient and listen.
22E2. Working with Negative Symptoms: In Kingdon and Turkington‘s approach to patients with negative symptoms, the therapist must understand that they will not be able to push patients out of negative symptoms, but may instead be able to open doors for them (D. G.
Kingdon & Turkington, 2005). Thus, negative symptoms should be assessed for possible relation to other symptoms associated with schizophrenia (secondary symptoms) such as positive symptoms (delusions and hallucinations), anxiety, depression, or side effects from medications. The patient may also present with negative symptoms due to fear of relapse or avoidance of over-stimulation.
If negative symptoms are secondary, the therapist should work with depression and anxiety, work with positive symptoms, or discuss relapse prevention. In working with negative symptoms it is imperative for the therapist to be empathic, building on meaningful engagement and identifying possible motivators for the client that will help ‗open doors‘ for them. Setting goals now can become tricky; the patient might set high standards for him/herself and then become discouraged when the goals are not met.
In order to avoid possible frustration and discouragement, it is important for the therapist to establish pressured areas, work on setting realistic goals, identify cognitive distortions, accepting flexibility, and dealing with setbacks. E2.a. Interventions for Negative Symptoms: In developing an intervention for negative symptoms, CBTp focuses on building on meaningful engagement, iidentifying motivating factors, balancing between acceptance and pressure to change, and reducing pressure and immediate expectations.
In CBTp, if negative symptoms are secondary, then therapists will 23focus on the primary issues (e.g., depression, anxiety, positive symptoms, and relapse prevention interventions). Additionally, if premorbid development is poor, therapists and patients work on skills development (social, domestic, employment, etc.) and motivators. And if premorbid development is good, then therapists and patients work on reducing immediate pressures and expectations and taking time to recover.
Negative symptoms may also be due to negative cognitions about activities. If there is a low expectancy of pleasure, the therapist may schedule meaningful activity, set an expected pleasure rating, identify cognitive distortion, consider, alternative evidence, keep pleasure ratings, and use feedback to shift low expectations as the arise. If there is low expectancy due to ―high costs,‖ the patient is most likely perceiving the high personal costs of making an effort (―It‘s not worth the effort‖).
In this case, it will be important for the therapist to review realistic goals, identify cognitive distortions, consider alternative evidence, prepare alternative balanced intervention, keep pleasure ratings, and use feedback to shift low expectations. Patients with psychosis may also have low expectancy due to stigma. In this case the therapist can provide assertiveness training, psychoeducation, and promote personal contact.
SUMMARY AND APPLICATIONS CBTp is based on the cognitive model, and it is not simply a collection of techniques. In CBTp, engagement with the patient is seen as primary. Techniques such as a normalizing approach (based on stress-vulnerability model), non-confrontational ―Columbo‖ style versus ―Sherlock Holmes‖ style, ―Collaborative Empiricism‖ (a collaborative investigation of various possibilities) are emphasized in CBTp.
CBTp is a goal-centered and time limited treatment. Goals in CBTp are structured around relieving distress for the patient, making sense of psychotic symptoms, exploring the personal meaning of symptoms, and promoting self-regulation. The goals of the CBTp Program in the VA system are to deliver state-of-the art treatment, advances research, and provides training in CBTp.
The ultimate goal is to make CBTp available to a large number of veterans. 24FURTHER READING • Chadwick, P., Birchwood, M., & Trower, P. (1996).
Cognitive therapy of delusions, voices, and paranoia. New York: J. Wiley & Sons.
• Chadwick, P. (2006) Person-Based Cognitive Therapy for Distressing Psychosis (Wiley Series in Clinical Psychology). Wiley series in clinical psychology.
• Fowler, D., Garety, P., & Kuipers, E. (1995).Cognitive behavior therapy for psychosis: Theory and practice. New York:Wiley.
• French, P., & Morrison, A. (2004). Early detection and cognitive therapy for people at high risk for psychosis: A treatment approach.
John Wiley & Sons. • Kingdon, D. & Turkington, D.
(2005). Cognitive therapy of schizophrenia. New York: Guilford Press.
• Morrison, A., Renton, J., Dunn, H., Williams, S., & Bentall, R. (2003). Cognitive therapy for psychosis: A formulation based approach.
New York: Routledge. • Nelson, H. (1997).
Cognitive behavioral therapy with schizophrenia. Chetenham:Stanley Thornes Ltd. 25References Andres, K., Pfammatter, M., Garst, F., Teschner, C., & Brenner, H.
D. (2000). Effects of a coping-orientated group therapy for schizophrenia and schizoaffective patients: a pilot study.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 101(4), 318-322. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10782553 Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Lobban, F., Jones, S., Siddle, R., Roberts, C., & Gregg, L. (2006).
Group cognitive-behavioural therapy for schizophrenia. Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 527-532.
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.106.021386 Bechdolf, A., Knost, B., Kuntermann, C., Schiller, S., Klosterkotter, J., Hambrecht, M., & Pukrop, R. (2004). A randomized comparison of group cognitive-behavioural therapy and group psychoeducation in patients with schizophrenia.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 110(1), 21-28. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2004.00300.x Beck, A. T.
(1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Universities Press.
Beck, A. T. (2009).
Schizophrenia : cognitive theory, research, and therapy. New York: Guilford Press. Bentall, R.
P. (1990). The illusion of reality: a review and integration of psychological research on hallucinations.
Psychological Bulletin, 107(1), 82-95. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2404293 Bentall, R. P.
(1992). Reconstructing schizophrenia. London ; New York: Routledge.
Bentall, R. P., Kinderman, P., & Kaney, S. (1994).
The self, attributional processes and abnormal beliefs: towards a model of persecutory delusions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32(3), 331-341. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8192633 Blackwood, N.
J., Howard, R. J., Bentall, R. P., & Murray, R.
M. (2001). Cognitive neuropsychiatric models of persecutory delusions.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(4), 527-539. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.158.4.527 Chadwick, P., & Birchwood, M. (1994).
The omnipotence of voices. A cognitive approach to auditory hallucinations. British Journal of Psychiatry, 164(2), 190-201.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8173822 Chadwick, P., Birchwood, M., & Trower, P. (1996). Cognitive therapy of delusions, voices, and paranoia.
New York: J. Wiley & Sons. Chadwick, P., Sambrooke, S., Rasch, S., & Davies, E.
(2000). Challenging the omnipotence of voices: group cognitive behavior therapy for voices. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38(10), 993-1003.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11004738 Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., Goldberg, R.
W., . . .
Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research, T. (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations and summary statements.
Schizophr Bull, 36(1), 48-70. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp115 Fowler, D. R., Garety, P., & Kuipers, L.
(1995). Cognitive behavior therapy for psychosis : theory and practice. Chichester ; New York: Wiley.
Freeman, D., & Garety, P. A. (2003).
Connecting neurosis and psychosis: the direct influence of emotion on delusions and hallucinations. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41(8), 923- 947. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12880647 Frith, C.
D. (1992). Consciousness, information processing and the brain.
J Psychopharmacol, 6(3), 436-440. doi:10.1177/026988119200600314 Gallagher, A. G., Dinan, T.
G., & Baker, L. J. (1994).
The effects of varying auditory input on schizophrenic hallucinations: a replication. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 67 ( Pt 1), 67-75. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8204543 26Gallup, G., & Jones, S.
(1989). 100 questions and answers : religion in America. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Religion Research Center.
Garety, P. A., Kuipers, L., Fowler, D., Chamberlain, F., & Dunn, G. (1994).
Cognitive behavioural therapy for drug-resistant psychosis. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 67 ( Pt 3), 259-271. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7803318 Gould, L.
N. (1948). Verbal hallucinations and activity of vocal musculature; an electromyographic study.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 105(5), 367-372. doi:10.1176/ajp.105.5.367 Gould, R. A., Mueser, K.
T., Bolton, E., Mays, V., & Goff, D. (2001). Cognitive therapy for psychosis in schizophrenia: an effect size analysis.
Schizophrenia Research, 48(2-3), 335-342. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11295385 Harrow, M., & Prosen, M. (1979).
Schizophrenic thought disorders: bizarre associations and intermingling. American Journal of Psychiatry, 136(3), 293-296. doi:10.1176/ajp.136.3.293 Inouye, T., & Shimizu, A.
(1970). The electromyographic study of verval hallucination. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 151(6), 415-422.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5483128 Jaspers, K. (1963). General psychopathology.
[Chicago]: University of Chicago Press. Johns, L., Sellwood, W., McGovern, J., and Haddock G. (2002).
Battling Boredom: Group Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Negative Symptoms. Behavior and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 30(3), 341-346. Kingdon, D., Turkington, D., & John, C.
(1994). Cognitive behaviour therapy of schizophrenia. The amenability of delusions and hallucinations to reasoning.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 164(5), 581-587. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7802805 Kingdon, D. G., & Turkington, D.
(2005). Cognitive therapy of schizophrenia. New York: Guilford Press.
Kreyenbuhl, J., Buchanan, R. W., Dickerson, F. B., Dixon, L.
B., & Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research, T. (2010). The Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT): updated treatment recommendations 2009.
Schizophr Bull, 36(1), 94-103. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp130 Landa, Y., Mueser, K. T., Wyka, K.
E., Shreck, E., Jespersen, R., Jacobs, M. A., . .
. Walkup, J. T.
(2016). Development of a group and family-based cognitive behavioural therapy program for youth at risk for psychosis. Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 10(6), 511-521.
doi:10.1111/eip.12204 Landa, Y., Silverstein, S. M., Schwartz, F., & Savitz, A. (2006).
Group cognitive behavioral therapy for delusions: helping patients improve reality testing. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 36(1), 9-17. Landmark, J., Merskey, H., Cernovsky, Z., & Helmes, E.
(1990). The positive triad of schizophrenic symptoms. Its statistical properties and its relationship to 13 traditional diagnostic systems.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 388-394. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2346840 Lecomte, T., Leclerc, C., Wykes, T., Wallace, C. J., Spidel, A., & Greaves, C.
(2007). Effectiveness of group cognitive-behaviour therapy for first episode psychosis - Results of a randomized controlled trial. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33(2), 440-440.
Retrieved from <Go to ISI>://WOS:000244506601078 Lehman, A. F., Lieberman, J. A., Dixon, L.
B., McGlashan, T. H., Miller, A. L., Perkins, D.
O., . . .
Steering Committee on Practice, G. (2004). Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with schizophrenia, second edition.
Am J Psychiatry, 161(2 Suppl), 1-56. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15000267 27Maher, B. A.
(1974). Delusional thinking and perceptual disorder. Journal of Individual Psychology, 30(1), 98-113.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4857199 McQuaid, J. R., Granholm, E., McClure, F. S., Roepke, S., Pedrelli, P., Patterson, T.
L., & Jeste, D. V. practice and research, 9(3), 149.
((2000)). Development of an integrated cognitive- behavioral and social skills training intervention for older patients with schizophrenia. The Journal of psychotherapy 9(3), 149.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. (2009). Schizophrenia: Core Interventions in the Treatment and Management of Schizophrenia in Primary and Secondary Care (Update).
Retrieved from Leicester (UK): Nayani, T. H., & David, A. S.
(1996). The auditory hallucination: a phenomenological survey. Psychol Med, 26(1), 177-189.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8643757 Persons, J. B. (1989).
Cognitive therapy in practice : a case formulation approach (1st ed.). New York: Norton. Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers, E., Garety, P., Geddes, J., Orbach, G., & Morgan, C.
(2002). Psychological treatments in schizophrenia: I. Meta-analysis of family intervention and cognitive behaviour therapy.
Psychological Medicine, 32(5), 763-782. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12171372 Sensky, T., Turkington, D., Kingdon, D., Scott, J. L., Scott, J., Siddle, R., .
. . Barnes, T.
R. (2000). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy for persistent symptoms in schizophrenia resistant to medication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(2), 165-172. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10665619 Tai, S., Haddock, G., & Bentall, R. (2004).
The effects of emotional salience on thought disorder in patients with bipolar affective disorder. Psychological Medicine, 34(5), 803-809. doi:10.1017/S003329170300117x Taylor, J.
L., & Kinderman, P. (2002). An analogue study of attributional complexity, theory of mind deficits and paranoia.
British Journal of Psychology, 93(Pt 1), 137-140. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11839105 Tien, A. Y.
(1991). Distributions of hallucinations in the population. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol, 26(6), 287-292.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1792560 Wykes, T., Parr, A. M., & Landau, S. (1999).
Group treatment of auditory hallucinations. Exploratory study of effectiveness. British Journal of Psychiatry, 175, 180-185.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10627803 Wykes, T., Steel, C., Everitt, B., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia: effect sizes, clinical models, and methodological rigor.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(3), 523-537. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm114 Zubin, J., & Spring, B. (1977).
Vulnerability--a new view of schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86(2), 103-126. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/858828 28
Behavioral Psychology / Psicología Conductual, Vol. 22, Nº 3, 2014, pp. 461-477 SOCIAL SKILLS TRAINING FOR PEOPLE WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA: WHAT DO WE TRAIN? Mar Rus-Calafell1,2, José Gutiérrez-Maldonado2, Joan Ribas-Sabaté3, and Serafín Lemos-Giráldez4 1King’s College London (United Kingdom); 2University of Barcelona; 3Igualada General Hospital; 4University of Oviedo (Spain) Abstract This paper gives a broad definition of the characteristics and incidence of schizophrenia, and introduces the various deficits in social skills and social function faced by patients with this disorder.
The role of Social Skills Training (SST), which can be used to improve some of these deficiencies in social skills, social function, cognition and competence, including the history and efficacy of such training, is addressed. An outline is given of the Brief Cognitive-Behavioural SST for schizophrenia patients, designed by our clinical research group (University of Barcelona and General Hospital of Igualada, Spain), along with the parameters of the study, risk factors for certain patients and results. We then indicate future directions focusing on the use of virtual reality as a modern technology to enhance treatment and highlighting potential areas for further study.
KEY WORDS: social skills, social functioning, cognition, competence, schizophrenia. Resumen Este artículo proporciona una definición amplia sobre las características y la incidencia de la esquizofrenia y presenta los distintos déficit en habilidades sociales y en funcionamiento social que sufren los pacientes con este trastorno. Se aborda el papel del entrenamiento en habilidades sociales (EHS), que puede utilizarse para mejorar algunas de estas deficiencias en habilidades sociales, en el funcionamiento social, en las cogniciones y en la competencia, incluyendo la historia y la eficacia de dicho entrenamiento.
Se expone un esquema del “EHS cognitivo conductual breve” para pacientes con esquizofrenia desarrollado por nuestro grupo clínico de investigación (Universidad de Barcelona y Hospital General de Igualada, España), junto con los parámetros del estudio, los factores de riesgo para ciertos pacientes y los resultados. Finalmente, presentamos las perspectivas futuras, centrándonos en el uso de la realidad virtual como una tecnología moderna para mejorar el tratamiento y resaltar áreas potenciales para estudios futuros. PALABRAS CLAVE: habilidades sociales, funcionamiento social, cogniciones, competencia, esquizofrenia.
 Correspondence: Mar Rus-Calafell, Institute of Psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital, King's College London, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF. E-mail: maria.rus-calafell@kcl.ac.uk462 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ Introduction Schizophrenia can be described as a severe mental disorder characterised by profound deficits in thinking, perception, affect, and social behaviour (World Health Organization [WHO], 2014). It affects about seven per thousand of the adult population, especially those in the age group of 15-35.
Although its incidence is low (3 per 10,000), the prevalence is high due to the chronicity of the illness (WHO, 2014). The main clinical symptoms of this mental disorder are hallucinations, delusions, thought disorder, abnormal affect and disturbance of motor behaviour. Although the most salient symptoms are hallucinations and delusions, for a significant portion of the course of the illness, the individual’s social and occupational functioning is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (WHO, 2014).
Furthermore, cognitive deficits are concomitant to this social impairment. These difficulties cannot be considered a residual manifestation of the psychopathology, because they emerge prior to the onset of the illness and they do not diminish with medication (Penadés & Gastó, 2010). Therefore, all the abnormalities that accompany the disorder have been directly associated with problems in everyday living (community functioning, interpersonal relationships, problem-solving strategies or new skills acquisition) (Addington & Addington, 1999; Bellack, Gold, & Buchanan, 1999; Bellack, Mueser, Gingerich, & Agresta, 2004; Green, Kern, Braff, & Mintz, 2000; Perlick, Rosenheck, Kaczynski, Bingham, & Collins, 2008).
Many of these studies have also linked the severity of affective symptoms not only with poorer social functioning, but also with worsening of cognitive deficits (Lysaker & Salyers, 2007) and a marked decrease of the person’s self-esteem. The most common explanatory model for mental disorders in clinical psychology is the stress-vulnerability model (Zubin & Spring, 1977). This model postulates that the primary cause of schizophrenia is the psychobiological vulnerability, early determined by genetic and environmental factors (e.g.
obstetric complications), which can potentially be precipitated by stress. Once the disease has developed, stressful environmental events (i.e. life events or interpersonal conflicts) directly affect this biological vulnerability, precipitating relapses.
Following this model’s premises, coping skills, social support or interpersonal skills can in fact reduce the effect of these life events on the individual who is suffering from the disease. One of the main features of schizophrenia is its impact on reducing the psychosocial functioning of the individual, including self-care skills and all other skills needed for an independent and competent life style, quality of social relationships and family life, and occupational performance (Ursano et al., 2004). Antipsychotic medication is currently the base of treatment for schizophrenia, significantly reducing the severity of positive symptoms (Lieberman, 2005).
However, this medication has a very poor effect on the reduction of negative symptoms, cognitive impairment and the overall functioning of the individual. The inclusion of psychosocial interventions in the treatment of people with schizophrenia is increasingly common and plays a key role in the recovery of the individual’s social functioning (Kopelowicz & Liberman, 2004).Social skills training for people with schizophrenia 463 Social functioning In addition to clinical symptoms, the diagnosis of schizophrenia includes impairment and/or function decrease in crucial aspects of the psychosocial domain, such as work skills, independence, and social functioning. Thus, the evaluation and treatment of these aspects has become a key objective when planning the recovery process.
According Kopelowicz and Liberman (2004), a global and operational definition of recovery includes standardized levels of independent living, social and occupational functioning instead of the sole remission or non- intrusion of psychotic symptoms. These authors claim that people have recovered when symptoms of their illness do not intrude on their functioning in everyday life, permitting them to work, attend school, participate in social and recreational activities and live as independently as possible in normal community environments without being segregated in enclaves of the mentally ill (Liberman & Kopelowicz, 2005). Bromley and Brekke (2010) proposed an operational definition of social functioning of the individual with schizophrenia: The functional outcome is the result of the conjunction between capacity and performance/competence.
For example, although the person shows the ability to perform the task (capacity), if he is not able to do it in the community or in his daily life (competence), the optimal performance is not achieved. It has been observed that the functional capacity is further determined by individual characteristics (such as the neurocognitive deficits) and social competence is more influenced by environmental factors (such as social support or interpersonal interaction opportunities). Following this definition, social dysfunction in schizophrenia would be composed of a deficit in social cognition (which refers to the receiving and processing actions: emotion and social cue perception social perception and theory of mind) and social competence (which includes aspects of communication and sending skills; the verbal and non-verbal communication skills that allow successful execution of interpersonal interactions) (Dickinson, Bellack, & Gold, 2007).
Social cognition The term social cognition refers to those mental operations underlying social interactions, including perception, interpretation and response generation to the intentions, dispositions and behaviours of others (Green et al., 2008). Following the latest report issued by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the study and treatment of social cognition in schizophrenia focus on five areas:  Theory of mind (ToM). This defines the set of capabilities needed to understand that others’ mental state is different from one’s own (Brüne, 2005).
Deficits in this ability have been associated with impaired functioning in community outpatient and inpatient behavioural problems (Brüne, 2005). In fact, Brüne et al. (2011) reported that mental state attribution ability could explain about 20 to 30% of the variance in social skills.464 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ  Social perception.
This is the individual's ability to identify roles and rules in the social context. Includes all the aspects of nonverbal behaviours (especially facial emotional expression), paraverbal and/ nonverbal cues (expressive behaviours, elements and characteristics that humans employ in addition to language) used to make inferences about the complexity or ambiguity of interaction situations (Penn, Ritchie, Francis, Combs & Martin, 2002). Deficiencies in this capacity have been associated with lower occupational development, poor performance in social interactions and an inappropriate personal appearance (Mueser & Bellack, 1998; Horton & Silverstein, 2008).
 Social knowledge. Sometimes also called Social Scheme, this defines more precisely the awareness of the roles, rules and goals that characterize social situations and guide social interactions. This knowledge is interpreted as a prior and essential step for social competence (Bellack, Sayers, Mueser, & Bennnett, 1994).
 Attributional biases. Attributions are causal explanations; attributional style or bias shows how often people infer the causes of events, positive or negative. It has been shown that schizophrenia patients tend to attach external attributions to negative events (i.e.
blaming others and inferring a negative intention) (Freeman, 2007). This attributional bias has been associated with an increased presence of persecutory delusions and negative interpretations of ambiguous social situations (Garety & Freeman, 1999).  Emotional processing.
This broadly covers all the skills necessary for the perception and use of emotions. Some authors define it as emotional intelligence (Mayer, Salovey, & Caruso, 2000) and it includes the following components: identification, facilitation, and understanding and managing emotions. The main deficits in this capacity in schizophrenia patients are a lower intensity of emotional experience, deficits in differentiating between emotions and unusual experiences, and decreased positive affect (Kohler & Martin, 2006).
The boundaries between the categories are hardly noticeable. For instance, emotion identification can be seen as a process involved in social perception which also influences the individual's emotional processing, commonly perceived as a basic aspect of theory of mind. However, differentiation between essential aspects of social cognition is necessary for both research and psychosocial interventions to address them.
Social competence Social competence refers to an individual’s ability to solve everyday problems and achieve affiliation goals (Liberman, Mueser, & Wallace, 1986). Social skills are key components of this competence. Thus, and to clarify the use of both terms, it can be stated that social skills refer to a specific set of skills including cognition and all those verbal and nonverbal behaviours needed to achieve effective interpersonal performance.
Meanwhile, social competence is the general ability of the individual to act successfully on its social environment. Finally, adjustment or social functioning is the current confluence of instrumental and affiliation needsSocial skills training for people with schizophrenia 465 that are the natural consequence of social competence (Liberman et al., 1986) (see figure 1). As discussed in the previous section, different studies have shown a relationship between deficits in aspects of social cognition and the poor social competence of persons with schizophrenia.
However, Brüne, Abdel-Hamid, Lehmkämper, and Sonntag (2007) indicate that the inability to appreciate one’s own and others’ mental state (ToM) is the best predictor of social competence deficit in patients with schizophrenia, and highlight it as a "core" symptom of schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Figure 1 Summary of the components of the individual’s Social Functioning Social skills training Definition Social skills training (SST) programs can be described as all those treatment approaches that aim to address deficiencies in the elements described in the previous section of this article: deficits in social cognition and social competence466 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ that result in an unsuccessful and deteriorated social functioning. Therefore, the main objective is to improve interpersonal dysfunctions that contribute to the failure of social behaviour, which has been linked to the individual’s isolation and interpersonal stress (Smith, Bellack, & Liberman, 1996 ).
SST interventions can be focused on one of the components (social cognition and social competence) or both in combination. Traditionally, the most important elements when training social skills are: expressive behaviours (speech content and paralinguistic elements: volume of voice, rhythm, intonation, body movements and gestures, interpersonal distance, etc.); responsive behaviours (social perception, attention, emotion recognition and interpretation); interactive behaviours (response and reaction times, conversational turns and use of social reinforcements); and situational factors (knowledge of cultural factors and specific contextual demands). Although there are different formats of training, depending on the specific therapy protocol and patient characteristics, most of them usually include similar cognitive-behavioural techniques: instructions, role-playing, reality tests, successive approximation, modelling, positive feedback and reinforcement.
They are usually highly systematized and structured programs in order to facilitate learning and the development of the skills that each patient needs. Currently, SST programs are usually conducted by clinical psychologists and their duration can vary from 10 to 22 sessions. They are usually applied in group sessions led by a therapist and co-therapist, with specific objectives for each session and in-between-sessions activities in order to improve the generalization of the learned responses to the individual’s daily life.
Implementation of SST in the clinical setting Of the psychosocial interventions for schizophrenia, social skills training has probably the longest history, having been used to help patients to learn to cope with interpersonal relationships since the 1960s (Chien, Leung, Yeung, & Wong, 2013). Following important studies about psychotherapy for schizophrenia (Gunderson et al., 1984; May, 1968; Stanton et al., 1984), psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy was deemed to be largely ineffective to treat schizophrenia and related psychoses and to have no beneficial effect on cognitive functioning and interpersonal relationships (Klerman, 1984; Smith et al., 1996). Some authors consider the institutionalised token economy, based on operant conditioning, as the first psychological intervention focusing on the social behaviour of people suffering from a psychiatric disorder (McMonagle & Sultana, 2000).
Those interventions generally led to reliable empirical results and managed to activate chronic patients with negative symptoms and restore some degree of social behaviour. At present, this form of intervention is still limited to institutionalised patients, characterised by a very poor level of social functioning, severe negative symptoms and other types of resistance to therapeutic interventions. But the rise of SST interventions comes at the beginning of the 1970s.
The American psychiatrist R. P. Liberman can be considered the main driver of the systematization and implementation of this approach in the clinical settingSocial skills training for people with schizophrenia 467 (Liberman & Eckman, 1989; Liberman, King, DeRisi, & McCann, 1975).
This second stage in the social skills training begins with the introduction of role playing as the main technique used to improve both "molecular" skills (like eye contact, verbal fluency, intonation or gestures) and "molar" skills (such as assertiveness and expression of emotions of various kinds). The efficacy of this technique was moderate in terms of social adaptation and generalisation of responses, and low regarding psychopathological changes; having also less clear results on patients’ work adaptation and quality of life. Around the 1990s, some neurocognition findings, focusing on the role of attention capability when teaching conversational skills, helped with the establishment of new SST interventions.
According to that model, training sustained attention in patients with poor social skills can benefit their learning of new conversational skills (Silverstein et al., 1998; Wong et al., 1993). Therefore, basic conversational skills can be taught through repetition in discrete trials wherein behavioural learning techniques are used to gain correct responses, or longer attention periods are reinforced where patients are learning the skills. The integrated psychological therapy (IPT) proposed by Brenner et al.
(1994) is a very good example of the cognitive model applied to the improvement of social functioning in the clinical setting. This approach emphasized that cognitive inventions should take place within a meaningful social context. Thus, by training attention, learning, memory and social perceptions, the acquisition of new social and independent living skills will be achieved.
The cognitive enhancement therapy (CET) (Hogarty & Flesher, 1999), an integrated approach to the remediation of social and non-social-cognitive impairments, is another good example of concomitant training of neurocognitive and social cognitive abilities as well as social skills. However, it should be pointed out that most of the SST interventions are based on the problem-solving approach: inadequate execution of skills in social situations may come from deficits in problem-solving capabilities (Vallina- Fernández & Lemos-Giráldez, 2001). The most widely studied social skill training intervention following this approach is the module-structured program named the UCLA Social and Independent Living Skills (SILS modules) developed by Liberman and colleagues in 1993.
It consists of ten training modules to practice specific disorder-related social and instrumental skills. This training is based on a previous model, postulated also by Liberman et al. (1986), which posits that there are three essential components for social competence: receiving skills, processing skills and sending skills.
This study has been translated into 23 languages and is used in six continents (Kopelowicz, Liberman, & Zarate, 2006). The application of these modules proved to be much more effective with regard to the ability to generalise the results and to social adaptation. This program requires focus on the individual’s needs, preferences and abilities (training in cognitive and emotional skills), and helps them to make decisions in each of the three areas: housing, work, and leisure, providing support to implement the decision (practical implementation skills).
At the same time, it requires teaching the participants to anticipate and solve specific problems that can take place in the new state of residence, work or leisure.468 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ Nowadays, SST has become a treatment of choice for people suffering from psychosis, recommended by important clinical guidance and international mental health institutions, such as the American Psychiatry Association (United States) and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (United Kingdom). Efficacy of SST over other treatment approaches Recent efficacy studies have shown improvements in the social functioning of patients with schizophrenia treated with SST (Bellack, 2004; Bowie et al., 2012; Granholm et al., 2008, 2009; Horan et al., 2009, 2011; Robert & Penn, 2009; Valencia et al., 2007). These studies have observed a greater reduction of social impairment and functional disability with SST when compared with other treatments, such as TAU (Granholm et al., 2008, 2009; Robert & Penn, 2009; Valencia Rascón, Juárez, & Murow, 2007), neuroleptic treatment only (Cirici, García, & Obiols, 2001) social disinterest attitudes (Granholm et al., 2009), illness self-management and relapse prevention skills training (Horan et al., 2009), and neurocognitive remediation (Horan et al., 2011).
Other studies have also shown that CET (Hogarty et al., 2004) can be also effective to improve the cognition and functioning of early schizophrenia patients (Eack, Pogue-Geile, Greenswald, Hogarty, & Keshavan, 2011) when it is compared with individually enriched support therapy (Hogarty, 2002). However, meta-analysis studies published within the last twenty years, showed inconclusive results on the efficacy of SST. Main results are depicted in table 1.
Table 1 Main findings of recent Meta-analyses regarding social skills training effects Studies Meta-analysis Outcome variable N Effect size included Pilling et al. Relapse 235 0.17 (-0.14 to 0.46) 9 RCT (2002) Social functioning 63 N/A Skills acquisition 688 0.77 (0.62 to 0.93) Pfammatter, Social functioning 342 0.39 (0.19 to 0.59) Junghan, & 19 RCT Skills acquisition (1-year FU) 295 0.52 (0.28 to 0.77) Brenner Social functioning (1-year FU) 210 0.32 (0.08 to 0.56) (2006) Relapse (hospitalization) (1-year) 110 0.48 (0.11 to 0.86) Content mastery N/A 1.20 (0.96 to 1.43) Kurtz & Living skills N/A 0.52 (0.34 to 0.71) Mueser 23 RCT Community functioning N/A 0.52 (0.31 to 0.73) (2008) Negative symptoms N/A 0.40 (0.19 to 0.61) Relapse (1-year) N/A 0.23 (0.04 to 0.41) Note: RCT= randomized clinical trial; FU=Follow-up; N/A= Not applicable. These results suggest that, although SST interventions can have positive consequences for patients, there is still room for improvement to increase theSocial skills training for people with schizophrenia 469 immediate effect of the intervention but, above all, to improve long-term clinical outcomes.
Brief cognitive-behavioural SST for schizophrenia Kopelowicz, Liberman, and Zarate (2006) stated recently that the main skills that should be trained in an SST program are: social perception, social information processing, responding and sending skills, affiliation skills, instrumental role skills, and behaviours governed by social norms. Following this recommendation, a novel and brief cognitive-behavioural SST addressing the seven target behaviours proposed was designed by our clinical research group (University of Barcelona and General Hospital of Igualada, Spain) and tested in a sample of outpatients suffering from schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (Rus-Calafell Gutiérrez- Maldonado, Ortega-Bravo, Ribas-Sabaté, & Caqueo-Urízar, 2013). According to this proposal, the program was divided into seven blocks, with two sessions planned for each block.
An introduction at the beginning session and a final session were also included. Thus, the entire program consisted of sixteen sessions (see table 2). A therapist’s manual (Rus-Calafell, 2009, unpublished manual) and PowerPoint slides for every session were created.
At the beginning of the program, each subject also received a user manual that included both the slides and activities between sessions. Additional graphic material, audio-visual material (movie clips), and specific role-playing scripts were designed and created for the training sessions. Each session was structured and consisted of a brief review of the material presented during the last session, a brief discussion about the between-sessions activity (if there had been any), a theoretical/didactic presentation of the session material, and group-practice and individual exercises.
Due to the structure of the intervention, the learning of the skills was scaffolded: First, the more basic skills were consolidated (e.g. facial emotion recognition and social processing), and finally the more complex skills (such as maintaining conversations) were achieved. The results of the clinical trial corresponded to previous research that also investigated the efficacy of this kind of training in outpatients (Granholm et al., 2009; Horan et al., 2009; Roberts & Penn, 2009).
It was applied in a group format to provide the patients with opportunities to practice the newly learned skills with other subjects. Results at post-treatment showed an improvement in the self- statements during social interactions, in the negative symptomatology and negative psychopathology, and in quality of life regarding mental health. Informants (mainly family members) reported a perceived positive change in terms of social withdrawal and communication for those patients who benefitted from SST.
There was also a very positive effect of the treatment on the SST group regarding subjects’ emotional and social cognition. The authors assume that the treatment’s content, which was focused on social perception and social attribution, resulted in a significant impact on these outcome measures, specifically in the emotional self-regulation statements during social interactions.470 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ Table 2 Brief description of the seven blocks of the program Block Summary Sessions First and last sessions used 1) to introduce the * Introduction and 1 and training and meet the group, and 2) to close the closing sessions 16 intervention and complete qualitative assessment Discriminating between basic human expressions and 1. Social perception 2-3 the accuracy if facial emotion recognition.
2. Social information To explore attributional styles when interpreting 4-5 processing others’ expressions and behaviours. Two parts: nonverbal (e.g.
eye contact and personal 3. Responding and distance) and verbal communication (distinctions 6-7 sending skills among passive, aggressive and passive communication styles). Family and friend relationships.
Requesting privacy, 4. Affiliative skills expressing affection or opinions, or offering 8-9 compliments were dealt with. To practice specific instrumental abilities (requesting 5.
Instrumental role information, asking for a favour, and setting limits in 10-11 skills an assertive manner). 6. Interactional skills Initiating, maintaining, and ending a conversation.
12-13 7. Behaviour To discuss the rights and responsibilities of governed by social community living. Effect of social relationships over 14-15 norms physical and mental health.
Future directions Risk groups Larsen et al. (2001) suggested that both pharmacological and psychosocial treatment, offered early to people presenting with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, can improve their prognosis and even help prevent their illness chronicity. One year after treatment for a first episode, 75% to 90% achieve remission from positive symptoms (Addington, Leriger, & Addington, 2003).
However, functional (e.g. social, vocational, interpersonal) recovery remains a major challenge since symptom improvement is not always matched with functional improvement (Voges & Addington, 2005). SST intervention should be adapted and offered to first-episode patients in order to prevent isolation and avoid subsequent psychotic episodes triggered by social anxiety or lack of social skills.
Although some clinical working groups have already tested the efficacy of integrated psychosocial intervention including social skills training for patients with first-episode psychosis (Rosenbaum et al., 2006; the Danish OPUS trial, Thorup et al., 2005), the implementation of SST interventions in the daily care routine of this type of patients remains a challenge for the clinical community. Similarly, people with dual diagnoses (Schizophrenia and co-occurring substance use disorder) can also benefit from programs integrating social skills training modules to learn, for example, how to say “no” or to combat socialSocial skills training for people with schizophrenia 471 pressure to use drugs (Shaner, Eckman, Roberts, & Fuller, 2003; Bellack et al., 2006). However, existing support services do not often include these types of modules, and consumers and caregivers struggle to cope with dual diagnoses.
Thus, the integration and establishment of SST intervention as part of the care routine of these patients could improve the number of relapses and quality of life. Clinical advanced technologies As mentioned before, SST interventions are usually applied in group format, which allows the participants to practice with others. However, social anxiety, negative symptoms and poor insight may hamper the involvement of schizophrenia patients in group therapy.
Another treatment characteristic of the SST is that it is delivered, like most interventions in mental health, in the clinical setting (e.g. consultation, day hospital), which lacks the “real” characteristics of the social situations (e.g. environmental stimuli, sounds or unknown people).
Although practitioners formerly included the intervention between-session exercises, the evidence supporting the generalization of psychosocial skills training from the clinical setting to everyday life is far weaker and has received less attention than it deserves (Scott & Dixon, 1995). Virtual reality (VR) has been suggested as a new technology that can overcome this limitations and some research has already shown its effects on the interventions’ outcomes. The first well reported application of VR to improve social skills in patients with schizophrenia was the clinical trial conducted in Korea by Ku et al.
in 2007. The authors designed a VR-based conversation program which consisted of 10 tasks involving several types of conversational skills (e.g. beginning a conversation, silence-breaking or catching the avatar’s expression).
Results showed that the system was sensitive to patients’ symptomatology (symptom variation) and cognitive decline, and that it was useful for conversation training. In their 2009 clinical study, Park et al. included a VR program in addition to an SST intervention.
The authors compared SST using VR role-playing (SST-VR) to SST using traditional role-playing (SST-TR). Both interventions were applied in group format, and the main purpose was to enhance motivation and enrolment in the group therapy. After 10 sessions, patients in the SST-VR group showed greater interest in SST and greater generalization of the skills than the SST-TR group.
At post intervention, participants receiving the SST-VR also showed a greater improvement in conversational skills and assertiveness than the SST-TR group. The authors concluded that the application of VR in role-playing might be a useful supplement to traditional SST (Park et al., 2009). Similarly, our research group in the University of Barcelona (New Applied Technologies in Clinical Psychology Research Group, VR-Psy Lab) designed and developed a virtual reality-integrated programme to train social skills in people suffering from schizophrenia (Rus-Calafell, Gutiérrez-Maldonado, & Ribas-Sabaté, 2014).
The programme was tested in a sample of stabilized outpatients instead of inpatients, because it is with outpatient cases and in stability periods that SST and other group-based social interventions are more effective and can assist the individual in correctly implementing and practicing social competence skills. The472 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ programme was created as an adjunct technique of a manualised brief cognitive- behavioural SST designed and tested previously by our research group (Rus-Calafell et al., 2013). Although it was a pilot study, after the intervention, negative symptomatology and general psychopathology decreased and these gains were maintained at follow-up after four months.
In terms of social cognition and social performance, results at post-treatment showed that participants improved in social skills mastery and new assertive behaviours were implemented in daily life. Crucially, the results also showed that participants exhibited a pattern of learning responses of emotion recognition, emissions and identification of assertive behaviours, and time expended in a conversation after the use of the Soskitrain (objective measures provided by the system). Conclusions Social disability affects the individual’s occupational and school performance, impacts on self-care, and hinders family relationships and interpersonal interactions.
Social skills interventions are the treatment of choice to improve this disability. Although there are a wide variety of programs that aim to improve social functioning in people suffering from schizophrenia, it seems clear that these programs must address directly the essential components of both pillars of functional outcome: social cognition and social competence. Furthermore, depression and social anxiety are common concomitants of schizophrenia that have been treated almost exclusively with medication.
However, by integrating social skills training procedures into evidence-based psychological treatments for these comorbid disorders, mood and anxiety disorders will be more effectively treated (Kopelowicz et al., 2006). This integration should take into account the stage of the illness: family interventions and psychoeducation for crisis therapy; the pure behavioural approaches (token economy) for negative symptoms in chronic patients; and CBT for positive symptoms, poor insight and poor compliance, in the early stages of the disorder. Thus, a pragmatic combination of psychosocial interventions, such us SST plus CBT or SST plus psychoeducation, could clearly enhance the treatment outcomes and the patient’s recovery process.
Although the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders introduces no change on the diagnostic B criteria (social/occupational dysfunction) for schizophrenia, some changes made in the A criteria should be taken into consideration when planning to offer SST to a person presenting negative symptoms and poor social functioning. Experts have found that avolition and diminished emotional expression are key aspects of negative symptoms; and they consider that diminished emotional expression describes better the nature of the affect abnormality in schizophrenia than the affective flattening. Thus, the A criteria’s fifth characteristic is now negative symptoms, i.e.
diminished emotional expression and avolition (Tandon et al., 2013). Finally, the generalization of social skills to clients’ natural environments is clearly one of the main challenges for clinicians when applying SST interventions. In fact, they can be further supplemented by community-based in vivo skills training (Glynn et al., 2002) and by enlisting “indigenous supporters” to promptSocial skills training for people with schizophrenia 473 the use of skills in real-life situations (Tauber et al., 2000), as well as by the use of advanced technologies like VR (Rus-Calafell et al., 2014).
References American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.) (DSM-5). Arlington, VA: Author.
Addington, J., & Addington, D. (1999). Neurocognitive and social functioning in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25, 173-182. Addington, J., Leriger, E., & Addington, D. (2003) Symptom outcome one year after admission to an early psychosis program.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 48, 204-207. Bellack, A. S., Sayers, M., Mueser, K.
T., & Benett, M. (1994). Evaluation of social problem solving in schizophrenia.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 371-378. Bellack, A. S., Gold, J.
M., & Buchanan, R. W. (1999).
Cognitive rehabilitation for schizophrenia: Problems, prospects, and strategies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25, 257- 274. Bellack, A.
S., Mueser, K. T., Gingerich, S., & Agresta, J. (2004).
Social skills training for schizophrenia. New York, NY: Guilford. Bellack, A.S., Bennett, M.E., Gearson, J.
S., Brown, C.H., & Yang,Y. (2006). A randomized clinical trial of a new behavioural treatment for drug abuse in people with severe and persistent mental illness.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 426-432. Birchwood, M., Meaden, A., Trower, P., Gilbert, P., & Plaistow, J. (2000).
The power and omnipotence of voices: Subordination and entrapment by voices and significant others. Psychological Medicine, 30, 337-34 Bowie, C. R., McGurk, S.
R., Mausbach, B., Patterson, T. L., & Harvey, P. (2012).
Combined cognitive remediation and functional skills training for schizophrenia: Effects on cognition, functional competence, and real-world behaviour. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 710-718. Brenner, H.
D., Roder, V., Hodel, B., Kienzle, N., Reed, D., & Liberman, R. P. (1994) Integrated psychological therapy for schizophrenic patients.
Toronto: Hogrefe & Huber. Bromley, E., & Brekke, J. S.
(2010). Assessing function and functional outcome in schizophrenia. Current Topics in Schizophrenia, 4, 3-21 Brüne, M., (2005).
“Theory of mind” in schizophrenia: A review of literature. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 31, 21-42. Brüne, M., Abdel-Hamid, M., Lehmkämper, C., & Sonntag, C.
(2007). Mental state attribution, neurocognitive functioning, and psychopathology: What predicts poor social competence in schizophrenia best? Schizophrenia Research, 92, 151-159.
Brüne, M., Schaub, D., Juckel, G., & Langdon, R. (2011). Social skills and behavioural problems in schizophrenia: The role of mental state attribution, neurocognition and clinical symptomatology.
Psychiatry Research, 190, 9-10. Chien, W. T., Leung, S.
F., Yeung, F. K., & Wong, W. K.
(2013). Current approaches to treatments for schizophrenia spectrum disorders, part II: Psychosocial interventions and patient-focused perspectives in psychiatric care. Neuropsychiatric Disorder Treatment, 9, 1463-1481.
Cirici, R., García, M., & Obiols, J. (2001). Therapeutic strategy to increase social competency in schizophrenic patients.
Revista de Psiquiatría. Medica Barcelona, 28, 8-15. Dickinson, D., Bellack, A.
S., & Gold, J. M. (2007).
Social/communication skills, cognition and vocational functioning in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 1213-1220.474 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ Eack, S. M., Pogue-Geile, M.
F., Greenwald, D. P., Hogarty, S. S., & Kesharan, M.
S. (2011). Mechanisms of functional improvement in a 2 year trial of cognitive enhancement therapy for early schizophrenia.
Psychological Medicine, 41, 1253-1261. Freeman, D., & Garety, P. A., (2003).
Connecting neurosis and psychosis: The direct influence of emotion on delusions and hallucinations. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 923-947. Freeman, D., Garety, P.
A., Bebbington, P., Slater, M., Kuipers, E., Fowler, D., Green, C., Jordan, J., Ray, K., & Dunn, G. (2005). The psychology of persecutory ideation: II.
A virtual reality experimental study. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 193, 309- 315. Freeman, D.
(2007). Suspicious minds: The psychology of persecutory delusions. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 425-457.
Garety, P. A., & Freeman, D. (1999).
Cognitive approaches to delusions: A critical review of theories and evidence. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38, 13-154. Glynn, S.
M., Marder, S. R., Liberman, R. P., Blair, K., Wirshing, W.
C., Wirshing, D. A., Ross, D., & Mintz, J. (2002).
Supplementing clinic-based skills training with manual-based community support sessions: Effects on social adjustment of patients with schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 829-837. Granholm, E., McQuaid, J.
R., Link, P. C., Fish, S., Patterson, T., & Jeste, D. V.
(2008). Neuropsychological predictors of functional outcome in cognitive-behavioral social skills training for older people with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 100, 133- 143.
Granholm., E., Been-Zeev, D., & Link, P.C. (2009). Social disinterest attitudes and group cognitive-behavioral social skills training for functional disability in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 874-883. Green, M. F., Kern, R., Braff, D., & Mintz, J.
(2000). Neurocognitive deficits and functional outcome in schizophrenia: Are we measuring the ‘right stuff’? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 119-136.
Green, M. F., Penn, D. L., Bentall, R., Carpenter, W.
T., Gaebel, Gur, C., Kring, A. M., Park, S., Silverstein, S. M., & Heinseen, R.
(2008). Social Cognition in schizophrenia: An NIMH workshop definitions, assessment and research opportunities. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 1322-1220.
Gunderson, J. G., Frank, A., Katz, H. M., Vannicelli, M.
L., Frosch, J. P., & Knapp, P. H.
(1984). Effects of psychotherapy in schizophrenia: II. Comparative outcome of two forms of treatment.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 10, 564-598. Heinssen, R. K., Liberman, R.
P., & Kopelowicz, A. (2000). Psychosocial skills training for schizophrenia: Lessons from laboratory.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 21-46. Hogarty, G. E.
(2002). Personal therapy for schizophrenia and related disorders: A guide to individualized treatment. New York, NY: Guilford.
Hogarty, G. E., & Flesher, S. (1999).
Practice principles of cognitive enhancement therapy for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25, 693-708. Hogarty, G.
E., Flesher, S., Ulrich, R., Carter, M., Greenwald, D., Pogue-Geile, M., Kechavan, M., Cooley, S., DiBarry, A. L., Garrett, A., Parepally, H., & Zoretich, R. (2004).
Cognitive enhancement therapy for schizophrenia: Effects of a 2-year randomized trial on cognition and behavior. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 866-876. Horan, W.
P., Kern, R. S., Shokat-Fadai, K., Sergi, M. J., Wynn, J.
K., & Green, M. F. (2009).
Social skills training in schizophrenia: An initial efficacy study of stabilized outpatients. Schizophrenia Research, 107, 47-54. Horton, H.
K., & Silverstein, S. M. (2008).
Social cognition as a mediator of cognition and outcome among deaf people with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 105, 125- 137.Social skills training for people with schizophrenia 475 Klerman, G. L.
(1984). Ideology and science in the individual psychotherapy in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 10, 608-612.
Kohler, C. G., & Martin, E. A.
(2006). Emotional processing in schizophrenia. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 11, 250-271.
Kopelowicz, A., & Liberman R. P. (2004).
Psychiatric rehabilitation for schizophrenia. International Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 3, 1-16. Kopelowicz, A., Liberman, R.
P., & Zarate, R. (2006). Recent advances in social skills training for schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, S12-S23. Ku, J., Han, K., Lee, H. R., Jang, H.
J., Kim, K. U., Park, S. H., Kim, J.
J., Kim, C. H., Kim, I. Y., & Kim, S.
I. (2007). VR-based conversation training program for patients with schizophrenia: A preliminary clinical trial.
Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 10, 567-574. Kurtz, M. M., & Mueser, K.
T. (2008). A meta-analysis of controlled research on social skills training in schizophrenia.
Journal of Consultant and Clinical Psychology, 76, 491-504. Larsen, T. K., McGlashan, T.
H., Johannessen, J. O., Friis, S., Guldberg, C., Haahr, U., Horneland, M., Melle, I., Moe, L. C., Opjordsmoen, S., Simonsen, E., & Vaglum, P.
(2001). Shortened duration of untreated first episode of psychosis: Changes in patient characteristics at treatment. American Journal Psychiatry, 11, 1917-1919.
Liberman, R. P., King L. W., DeRisi, W.
J., & McCann, M. (1975). Personal effectiveness: Guiding people to assert their feelings and improve their social skills.
Champaign, IL: Research Press. Liberman, R. P., Mueser, K.
T., & Wallace, C. J. (1986).
Social skills training for schizophrenic individuals at risk for relapse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 523-526. Liberman, R.
P., & Eckman, T. A. (1989).
Dissemination of skills training modules to psychiatric facilities: Overcoming obstacles to the utilization of rehabilitation innovation. British Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 224-226. Liberman, R.
P., Wallace, C. J., Blackwell, G., Eckman, T., Vaccaro, J. V., & Kuehnel, T.
G. (1993). Innovations in skills training for the seriously mentally ill.
Innovations and Research, 2, 43-60. Liberman, R. P., & Kopelowicz, A.
(2005). Recovery from schizophrenia: A concept in search of research. Psychiatry Services, 56, 735-742.
Lieberman, J. A., Stroup, T. S., McEvoy, J.
P., Swartz, M. S., Rosenheck, R., Perkins, D. O., Keefe, R.
S. E., Davis, S. M., Davis, C.
E., Lebowitz, B. D., Severe, J., & Hsiao, J. K.
(2005). Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia. New England Journal of Medicine, 353, 1209-1223.
Lysaker, P. H., & Salyers, M. (2007).
Anxiety symptoms in schizophrenia spectrum disorders: Associations with social function, positive and negative symptoms, hope and trauma history. Acta Psychiarica Scandinavica, 116, 290-298. May, P.
R. A. (1968).
Treatment of schizophrenia. New York, NY: Science House. Mayer, J.
D., Salovey, P., & Caruso, D. (2000). Models of emotional intelligence.
In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of human intelligence (pp.
396-420). New York, NY: Cambridge University. McMonagle, T., & Sultana, A.
(2000) Token economy for schizophrenia, Oxford, UK: The Cochrane Library. Mueser, K.T., & Bellack, A.S. (1998).
Social skills and social functioning. In K. T.
Mueser, & N. Tarrier (Eds.), Handbook of social functioning in schizophrenia (pp. 79-96).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Park, K. M., Ku, J., Soo-Hee, J., Park., J.
Y., Kim, S., & Kim, J. J. (2011).
A virtual reality application in role-plays of social skills training for schizophrenia: A randomized, controlled trial. Psychiatry Research, 189, 166-172. Penadés, R., & Gasto, C.
(2010). El tratamiento de rehabilitacion neurocognitive en la esquizofrenia. Barcelona: Herder.476 RUS-CALAFELL, GUTIÉRREZ-MALDONADO, RIBAS-SABATÉ AND LEMOS-GIRÁLDEZ Penn, D.
L., Ritchie, M., Francis, J., Combs, D., & Martin, J. (2002). Social perception in schizophrenia: The role of context.
Psychiatry Research, 15, 149-159. Roberts, D. L., & Penn, D.
L. (2009). Social cognition and interaction training (SCIT) for outpatients with schizophrenia: A preliminary study.
Psychiatry Research, 166, 141- 147. Rus-Calafell, M., Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J., Ortega-Bravo, M., Ribas-Sabaté, J., & Caqueo- Urízar, A. (2013).
A brief cognitive-behavioural social skills training for stabilised outpatients with schizophrenia: A preliminary study. Schizophrenia research, 143, 327- 336. Rus-Calafell, M., Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J., & Ribas-Sabaté, J.
(2014). A virtual reality- integrated program for improving social skills in patients with schizophrenia: A pilot study. Journal of Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 45, 81-89.
Stanton, A. H., Gunderson, J. G., Knapp, P.
H., Frank, A. F., Vannicelli, M. L., Schnitzer, R., & Rosenthal, R.
(1984). Effects of psychotherapy in schizophrenia: I. Design and implementation of a controlled trial.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 10, 520-563. Park, K. M., Ku, J., Soo-Hee, J., Park, J.
Y., Kim, S., & Kim, J. J. (2011).
A virtual reality application in role-plays of social skills training for schizophrenia: A randomized, controlled trial. Psychiatry Research, 189, 166-172. Perlick, D., Rosenheck, R., Kaczynski, R., Bingham, S., & Collins, J., (2008).
Association of symptomatology and cognitive deficits to functional capacity in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 99, 192-199. Pfammatter, M., Junghan, U.
M., & Brenner, H. D. (2006).
Efficacy of psychological therapy schizophrenia: Conclusions and meta-analyses. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, S64-S80. Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers, E., Garety, P., Goldes, J., Martindale, B., Orbach, G., & Morgan, C.
(2002). Psychological treatments in Schizophrenia II: Meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of social skills training and cognitive remediation. Psychological Medicine, 32, 783-791.
Rosenbaum, B., Valbak, K., Harder, S., Knudsen, P., Koster, A., Lajer, M., Lindhardt, A., Winther, G., Petersen, L., Jørgensen, P., Nordentoft, M., & Andreasen, A. H. (2006).
Treatment of patients with first-episode of psychosis: Two-year outcome data from the Danish National Schizophrenia Project. World Psychiatry, 5, 100-103. Scott, J.
E., & Dixon, L. B. (1995).
Assertive community treatment and case management for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21, 657-668 Shaner, A., Eckman, T., Roberts, L. J., & Fuller, T.
(2003). Feasibility of a skills training approach to reduce substance dependence among individuals with schizophrenia. Psychiatry Services, 54, 1287-1289.
Smith, T. E., Bellack, A. S., & Liberman, R.
P. (1996). Social skills training for schizophrenia: Review and future directions.
Clinical Psychology Review, 16, 599-617. Smith, B., Fowler, D. G., Freeman, D., Bebbington, P., Bashforth, H., Garety, P., Dunn, G., & Kuipers, E.
(2006). Emotion and psychosis: Links between, depression, self-esteem, negative schematic beliefs and delusions and hallucinations. Schizophrenia Research, 86, 181-188.
Silverstein, S. M., Pierce, D. L., Saytes, M., Hems, L., Schenkel, L., & Streaker, N.
(1998). Behavioral treatment of attention dysfunction in chronic treatment refractory schizophrenia. Psychiatry Quarterly, 69, 95-105.
Tandon, R., Gaebel, W., Barch, D. M., Bustillo, J., Gur, R., Heckers, S., Malaspina, D., Owen, M. J., Schultz, S., Tsuang, M., Van Os, J.
& Carpenter, W. (2013). Definition and description of schizophrenia in the DSM-5.
Schizophrenia Research, 150, 3-10. Thorup, A., Petersen, L., Jeppesen, P., Ohlenschlaeger, J., Christensen, T., karup, G., G., Jorgensen, P., & Nordentoft, M. (2005).
Integrated treatment ameliorates negativeSocial skills training for people with schizophrenia 477 symptoms in first episode psychosis-results from the Danish OPUS trial. Schizophrenia Research, 79, 95-105. Ursano, R.
J., Bell, C., Eth, S., Friedman, M., Norwood, A., Pfefferbaum, B., Pynoos, J. D., Zatzick, D. F., Benedek, D.
M., McIntyre, J. S., Charles, S. C., Altshuler, K., Cook, I., Cross, C.
D., Mellman, L., Moench, L. A., Norquist, G., Twemlow, S. W., Woods, S., Yager, J., & Work Group on ASD and PTSD, Steering Committee on Practice Guidelines (2004).
Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 3-31 Valencia, M., Rascón, M. L., Juárez, F., & Murow, E.
(2007). A psychosocial skills training approach in Mexican outpatients with schizophrenia. Psychological Medicine, 37, 1393-1402.
Vallina-Fernandez, O., & Lemos-Giráldez, S. (2001). Tratamientos psicológicos eficaces para la esquizofrenia.
Psicothema, 13, 345-364. Voges, M., & Addington, J. (2005).
The association between social anxiety and social functioning in first episode psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 76, 287-292. Wong, S.
E., Martinez-Diaz, J. A., Massel, H. K., Edlestein, B.
A., Wiegand, W., & Liberman, R. P. (1993).
Conversational skills training with schizophrenic inpatients: A study of generalization across settings and conversants. Behavior Therapy, 24, 285-304. World Health Organization (2014).
Schizophrenia. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/mental_health/management/schizophrenia/en/ Zubin, J., & Spring B. (1977).
Vulnerability: A new view of schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86, 103-26. RECEIVED: May 12, 2014 ACCEPTED: September 8, 2014
Schizophrenia National Institute of Mental HealthWhat is schizophrenia? Schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that affects how a person thinks, feels, and behaves. People with schizophrenia may seem as though they have lost touch with reality, which can be distressing for them and for their family and friends.
The symptoms of schizophrenia can make it difficult to participate in usual, everyday activities, but effective treatments are available. Many people who receive treatment can engage in school or work, achieve independence, and enjoy personal relationships. What are the symptoms of schizophrenia?
It’s important to recognize the symptoms of schizophrenia and seek help as early as possible. People with schizophrenia are usually diagnosed between the ages of 16 and 30, after the first episode of psychosis. Starting treatment as soon as possible following the first episode of psychosis is an important step toward recovery.
However, research shows that gradual changes in thinking, mood, and social functioning often appear before the first episode of psychosis. Schizophrenia is rare in younger children. Schizophrenia symptoms can differ from person to person, but they generally fall into three main categories: psychotic, negative, and cognitive.
Psychotic symptoms Psychotic symptoms include changes in the way a person thinks, acts, and experiences the world. People with psychotic symptoms may lose a shared sense of reality with others and experience the world in a distorted way. For some people, these symptoms come and go.
For others, the symptoms become stable over time. Psychotic symptoms include: ● Hallucinations: When a person sees, hears, smells, tastes, or feels things that are not actually there. Hearing voices is common for people with schizophrenia.
People who hear voices may hear them for a long time before family or friends notice a problem. ● Delusions: When a person has strong beliefs that are not true and may seem irrational to others. For example, individuals experiencing delusions may believe that people on the radio and television are sending special messages that require a certain response, or they may believe that they are in danger or that others are trying to hurt them.● Thought disorder: When a person has ways of thinking that are unusual or illogical.
People with thought disorder may have trouble organizing their thoughts and speech. Sometimes a person will stop talking in the middle of a thought, jump from topic to topic, or make up words that have no meaning. ● Movement disorder: When a person exhibits abnormal body movements.
People with movement disorder may repeat certain motions over and over. Negative symptoms Negative symptoms include loss of motivation, loss of interest or enjoyment in daily activities, withdrawal from social life, difficulty showing emotions, and difficulty functioning normally. Negative symptoms include: ● Having trouble planning and sticking with activities, such as grocery shopping ● Having trouble anticipating and feeling pleasure in everyday life ● Talking in a dull voice and showing limited facial expression ● Avoiding social interaction or interacting in socially awkward ways ● Having very low energy and spending a lot of time in passive activities.
In extreme cases, a person might stop moving or talking for a while, which is a rare condition called catatonia. These symptoms are sometimes mistaken for symptoms of depression or other mental illnesses. Cognitive symptoms Cognitive symptoms include problems with attention, concentration, and memory.
These symptoms can make it hard to follow a conversation, learn new things, or remember appointments. A person’s level of cognitive functioning is one of the best predictors of their day-to-day functioning. Cognitive functioning is evaluated using specific tests.
Cognitive symptoms include: ● Having trouble processing information to make decisions ● Having trouble using information immediately after learning it ● Having trouble focusing or paying attention Risk of violence Most people with schizophrenia are not violent. Overall, people with schizophrenia are more likely than those without the illness to be harmed by others. For people with schizophrenia, the risk of self-harm and of violence to others is greatest when the illness is untreated.
It is important to help people who are showing symptoms to get treatment as quickly as possible.Schizophrenia vs. dissociative identity disorder Although some of the signs may seem similar on the surface, schizophrenia is not dissociative identity disorder (which used to be called multiple personality disorder or split personality). People with dissociative identity disorder have two or more distinct identities that are present and that alternately take control of them.
What causes schizophrenia? Several factors may contribute to a person’s risk of developing schizophrenia, including: ● Genetics. Schizophrenia sometimes runs in families.
However, just because one family member has schizophrenia, it does not mean that other members of the family also will have it. Studies suggest that many different genes may increase a person’s chances of developing schizophrenia, but that no single gene causes the disorder by itself. ● Environment.
Research suggests that a combination of genetic factors and aspects of a person’s environment and life experiences may play a role in the development of schizophrenia. These environmental factors may include living in poverty, stressful or dangerous surroundings, and exposure to viruses or nutritional problems before birth. ● Brain structure and function.
Research shows that people with schizophrenia may be more likely to have differences in the size of certain brain areas and in connections between brain areas. Some of these brain differences may develop before birth. Researchers are working to better understand how brain structure and function may relate to schizophrenia.
How is schizophrenia treated? Current treatments for schizophrenia focus on helping individuals manage their symptoms, improve day-to-day functioning, and achieve personal life goals, such as completing education, pursuing a career, and having fulfilling relationships. Antipsychotic medications Antipsychotic medications can help make psychotic symptoms less intense and less frequent.
These medications are usually taken every day in a pill or liquid form. Some antipsychotic medications are given as injections once or twice a month.If a person’s symptoms do not improve with usual antipsychotic medications, they may be prescribed clozapine. People who take clozapine must have regular blood tests to check for a potentially dangerous side effect that occurs in 1% to 2% of patients.
People respond to antipsychotic medications in different ways. It is important to report any side effects to a health care provider. Many people taking antipsychotic medications experience side effects such as weight gain, dry mouth, restlessness, and drowsiness when they start taking these medications.
Some of these side effects may go away over time, while others may last. You should not stop taking a medication without talking to your health care provider first. Your health care provider will work with you to adjust your treatment plan in a safe and effective way.
Some people may need to try several medications before finding the one that works best for them, so it is important to continue with treatment and to stay hopeful. You can find the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website at www.fda.gov/drugsatfda.
Psychosocial treatments Psychosocial treatments help people find solutions to everyday challenges and manage symptoms while attending school, working, and forming relationships. These treatments are often used together with antipsychotic medication. People who participate in regular psychosocial treatment are less likely to have symptoms reoccur or to be hospitalized.
Examples of this kind of treatment include cognitive behavioral therapy, behavioral skills training, supported employment, and cognitive remediation interventions. You can find information about psychosocial treatments on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website at www.nimh.nih.gov/ psychotherapies. Family education and support Educational programs can help family and friends learn about symptoms of schizophrenia, treatment options, and strategies for helping loved ones with the illness.
These programs can help friends and family manage their distress, boost their own coping skills, and strengthen their ability to provide support.Coordinated specialty care Coordinated specialty care (CSC) programs are recovery-focused programs for people with first episode psychosis, an early stage of schizophrenia. Health professionals and specialists work together as a team to provide CSC, which includes psychotherapy, medication, case management, employment and education support, and family education and support. The treatment team works collaboratively with the individual to make treatment decisions, involving family members as much as possible.
Compared with typical care, CSC is more effective in reducing symptoms, improving quality of life, and increasing involvement in work or school. Assertive community treatment Assertive community treatment (ACT) is designed to help individuals with schizophrenia who are likely to experience multiple hospitalizations or homelessness. ACT is usually delivered by a team of health professionals and specialists who work together to provide care to patients in the community.
Treatment for drug and alcohol misuse It is common for people with schizophrenia to have problems with drugs and alcohol. A treatment program that includes treatment for both schizophrenia and substance use is important for recovery because substance use can interfere with treatment for schizophrenia. How can I find help?
If you’re not sure where to get help, your health care provider is a good place to start. Your health care provider can refer you to a qualified mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist who has experience treating schizophrenia. You can learn more about getting help on the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has an online tool at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov to help you find mental health services in your area. You can find information about treatment facilities that offer coordinated specialty care by using SAMHSA’s Early Serious Mental Illness Treatment Locator at www.samhsa.gov/esmi-treatment-locator.For tips on talking with your health care provider about your mental health and getting the most out of your visit, read NIMH’s fact sheet, Taking Control of Your Mental Health: Tips for Talking With Your Health Care Provider, available at www.nimh.nih.gov/talkingtips. How can I help a friend or relative with schizophrenia?
It can be difficult to know how to help someone who is experiencing psychosis. Here are some things you can do: ● Help them get treatment and encourage them to stay in treatment. ● Remember that their beliefs or hallucinations seem very real to them.
● Be respectful, supportive, and kind without tolerating dangerous or inappropriate behavior. ● Look for support groups and family education programs, such as those offered by the National Alliance on Mental Illness at www.nami.org/ Support-Education. If your loved one is thinking about attempting suicide or otherwise harming themselves or others, seek help right away: ● Call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room.
● Call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (Lifeline) at 1-800-273- TALK (8255) or go to the Lifeline website at https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org. ● Text the Crisis Text Line (HELLO to 741741). What should I know about participating in clinical research?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Talk to your health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.
For more information, visit www.nimh.nih. gov/clinicaltrials.Reprints This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated.
To learn more about using NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464, email nimhinfo@nih.gov, or refer to NIMH’s reprint guidelines at www.nimh.nih.gov/reprints. For More Information NIMH website www.nimh.nih.gov MedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine) https://medlineplus.gov https://medlineplus.gov/spanish (en español) ClinicalTrials.gov www.clinicaltrials.gov https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica (en español) National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 1-866-615-6464 TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 1-866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.gov National Institute of Mental Health U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No.
21-MH-8082 Revised 2021
W H A T I S SCHIZOPHRENIA? BASIC FACTS • SYMPTOMS • FAMILIES • TREATMENTS V A D ESERT PA CIF IC M VA e n D t e a s l e I r l t l n P e a s c s if R ic e H se e a a r l c th h c , a E r d e u N ca e t t i w o o n r a k nd Clinical Center Long Beach VA Healthcare System MENTAL ILLNESS RESEARCH, EDUCATION & CLINICAL CENTER Education and Dissemination Unit 06/116A 5901 E. 7th Street | Long Beach, CA 90822Course of Illness Schizophrenia is a common psychiatric disorder that can af- fect a person’s thinking, emotions, and behaviors.
Individuals Schizophrenia often first appears during young adulthood with this illness will have periods when they have difficulty (late teens or early twenties for men and late twenties or early understanding the reality around them. They may hear voices thirties for women). The onset of symptoms may be abrupt or other people don't hear.
They may have unusual thoughts and gradual, but most people experience some early signs prior to suspicions, such as believing that other people are reading the beginning of active symptoms. These early signs may in- their minds, controlling their thoughts, or plotting to harm clude depression, social withdrawal, loss of interests, unusual them. These experiences can terrify people with the illness and behavior, or decreases in functioning (such as in school, work, make them withdrawn or extremely agitated.
In addition to or social relationships). These are often the first behaviors to symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions, which are worry family members and friends. also called positive symptoms, nearly all people with schizo- The course of schizophrenia over time varies considerably phrenia have some impairments in their memory, attention, from person to person.
Most individuals experience periods and decision-making. These are called cognitive impairments. of symptom exacerbation and remission, while others are Some individuals with this illness also have what are called more chronically ill and maintain a steady level of moderate negative symptoms.
These can include a lack of expressive- to severe symptoms and disability over time. Some individu- ness, low motivation, apathy, an inability to experience pleas- als have a milder course of illness. The positive symptoms of ure, and a disinterest in social relationships.
Depression can schizophrenia increase during a relapse while negative symp- also be a part of the illness. toms and cognitive impairments tend to be more persistent Families and society are affected by schizophrenia too. and are present between episodes.
Although there is great Many people with schizophrenia have difficulty holding a job variability, some generalizations can be made about the long- or caring for themselves, so they rely on others for help. Some- term course of schizophrenia. While many individuals do not times symptoms may be so severe that a person needs to be return to their prior state of functioning, about one-half to two- hospitalized.
thirds of people with schizophrenia significantly improve or There are treatments to help improve functioning and re- recover, some completely. About one-third of individuals are lieve many symptoms of schizophrenia. Some individuals re- significantly affected by the disorder and experience frequent spond very well to these treatments and can lead rewarding hospitalization, and about 10% of these individuals experience and meaningful lives.
Others remain severely disabled by their long-term institutionalization. illness. Causes Prevalence There is no simple answer to what causes schizophrenia be- About one in every hundred people (1%) develop schizo- cause several factors play a part in the onset of the disorder.
phrenia at some point in their life. Schizophrenia affects men These include: a genetic or family history of schizophrenia, en- and women at equal rates. It can affect multiple members vironmental stressors and stressful life events, and biological within families.
Schizophrenia occurs in about 10% of people factors. who have a first-degree relative (parent or sibling) with the Research shows that the risk for schizophrenia results from disorder. People who have a second-degree relative (aunts, un- the influence of genes acting together with environmental fac- cles, grandparents, or cousins) with schizophrenia also de- tors.
A family history of schizophrenia does not necessarily velop the disorder more often than the general population. mean children or other relatives will develop the disorder. The risk is highest for an identical twin of a person with schiz- However, studies have shown that schizophrenia does run in ophrenia.
The identical twin has a 40 to 65 percent chance of families (see section on Prevalence). Others believe the envi- developing the disorder. ronment plays a key role in whether someone will develop schizophrenia.
Some of the environmental factors believed to be linked to schizophrenia are malnutrition before birth, ob- stetric complications, poverty, and substance use. Cannabis Diagnosis use, especially before age 15, has been identified as a big risk factor. Stressful life events, such as family conflict, early Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder that must be diag- parental loss or separation, and physical or sexual abuse, are nosed by a trained mental health professional.
Diagnostic in- also associated with the illness. terviews and medical evaluations are used to determine the An imbalance of the neurotransmitters dopamine and glu- diagnosis. There are currently no physical or lab tests that can tamate is also linked to schizophrenia.
Neurotransmitters are diagnose schizophrenia, but they can help rule out other con- brain chemicals that communicate information throughout the ditions that sometimes have similar symptoms to schizophre- brain and body. However, the exact role of these neurotrans- nia (e.g., seizure disorders, metabolic disorders, thyroid mitters in schizophrenia is unclear. dysfunction, brain tumor, and drug use).
2 3102 YLUJ - CCERIM - AINERHPOZIHCS SI TAHW basic facts Schizophrenia usually appears during young adulthood. Most Schizophrenia is a common psychiatric disorder that can affect a people experience periods of symptom exacerbation and person’s thinking, emotions, and behaviors. remission, while others are more chronically ill.
About 1 in 100 people develop schizophrenia in their lifetime. Scientists believe schizophrenia is caused by several factors, Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder that must be diagnosed including: a genetic or family history of the disorder, environmental by a trained mental health professional. stressors and stressful life events, and biological factors.3 3102 YLUJ - CCERIM - AINERHPOZIHCS SI TAHW symptoms of schizophrenia The symptoms of schizophrenia fall into three broad cate- special or have special powers or abilities.
gories: positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and cognitive • Delusions of control: The belief that their feelings, symptoms. thoughts, and actions are being controlled by other people. POSITIVE SYMPTOMS: • Thought disorders: Positive symptoms refer to Thought disorders are unusual thoughts, perceptions, and behaviors that are present in or dysfunctional ways of thinking.
One form of people with schizophrenia, but ordinarily absent in other thought disorder is called "disorganized thinking." people. These symptoms can come and go. Sometimes This is when a person has trouble organizing his or her they are severe, and and sometimes they are hardly no- thoughts or connecting them logically.
They may ticeable. string words together in an incoherent way that is hard Hallucinations: • Hallucinations are false perceptions. to understand, often referred to as a “word salad.” The The person may hear, see, feel, smell, or taste things that person may make “loose associations,” where they are not actually there.
The most common type of halluci- rapidly shift from one topic to an unrelated topic, nation is auditory hallucinations. making it very difficult to follow their conversation. • Auditory: Hearing things that other people cannot “Thought blocking” may occur in which the person hear.
Many people with the disorder hear voices. stops speaking abruptly in the middle of a thought. The voices may talk to the person about his or her When asked why he or she stopped talking, the person behavior, order the person to do things, or warn the person of danger.
Sometimes the voices talk to each other. • Visual: Seeing things that are not there or that other people cannot see. • Tactile: Feeling things that other people don't feel or feeling something is touching their skin that isn't there.
• Olfactory: Smelling things that other people cannot smell, or not smelling the same thing that other peo- ple do smell. • Gustatory: Tasting things that are not there. • Delusions: Delusions are false beliefs that are held in spite of invalidating evidence.
People hold these beliefs strongly and usually cannot be “talked out” of them. The content of the delusions may include a variety of themes. Some examples include: • Delusions of persecution: The belief that they (or someone close to them) are being plotted or discrim- cont’d on page 4 inated against, spied on, threatened, attacked or de- liberately victimized.
• Delusions of reference: When an individual attaches special personal meaning to actions of others or to various objects and events when there is no infor- mation to confirm this. The person may believe that certain gestures, comments, or other environmental cues are specifically directed at him or her. For ex- ample, it may seem as if special personal messages are being communicated to them through the TV, radio, or other media.
• Somatic delusions: False beliefs about their body. For example, that a terrible physical illness exists or that something foreign is inside or passing through their body. • Delusions of grandeur: The belief that they are verymay say that it felt as if the thought had been taken out interests.
They may feel lethargic or sleepy, and have of his or her head. A person with a thought disorder trouble following through on even simple plans. • Anhedonia: might make up meaningless words, or "neologisms,” Anhedonia is defined as the inability to or perseverate which means to persistently repeat experience pleasure from activities one used to find en- words or ideas.
joyable. For example, the person may not enjoy watch- ing a sunset, going to the movies, or having close NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS: Negative symptoms are the ab- relationships with other people. sence of thoughts, perceptions, or behaviors that are or- COGNITIVE SYMPTOMS: dinarily present in other people.
These symptoms are Cognition refers to mental often stable throughout much of the person’s life. processes that allow us to perform day-to-day func- • Affective flattening: Affective flattening is character- tions, such as the ability to pay attention, to remember, ized by a reduction in the range of emotional expres- and to solve problems. Cognitive impairments are con- siveness, including limited or unresponsive facial sidered a core feature of schizophrenia and contribute expression, poor eye contact, and reduced body lan- to difficulties in work, social relationships, and inde- guage.
The expressiveness of the person’s face, voice pendent living. Some examples of cognitive symptoms tone, and gestures may be reduced or restricted. How- in schizophrenia include: trouble concentrating or pay- ever, this does not mean that the person is not reacting ing attention, poor memory, slow thinking, and poor ex- to his or her environment or having feelings.
ecutive functioning. Executive functions include the • Alogia: Alogia, or poverty of speech, is the lessening ability to plan, solve problems, and grasp abstract con- of speech fluency and productivity. The person may cepts.
have difficulty or be unable to speak and may give short, empty replies to questions. • Avolition: Avolition is the difficulty or inability to begin and persist in goal-directed behavior. It is often mistaken for apparent disinterest.
The person may not feel motivated to pursue goals and activities. They may have little sense of purpose in their lives and have few 4 3102 YLUJ - CCERIM - AINERHPOZIHCS SI TAHW symptoms of schizophrenia (cont’d) Common symptoms of schizophrenia include: • Positive symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions. • Negative symptoms, such as lack of emotion and lack of motivation.
• Cognitive symptoms, such as poor memory and attention. similar psychiatric disorders Schizophrenia shares symptoms with some other psy- chiatric disorders. Prominent psychotic symptoms seen in schizophrenia are similar to those seen in other psychotic disorders, such as Schizoaffective Disorder, Schizophreni- form Disorder, and Brief Psychotic Disorder.
Symptoms of schizophrenia may also overlap with symptoms of Bipolar Disorder. Individuals with schizophrenia may experience mood disturbances seen in Bipolar Disorder, including mania and depression. Schizophrenia must be distin- guished from a Psychotic Disorder due to a General Med- ical Condition, where psychotic symptoms are judged to be the direct consequence of a general medical condition.
Schizophrenia must also be distinguished from a Sub- stance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, in which psychotic symptoms are judged to be the direct consequence of drug abuse, medication, or toxin exposure. The symptoms of schizophrenia may overlap with symptoms of other psychiatric disorders.5 3102 YLUJ - CCERIM - AINERHPOZIHCS SI TAHW how family members can help The family environment is important to the recovery of in- because critical and hostile attitudes on the part of the relative dividuals with schizophrenia. Even though the disorder can are predictive of relapse.
be a frustrating illness, family members can help the process Take Care of Themselves of recovery in many ways. Family members often feel guilty about spending time away Encourage Treatment and Rehabilitation from their ill relative; however, it is important that they take Medications and psychotherapy can help a person feel bet- good care of themselves. There are many ways to do this.
Fam- ter, engage in meaningful activities, and improve their quality ily members should not allow their ill relative to monopolize of life. The first step is to visit a doctor for a thorough evalua- their time. Spending time alone or with other family members tion.
If possible, family members should be present at the eval- and friends is important for their own well-being. Family uation to offer support, help answer the doctor’s questions, members may also consider joining a support or therapy and learn about the illness. If medication is prescribed, family group.
Counseling can often help family and friends better members can provide support in taking those medications. cope with a loved one’s illness. Finally, family members Taking medication can be difficult - there will be times when should not feel responsible for solving the problem them- the person won't want to take it or may just forget to take it.
selves. They can’t. They should get the help of a mental health Encouragement and reminders are helpful.
Family members professional if needed. can help the person fit taking medication into their personal routine. The person may also have been referred to psychoso- cial treatment and rehabilitation.
Family members can be very Family members can help the process of recovering from schizo- helpful in supporting attendance to therapy. Some ways to do phrenia in many ways. Some ways include encouraging treat- this are by giving reminders, offering support, and providing ment (medication and psychotherapy), providing support, and transportation to the clinic.
taking care of themselves. Provide Support Family stress is a powerful predictor of relapse, while family support decreases the rate of relapse. Helping the person pur- sue meaningful goals and activities can be very helpful in the process of recovery.
It is best if family members try to be un- derstanding rather than critical, negative or blaming. It may be difficult at times, but families do best when they are patient and appreciate any progress that is being made, however slow it may be. If family members are having difficulty being sup- portive, it might be because of what they believe is causing the disorder.
Studies show that family members try to make sense of schizophrenia by determining its cause. They tend to think about the causes of schizophrenia as “moral” or “organic.” Family members who believe the cause of schizophrenia is “moral” believe it is caused by the individual’s personality (i.e., the individual is weak, lazy, or lacking self-discipline). Family members who believe the cause of schizophrenia is “organic” believe in the medical model of disease (i.e., it is a medical illness).
The belief that the disorder is caused by moral weakness, laziness, or lack of self discipline leads family mem- bers to believe that the symptoms are controllable by their rel- ative. The belief that people have control over, and hence are responsible for their symptoms, can lead to feelings of anger and may prevent family members from being supportive of their ill relative. In contrast, belief in the medical model of schizophrenia may lead family members to believe that the symptoms are not controllable, and therefore the individual is not responsible for their symptoms.
This leads to greater feel- ings of warmth and sympathy and a greater willingness to help their relative. Research has shown that family members who hold a medical view of schizophrenia are less critical of their relative than those who hold a moral view of the disor- der. These views of what causes schizophrenia are important6 3102 YLUJ - CCERIM - AINERHPOZIHCS SI TAHW treatment There are a variety of medications and therapies available to those suffering from help a person better cope with schizophrenia.
CBT for schizophrenia is skill-oriented. schizophrenia. Antipsychotic medications can help reduce symptoms and are recom- Patients learn skills to cope with life's challenges.
The therapist teaches social skills, mended as the first-line treatment for schizophrenia. People can also learn to manage skills related to daily functioning, and problem-solving skills. Patients learn to identify their symptoms and improve their functioning with psychosocial treatment and reha- what triggers episodes of the illness, which can prevent or reduce the chances of re- bilitation.
The treatments listed here are ones which research has shown to be effective lapse. This can help patients with schizophrenia minimize the types of stress that can for people with schizophrenia. They are considered to be evidence-based practices.
lead to hospitalizations. CBT also helps patients learn more adaptive and realistic in- terpretations of events. Patients are also taught various coping techniques for dealing Medication with "voices" or other hallucinations.
Therapy may be done one-on-one or in a group The section titled “Antipsychotic Medication: What You Should Know” (page 7) setting. provides information about antipsychotic medications and their side effects. Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) Social Skills Training Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) is an approach that is most effective for in- Many people with schizophrenia have difficulties with effective social skills.
Social dividuals with the greatest service needs, such as those with a history of multiple hos- skills training aims to correct these deficits by teaching socially appropriate ways to pitalizations or those who are homeless. In ACT, the person receives treatment from express emotion and interact with others, so individuals are more likely to achieve an interdisciplinary team of usually 10 to 12 professionals, including case managers, a their goals, develop relationships, and live independently. Social skills are taught in a psychiatrist, several nurses and social workers, vocational specialists, substance abuse very systematic way using behavioral techniques, such as modeling, role playing, pos- treatment specialists, and peer specialists.
The team provides coverage 24 hours, 7 itive reinforcement, and shaping. days per week, and utilizes small caseloads, usually 1 staff for every 10 clients. Services provided include: case management, comprehensive treatment planning, crisis inter- Family-Based Services vention, medication management, individual supportive therapy, substance abuse treat- Mental illness affects the whole family.
Family treatment and psychoeducation is ment, rehabilitation services (e.g., supported employment), and peer support. The one way families can work together towards recovery. The family and clinician meet VA's version of this program is called Mental Health Intensive Case Management together to discuss the problems they are experiencing.
Families then attend educa- (MHICM). tional sessions where they will learn basic facts about mental illness, coping skills, communication skills, problem-solving skills, and ways to work together toward re- Illness Self-Management covery. Patients who participate in family interventions report fewer psychiatric symp- Components of illness self-management include psychoeducation, coping skills toms, improved work functioning, and improved treatment adherence.
Family training, relapse prevention, and social skills training. Individuals learn about their members also benefit and report feeling more satisfaction with their relationship and psychiatric illness, their treatment choices, medication adherence strategies, and coping less burden. skills to deal with stress and symptoms.
Relapse prevention involves recognizing situ- There are a range of family programs available. Some families benefit from just a ations that might trigger symptoms, tracking warning signs and symptoms of relapse, few sessions. More intensive services are especially helpful for families that are expe- and developing a plan to cope with triggers and warning signs to prevent relapse.
This riencing high levels of stress and tension and for patients who are chronically symp- treatment approach also teaches individuals social skills in order to improve the quality tomatic or prone to relapse. These longer-term interventions generally last 6-9 months of their relationships with others. and can be done in single family or multi-family formats.
Psychosocial Interventions for Alcohol and Supported Employment Substance Use Disorders Research shows that about 70% of adults with severe mental illness want to work Many individuals with schizophrenia also struggle with an alcohol or substance and about 60% can be successfully employed when using Supported Employment. use disorder. Co-occurring disorders are best treated concurrently, meaning that treat- Supported Employment is designed to help people with severe mental illness find and ment for schizophrenia should be integrated with the treatment for the alcohol or drug keep competitive employment.
The approach is characterized by focus on competitive problem. Integrated treatment includes motivational enhancement and cognitive-be- work, rapid job search, absence of prevocational training, and continued support once havioral interventions. Integrated treatments are effective at reducing substance use, a job is obtained.
Employment specialists work with individuals to identify their career preventing relapse, and keeping individuals in treatment longer. These interventions goals and personal abilities. Case managers and mental health providers work closely can be delivered one-on-one or in a group format.
with employment specialist to provide support during the job seeking and keeping process. Psychosocial Interventions for Weight Management Weight gain is one of the most significant and frustrating side effects of many med- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) ications used to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia. Weight gain can lead to problems Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a blend of two therapies: cognitive therapy such as diabetes and hypertension, making it a serious problem for many individuals.
and behavioral therapy. Cognitive therapy focuses on a person's thoughts and beliefs, Help with weight loss is available. Weight programs generally last 3 months or longer and how they influence a person's mood and actions, and aims to change a person's and include education about nutrition and portion control.
Participants learn skills to thinking to be more adaptive and healthy. Behavioral therapy focuses on a person's monitor their daily food and activity levels, have regular weigh-ins, and set realistic actions and aims to change unhealthy behavior patterns. and attainable personal goals.
Participation in such a program can help prevent addi- Treating schizophrenia with CBT is challenging. The disorder usually requires tional weight gain and lead to modest weight loss. The VA’s version of this program is medication first.
But research has shown that CBT, as an add-on to medication, can called MOVE!It is offered in a supportive group setting.7 3102 YLUJ - CCERIM - AINERHPOZIHCS SI TAHW antipsychotic medication: what you should know • Research has found that antipsychotic medications are effective for treating the pos- LONG-ACTING INJECTABLE ANTIPSYCHOTIC MEDICATIONS itive symptoms in schizophrenia. It is not known exactly how they work, but one Certain antipsychotic medications are available as long-acting injectables. These med- common feature is the ability to block the action of a chemical messenger in the ications are given every two to four weeks.
Some patients find these more convenient be- brain called dopamine. Research suggests that malfunction of this chemical messen- cause they don’t have to take the medications daily. The side effects of these medications ger system, as well as others, cause symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions.
are similar to their oral counterparts. • All antipsychotic medications must be taken as prescribed. Their effects can some- Fluphenazine (Prolixin decanoate) Paliperidone (Sustena) times be noticed within the same day of the first dose.
However, the full benefit of Haloperidol (Haldol decanoate) Risperdal (Consta) the medication may not be realized until after a few weeks of treatment. So don’t Olanzapine (Zyprexa Relprevv) stop taking your medication because you think it’s not working. Give it time!
SIDE EFFECTS OF ANTIPSYCHOTIC MEDICATIONS • Sometimes the antipsychotic you first try may not lead to improvement in symptoms. Some individuals experience side effects that mimic symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, This is because each person’s brain chemistry is unique; what works well for one which are called parkinsonian or extrapyramidal symptoms. These include tremor, shuffling person may not do as well for another.
Be open to trying another medication or walk and muscle stiffness. A related side effect is akathisia, which is a feeling of internal combination of medications in order to find a good fit. Let your doctor know if your restlessness.
Additionally, prolonged use of antipsychotics may cause tardive dyskinesia, a symptoms have not improved and do not give up searching for the right medication! condition marked by involuntary muscle movements in the face and body. An uncommon, but serious side effect is called Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS).
These symptoms • Once you have responded to treatment, it is important to continue treatment. To include high fever, muscle rigidity, and irregular heart rate or blood pressure. Contact your prevent symptoms from coming back or worsening, do not abruptly stop taking your doctor immediately if any of these symptoms appear.
medications, even if you are feeling better. Stopping your medication can cause a People taking antipsychotic medications can also experience a variety of other side relapse. Medication should only be stopped under your doctor’s supervision.
If you effects including: unusual dreams; blank facial expression; blurred vision; breast enlarge- want to stop taking your medication, talk to your doctor about how to correctly stop ment or pain; breast milk production; constipation; decreased sexual performance in men; them. diarrhea; dizziness or fainting when you sit up or stand up; difficulty urinating; drowsiness; dry mouth; excessive saliva; missed menstrual periods; mood changes; nausea; nervous- • Most antipsychotics are prescribed once daily. If you forget to take your medication, ness; restlessness and sensitivity to the sun.
do not double up the next day to “catch up” on the dose you missed. If your med- Weight gain, changes in blood sugar regulation, and changes in blood levels of lipids ication is prescribed to be taken twice a day, and you forget to take a dose: a rule of (cholesterol and triglycerides) are common with some antipsychotics. Therefore, your doc- thumb is to take your medication if it has been 6 hours or less from the time you tor will check your weight and blood chemistry on a regular basis.
If you have a scale at were supposed to take it. If it is more than six hours after the dose should have been home, you want to regularly check your own weight. Each of these medications differ in taken, just skip the forgotten dose and resume your medication at the next regularly their risk for causing these side effects.
If you start to gain weight, talk to your doctor. It scheduled time. Never double up on doses of your antipsychotic to “catch up” on may be recommended that you switch medications or begin a diet and exercise program.
those you have forgotten. Clozapine can cause agranulocytosis, which is a loss of the white blood cells that help a person fight off infection. Therefore, people with who take clozapine must get their white • Some antipsychotic medications are available as long-acting injectables.
Use of in- blood cell counts checked frequently. This very serious condition is reversible if clozapine jectable medications is one strategy that can be used for individuals who regularly is discontinued. Despite this serious side effect, clozapine remains the most effective an- forget to take their medication.
tipsychotic available and can be used safely if monitoring occurs at the appropriate time intervals. • Like all medications, antipsychotic medications can have side effects. In many cases they are mild and tend to diminish with time.
Many people have few or no side ef- fects, and the side effects people typically experience are tolerable and subside in a few days. Your doctor will discuss some common side effects with you. Check with your doctor if any of the common side effects persist or become bothersome.
If you experience side effects, talk to your doctor before making any decisions about dis- continuing treatment. • In rare cases, these medications can cause severe side effects. Contact your doctor immediately if you experience one or more severe symptoms.
***This handout provides only general information about antipsychotic medication. It does not cover all possible uses, actions, precautions, side effects, or interactions of the medicines mentioned. This information does not constitute medical advice or treatment and is not intended as medical advice for individual problems or for making an evaluation as to the risks and benefits of taking a particular medication.
The treating physician, relying on experience and knowledge of the patient, must determine dosages and the best treat- ment for the patient.*** ANTIPSYCHOTIC MEDICATIONS These are sometimes referred to as conventional, typical or first generation antipsychotic medications: Chlorpromazine (Thorazine) Perphenazine (Trilafon) Fluphenazine (Prolixin) Thiothixene (Navane) Haloperidol (Haldol) Trifluoperazine (Stelazine) Loxapine (Loxitane or Loxapac) These are sometimes referred to as atypical or second generation antipsychotic medica- tions: Aripriprazole (Abilify) Olanzapine (Zyprexa) Asenapine (Saphris) Paliperidone (Invega) Clozapine (Clozaril) Quetiapine (Seroquel) Iloperidone (Fanapt) Risperidone (Risperdal) Lurasidone (Latuda) Ziprasidone (Geodon)IMAGE BY KEVIN ROLLY MENTAL ILLNESS RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND CLINICAL CENTER VA Desert Pacific Healthcare Network Long Beach VA Healthcare System Education and Dissemination Unit 06/116A 5901 E. 7th Street Long Beach, CA 90822 VISIT US ON THE INTERNET AT: http://www.mirecc.va.gov/visn22 DOWNLOAD THIS HANDOUT AT: http://www.mirecc.va.gov/visn22/schizophenia_education.pdf Noosha Niv, PhD 1, 2 Kim Mueser, PhD 3 Lindy F. Smith, MA, LADC 4 Shirley Glynn, PhD 5, 6 Stacey Maruska, LCSW 1 Nikki Frousakis, PhD 1 Christopher Reist, MD, MBA 1 Stephen Marder, MD 1, 2 1VA Desert Pacific Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center (MIRECC) 2UCLA Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences 3Boston University Center for Psychiatric Rehabilitation 4Department of Psychiatry, Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth Psychiatric Research Center 5VA Office of Mental Health Services and Research Service 6VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System at West Los Angeles VA DESERT PACIFIC MENTAL ILLNESS RESEARCH, EDUCATION & CLINICAL CENTER
Diagnosis, Treatment Options, and Costs of Schizophrenia Mark Rosenberg, MD, PHD For a CME/CEU version of this article please go to www.namcp.org/cmeonline.htm, and then click the activity title. Summary Schizophrenia is a chronic mental disorder that causes functional impairment in work, interpersonal relationships, and self-care. Both the direct and indirect costs of this disease are signifi cant.
Managed care can implement various interventions to improve patient outcomes and manage costs. Key Points • Schizophrenia is a costly disease both from a direct and indirect cost perspec- tive. • Medication nonadherence has a signifi cant impact on costs.
• The costs of schizophrenia treatment can be managed by using available resourc- es more effectively. • Strong evidence for effectiveness exists for antipsychotic medications, family edu- cation, community atreatment teams, supported employment and housing, psycho- social remedial therapies, and case management. • Managed care can improve outcomes in patients with schizophrenia by utilizing community treatment teams, case management, disease management programs, schizophrenia treatment algorithms, provider partnerships, specialty mental and behavioral health organizations, and Community Mental Health Centers.
SCHIZOPHRENIA IS A PERSISTENT, OFTEN without the disease, these patients have a decreased chronic, and usually serious mental disorder affect- life expectancy of about 25 years. This has actually ing a variety of aspects of behavior, thinking, and worsened over the past 20 years. All of the symp- emotion.
Patients with delusions or hallucinations toms of schizophrenia cause functional impairment may be described as psychotic. Thinking may be in work, interpersonal relationships, and self-care disconnected and illogical. Peculiar behaviors may (Exhibit 1).1 be associated with social withdrawal and disinterest.
The diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are list- While the word for schizophrenia is less than 100 ed in Exhibit 2.2 The differential diagnosis includes years old, Kraepelin concretely identifi ed the disease schizoid personality, schizophreniform disorder, in 1887. Bleuler coined the term we know today schizotypal personality, bipolar disorder, and Asperg- based on the Greek words schizo (split) and phrene er’s Syndrome. Bipolar disorder is frequently misdi- (mind), and also was the fi rst to describe symptoms agnosed as schizophrenia and the other way around.
in terms of positive and negative. Evidence that Exhibit 3 shows the progression of the course of schizophrenia is biologically based has accumulated schizophrenia.3 Like bipolar disorder and major de- in the past 20 years; genetic advancements offer even pression, there is a kindling model with schizophre- more promise of understanding this illness. nia, which suggests that the more episodes one has About 1 percent of the population develops this the harder treatment is and the more brain damage disorder.
There are both positive and negative symp- that occurs. Current practice is to treat schizophrenia toms. Positive symptoms are those such as hearing early and for life to limit deterioration of function.
voices and negative symptoms include lack of mo- The direct and indirect costs of treating schizo- tivation. There also are cognitive defi cits, disorga- phrenia are signifi cant. Inpatient costs have de- nization, and mood symptoms.
About 10 percent of creased since 1991 while outpatient expenses have patients with schizophrenia commit suicide during increased (Exhibit 4).4 This particular direct cost the course of their illness. Compared with someone analysis used a direct cost offset to take out the av- 10 Journal of Managed Care Medicine | Vol. 12, No.
3 | www.namcp.orgExhibit 1: Features of Schizophrenia1 Positive Negative Symptoms Functional Impairments Symptoms Work Interpersonal Relationships Self-Care Cognitive Mood Deficits Symptoms Disorganization erage cost of regular housing. The bulk of indirect agents, using expert consensus guidelines, holding costs come from unemployment (Exhibit 5).4 providers accountable for improving patient out- Medication nonadherence, which is a common comes, facilitating measurement-based clinical de- problem in schizophrenia treatment, has a significant cision making, and utilizing case management and impact on costs. The degree of medication adher- disease management programs.
ence varies over the course of an individual’s illness. There are a number of antispychotics available for Overall, about 50 percent of patients are not compli- use (Exhibit 6). Some of these are available in in- ant with their medications.
Only 20 to 30 percent of jectable long acting formulations (depot). The goal patients will relapse within one year with consistent of using long acting agents is to improve adherence use of medication whereas 60 to 80 percent will re- and prevent relapse. The long acting agents are in- lapse without medication consistency.5,6 Because of jected every two weeks [fluphenazine (Prolixin) and the increased relapse rate, medication nonadherence risperidone (Risperdal)] or four weeks [haloperidol increases the risk of hospitalization.
In one study of (Haldol)]. These were widely used in the past but acute care inpatient admissions and hospital days have not been commonly used in the past 10 years for Medicaid schizophrenia patients attributable to because of the introduction of the atypical agents. A nonadherence, 10,686 acute care hospital admissions meta-analysis of six studies showed significantly low- occurred due to gaps in treatment.
This resulted in er relapse rates in patients taking depot versus oral 121,838 inpatient days and an approximate cost of antipsychotics (P<0.0002).9 Encouraging the use of $106 million.7 The financial burden of relapse was depot agents is one strategy that managed care can estimated at $300 million per year in 1995.8 Ex- use to improve adherence rates and contain costs. trapolating to 2008 dollars the total cost is greater Refractory symptoms are a common occurrence than $420 million. with schizophrenia.
A poor treatment response oc- Components of schizophrenia treatment that have curs in 30 percent of patients. An incomplete treat- strong evidence for effectiveness are antipsychotic ment response occurs in an additional 30 percent medications, family education, community treat- or more. Clozapine is the treatment of choice for ment teams, supported employment and housing, treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
Use of clozapine psychosocial remedial therapies (organized peer produces a consistent 30 percent response rate in support network, clubhouses, etc.), and case man- severely ill, treatment-resistant patients versus four agement. The costs of schizophrenia treatment can percent with chlorpromazine.10 be managed by using available resources more ef- The adverse effects of the antipsychotic agents fectively. This includes using protocols for proper have to be balanced against their efficacy.
As a class, administration and timing of psychotherapeutic the first generation antipsychotics (FGAs) have the www.namcp.org | Vol. 12, No. 3 | Journal of Managed Care Medicine 11Exhibit 2: DSM IV Diagnostic criteria for Schizophrenia2 A.
Characteristic Symptoms: Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated): (1) Delusions (2) Hallucinations (3) Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence) (4) Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior (5) Negative Symptoms, i.e., Affect Flattening, Alogia or Avolition Note: Only one Criterion A symptom is required if delusions are bizarre or hallucinations consist of a voice keeping up a running commentary on the person’s behavior or thoughts, or two or more voices conversing with each other. B. Social/occupational dysfunction: For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, one or more major areas of functioning such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care are markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, failure to achieve expected level of inter- personal, academic, or occupational achievement).
C. Duration: Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Criterion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms.
During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or two or more symptoms listed in Criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences). D. Schizoaffective and Mood Disorder exclusion: Schizoaffective Disorder and Mood Disorder With Psychotic Fea- tures have been ruled out because either (1) no Major Depressive, Manic or Mixed Episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms; or (2) if mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, their total duration has been brief relative to the duration of the active and residual periods.
E. Substance/general medical condition exclusion: The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition. F.
Relationship to a Pervasive Developmental Disorder: If there is a history of Autism or another Pervasive Develop- mental Disorder, the additional diagnosis of Schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations are also present for at least a month (or less if successfully treated). potential to cause sedation, dizziness, anticholiner- When the SGAs first were introduced, many gic effects, extrapyramidal symptoms, agranulocy- practitioners considered it almost malpractice not to tosis, cardiovascular events, and depression. All of use them over the FGAs because of the reduced in- them have at least one “boxed” warning in the FDA cidence of long-term adverse effects such as tardive approved package labeling.
The second-generation dyskinesia and benefit for negative symptoms. This antipsychotics (SGAs) have a wide variety of differ- assumption has been turned around by the findings ent side effects. These also have at least one “boxed” from one large, well-designed trial (CATIE).12 This warning in the package labeling.
As a class, most study compared several SGAs (olanzapine, quetiap- of the SGAs all cause significant weight gain and ine, risperidone, ziprasidone) with perphenazine, a metabolic syndrome. Ziprasidone (GeodonÒ) and FGA, over 18 months. The medications were simi- aripiprazole (AbilifyÒ) are the two SGAs that do larly effective.
Fewer people discontinued olanzap- not appear to cause these problems. ine but it caused significantly more weight gain and After evaluating the available evidence, the metabolic problems. Perphenazine did not cause Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team more EPS than the other medications and was just as recommended SGAs (other than clozapine) as first effective as three of the four medications.
There was choice medications.11 These recommendations do no advantage of the newer mediations on negative note that weight gain and metabolic effects of the symptoms or cognitive functioning and perphen- SGAs may alter the choice in an individual patient azine was the most cost effective. Unfortunately, and are more expensive. The recommendations with a relatively short-term study, the difference in made no clear statement of preference of SGAs rates of tardive dyskinesias was not answered.
over FGAs in acute or maintenance treatment. Because of the CATIE trial and a similar study Clozapine is recommended for treatment-refrac- from the United Kingdom, the World Psychiatric tory positive symptoms, hostility, and suicidality. Association did a comparison of all the available Long-acting injectable antipsychotics are recom- trials.13 This analysis stated that antipsychotic treat- mended for individuals who do not adhere to oral ment needs to be individually tailored to promote medication regimens.
optimal recovery. It noted that medications are very 12 Journal of Managed Care Medicine | Vol. 12, No.
3 | www.namcp.orgExhibit 3: Schematic Model of Course of Schizophrenia3 Good Prevention Recovery Function R Premorbid Pr o dr o Progression Re S l t a a p b s l i e n g St a bl e e si d u al / m al Poor 15 20 30 40 50 60 70 Age (Years) Exhibit 4: Direct Costs of Schizophrenia4 Homeless Shelter Research and Training Drugs $291 $6,397 $5,043 Law Enforcement $2,637 $6,951 $7,967 $2,764 Outpatient Care/Professional Fees Long Term Care Hospital Inpatient Stay Total Direct Health Care Costs: $22,726* Total Direct Non-Health Care Costs: $9,325* Direct Cost Offsets: $1,739* *In millions heterogeneous with substantial differences in side to patients. The team adapts itself and the environ- effect profiles. SGAs were found to be inconsistently ment to patients’ needs.
An example would be pro- more efficacious than FGAs with a lower likelihood viding services where the patient lives rather than to cause EPS but associated with more metabolic expecting them to show up for appointments. ACT events. Consistent with other evidence, clozapine programs have reduced hospitalizations for severely was found to be most efficacious in treatment-resis- mentally ill patients by approximately 40 percent.14 tant schizophrenia.
Unfortunately, the ACT model is difficult to repli- Numerous strategies can be used to improve the cate successfully. outcomes in patients with schizophrenia. One of In one evaluation of schizophrenics with substance these is assertive community treatment (ACT).
abuse receiving ACT versus standard case manage- This uses a 24/7 community-based treatment and ment (SCM), both groups showed significant reduc- rehabilitation model. Multidisciplinary teams pro- tions in substance use over time.15 ACT and SCM vide ongoing continuous service, assertive out- were not significantly different in cost-effectiveness reach, and support services. Care teams have small, over three years.
SCM was more effective than ACT manageable caseloads and provide all key services in the first two years, but ACT became more effi- www.namcp.org | Vol. 12, No. 3 | Journal of Managed Care Medicine 13Exhibit 5: Indirect Costs4 Caregiver $7,899 Premature Mortality (suicide) $1,100 Reduced Productivity at Work Unemployment $1,734 $21,644 Total Indirect Costs $32,378 Million Exhibit 6: Available Antipsychotic Agents “Typical” Antipsychotics “Atypical” Antipsychotics (first-generation or FGAs) (second-generation or SGAs) Chlorpromazine (Thorazine) Clozapine (Clozaril) Perphenazine (Trilafon) Risperidone (Risperdal)* Molindone (Moban) Olanzapine (Zyprexa)** Thiothixene (Navane) Quetiapine (Seroquel) Fluphenazine (Prolixin)* Ziprasidone (Geodon) Haloperidol (Haldol)* Aripiprazole (Abilify) Paliperidone (Invega)** *Depot version available **Depot version in development cient during the final year.
The SCM program costs practice behavior through clinician and staff educa- were about one-half of ACT costs, but subjects in tion and to improve cost effectiveness of treatment. the SCM group used more mental health center ser- Interventions that may be utilized by disease man- vices. Standard case management can be replicated agement programs include evidence-based practice easier over a wide area and group of patients.
guidelines, case management, self-management edu- High-risk, high cost patients with schizophrenia cation, patient risk stratification, patient satisfaction should be identified and placed in intensive case surveys, outcomes tracking and reporting, specialized management programs or ACT. Case managers can software, computerized data warehouse, automated ensure patients are receiving evidence-based treat- decision support tools, and callback systems. ment and can assist with provider-to-provider com- Schizophrenia treatment algorithms also can be munication, transportation, and other needs.
used to improve cost effectiveness and patient out- Disease management programs are another way comes. These algorithms can be developed with in- to improve patient outcomes. These programs have put from mental health experts, literature reviews, many potential goals such as to build and strengthen and data from consensus conferences.
The goals of a support systems, support physician-patient relation- treatment algorithm include increased effectiveness of ships, increase medication adherence, reduce hospital- drug therapy to reduce symptoms and improve func- izations and length of stay, improve patient function tion, and enhanced quality of clinical decision-mak- and quality of life, and empower the patient and fam- ing and practice. One example is the Texas Medica- ily with education. They also can be used to improve tion Algorithm Project.
Clinician and patient/family 14 Journal of Managed Care Medicine | Vol. 12, No. 3 | www.namcp.orgmaterials from this program are available at www.
tion of outliers on best practices for schizophrenia dshs.state.tx.us/mhprograms/tmapover.shtm. management. Managed care should partner with Provider partnerships are another way to improve community mental health centers for specialty ser- patient outcomes.
Providers can work creatively vices that they only provide. Lastly, processes, inter- with care managers to get patients into treatment. ventions, and outcomes should be tracked through This may include having weekend appointments, af- health information technology.
ter-hours services, and home visits. Another creative idea is to negotiate rates with providers for in-hos- Conclusion pital visits before patients are stepped down to lower Schizophrenia is a costly disease with significant im- levels of care. The patients are then more likely to pact on all areas of patient functioning.
Management follow-up with a provider or group with whom they of this disease requires a multitude of interventions. have had prior contact. Managed care should also By efficiently utilizing available community resourc- consider additional negotiated rates for telephone es and implementing other strategies such as disease contact and travel time.
management programs, managed care can improve Specialty mental and behavioral health organiza- patient outcomes while minimizing costs. JMCM tions (MBHO) offer unique resources and services that are communicated to providers, patients, and Mark Rosenberg, MD, PHD, is president of Behavioral Health Management. families.
Their products may include provider edu- cation programs, updated schizophrenia treatment References guidelines, consumer treatment guides, communi- 1.Goff DC, Heckers S, Freudenreich O. Schizophrenia. Med Clin North Am.
cation tools (newsletters, online CME, patient/fam- 2001;85:663-89. ily education), and peer-to-peer support. 2.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Men- tal Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision. (DSM-IV-TR) Arlington, VA: Another way to improve patient outcomes is to American Psychiatric Association.
2000. contract with Community Mental Health Centers. 3.
Sheitman BB, Lieberman JA. The natural history and pathophysiology of The payer has to initiate contact because the mental treatment resistant schizophrenia. J Psychiatr Res.
1998;32:143-50. health centers will not. This can provide alternative 4.
Wu EQ, Birnbaum HG, Shi L, et al. The economic burden of schizophrenia services not typically provided by the MBHO such as in the United States in 2002. J Clin Psychiatry.
2005;66:1122-9. 5. Kane JM, Leucht S, Carpenter D, Docherty JP; Expert Consensus Panel for housing, employment services, legal services, asser- Optimizing Pharmacologic Treatment of Psychotic Disorders.
The expert con- tive community treatment teams, and wrap-around sensus guideline series. Optimizing pharmacologic treatment of psychotic dis- services like respite care and in-home intervention. orders.
Introduction: methods, commentary, and summary. J Clin Psychiatry. Transitions from one provider to another are when 2003;64(suppl 12):5-19.
patients can be lost to follow-up. To ensure success, 6. Robinson D, Woerner MG, Alvir JM, et al.
Predictors of relapse following response from a first episode of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Arch payers must ensure transition does not disrupt conti- Gen Psychiatry. 1999;56:241-7.
nuity of care, especially for high-risk schizophrenia 7. Marcus SC, Olfson M. Outpatient antipsychotic treatment and inpatient costs patients.
Payers should cover patients being treated of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2008;34:173-180.
by out of network providers for 6 months to make 8. Weiden PJ, Olfson M. Cost of relapse in schizophrenia.
Schizophr Bull. transitions smoother. 1995;21:419-29.
9. Adams CE, Fenton MK, Quraishi S, David AS. Systematic meta-review of Payer medical directors have a role in improving depot antipsychotic drugs for people with schizophrenia.
Br J Psychiatry. payer-provider communication. Their role is often 2001;179:290-9.
stereotyped as “Dr. No” through denying claims. 10.
Kane J, Honigfeld G, Singer J, Meltzer H. Clozapine for the treatment-re- They can introduce changes that improve medical sistant schizophrenic. A double-blind comparison with chlorpromazine.
Arch services through quality improvement initiatives, Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:789-96. 11.
Lehman AF, Kreyenbuhl J, Buchanan RW, et al. The Schizophrenia Patient conduct literature reviews to determine best prac- Outcomes Research Team (PORT): updated treatment recommendations tices, consult academic experts, and communicate 2003. Schizophr Bull.
2004;30:193-217. with colleagues before making a medical necessity 12. Rosenheck RA, Leslie DL, Sindelar J, et al.
Cost-effectiveness of second- decision. One area where medical directors are un- generation antipsychotics and perphenazine in a randomized trial of treatment derutilized is working directly with providers in for chronic schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry.
2006;163:2080-9. 13. Tandon R, Belmaker RH, Gattaz WF, et al.
World Psychiatric Association the community. Pharmacopsychiatry Section statement on comparative effectiveness of antipsy- Managed care can take some immediate actions to chotics in the treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophr Res.
2008;100:20-38. improve outcomes in patients with schizophrenia. 14.
Allness DJ. The Program of Assertive Community Treatment (PACT): First should be the identification of outlier patients the model and its replication. New Dir Ment Health Serv.
1997 Sum- and providers. Various programs can be implement- mer;(74):17-26. 15.
Clark RE, Teague GB, Ricketts SK, et al. Cost-effectiveness of assertive ed to manage these subsets of patients and provid- community treatment versus standard case management for persons with co-oc- ers such as an intensive case management program. curring severe mental illness and substance use disorders.
Health Serv Res. Another immediate intervention would be educa- 1998;33(5 Pt 1):1285-1308. www.namcp.org | Vol.
12, No. 3 | Journal of Managed Care Medicine 15
B N r e a u z r il o ia d n e v Jo el u o r p n m al e o n f t a M l e ri d sk ic a fa l c a t n o d rs B in io s lo ch gi i c z a o l p R h e re se n a ia rch (2001) 34: 155-163 155 ISSN 0100-879X Neurodevelopmental risk factors in schizophrenia M.I. Lobato1, 1Serviço de Psiquiatria, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, P. Belmonte-de-Abreu2, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil D.
Knijnik2, B. Teruchkin1, 2Departamento de Psiquiatria, Faculdade de Medicina, E. Ghisolfi1 Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil and A.
Henriques2 Abstract The authors review environmental and neurodevelopmental risk fac- Correspondence Key words M.I. Lobato tors for schizophrenic disorders, with emphasis on minor physical •Schizophrenia Rua Vasco da Gama, 1301/401 anomalies, particularly craniofacial anomalies and dermatoglyphic •Neurodevelopmental 90420-112 Porto Alegre, RS variations. The high prevalence of these anomalies among schizo- disorder Brasil phrenic subjects supports the neurodevelopmental theory of the etiol- •Risk factors E-mail: mlupo@pro.via-rs.com.br ogy of schizophrenia, since they suggest either genetically or epige- netically controlled faulty embryonic development of structures of Research supported by CNPq ectodermal origin like brain and skin.
This may disturb neurodevelop- (No. 138121/96-6). ment that in turn may cause these subjects to be at increased risk for the development of schizophrenia and related disorders.
The precise confirmation of this theory, at least in some cases, will provide further Received August 11, 1999 understanding of these illnesses, allowing easy and inexpensive iden- Accepted November 22, 2000 tification of subjects at risk and providing guidelines for the develop- ment of new pharmacological interventions for early treatment and even for primary prevention of the illness. Introduction dementia(cid:148) (2) that affects adults from 18 to 24 years, particularly men, with associated Despite many technical and medical ad- cognitive impairment early in the course of vances over the past ten years, at the end of the disease. the Decade of the Brain schizophrenia is still Here we review the main evidence for the a personal and family disaster.
Research over neurodevelopmental theory of schizophre- the past few decades has demonstrated with nia. The articles for this review were selected increasing frequency the presence of brain through a systematic literature search of lesions dating back to early brain develop- Medline from 1994-1999. The key words ment (1).
This has resulted in a change in the used were (cid:147)schizophrenia(cid:148), (cid:147)neurodevelop- concept of schizophrenia from a disease of mental(cid:148), and (cid:147)risk factors(cid:148). The criteria for the mind to a disease of the brain. This selection of the articles were systematic as- neurodevelopmental model is not a new con- sessment using DSM-III-IV criteria, case- cept.
In fact, it is a reconsideration of the control design, and adequate description of XIX century(cid:146)s concept about a precocious index and comparison cases. Additional pa- psychotic condition preceding a (cid:147)secondary pers from citations of these articles were also Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001156 M.I. Lobato et al.
included according to the same criteria. of neuronal connections and the selective reduction of cerebral structures occurs dur- Evidence for association of neurode- ing early cerebral maturation. A genetic al- velopmental abnormalities with the teration in some maturational mechanisms, course of schizophrenia such as (cid:147)cortical pruning(cid:148), expressed during adolescence can explain the delay between Neurodevelopmental disorders such as initial lesion and illness onset (2,5).
Accord- speech retardation and reading and/or motor ing to some authors (3), most schizophrenic disabilities are usually non-progressive and patients display a clinical picture that fits the appear during the first decade of life. Cere- neurodegenerative model better than the neu- bral morphologic alterations include micro- rodevelopmental model. It consists of a de- cephaly, hydrocephalus, abnormal cell mi- cline in function of previously healthy per- gration and asymmetry of specific brain re- sons, progresses over months or years with gions (3).
The schizophrenias have many exacerbations and remissions and higher or characteristics of neurodevelopmental dis- lower expression of psychotic and/or nega- orders, although, because of their many dif- tive symptoms, with only a small group of ferent clinical presentations, there is often patients returning to the premorbid state (3). great difficulty in making any general state- Complete remission of schizophrenia is not ment about this group of disorders. If we often seen in patients diagnosed according consider the neurodevelopmental theory in to rigorous diagnostic criteria.
schizophrenia, it is reasonable to presume that the morbid process is present in a latent Neuropathological evidence state and that the lesion(s) and some neu- rodevelopmental abnormalities could be ob- An important issue for the neurodevelop- served before diagnosis. Although most pro- mental theory is the failure of major early spective studies that have looked for neu- studies to detect gliosis (considering gliosis rodevelopmental abnormalities in schizo- as the evidence of a brain reaction to after- phrenia before diagnosis report negative re- birth insults, producing (cid:147)glial scars(cid:148)) (3). sults, some did detect subtle behavior and Cerebral abnormalities in the absence of intellectual abnormalities as possible (cid:147)pre- gliosis may probably indicate abnormalities dictors of risk(cid:148) for the development of schizo- of fetal cerebral development instead of neu- phrenia (4).
These findings, however, are rodegeneration (3). Some neuropathological inconsistent, raising doubts about the neu- studies have failed to detect evidence of rodevelopmental theory (3,4). gliosis (1), but others have described it in A persistent question can be raised.
If the subcortical and periventricular areas. Dur- initial lesion occurs in early neurodevelop- ing cerebral development, neuronal prolif- ment, why would the disease become clini- eration occurs in ventricular and subven- cally manifest usually at the end of adoles- tricular zones, with cortical cells migrating cence? A possible explanation is the occur- through radially aligned glial fibers to the rence of some maturational processes final positions.
Therefore, reduction or de- throughout adolescence that modulate psy- rangement of the neurons in the cortical chosis (2). It is known that the human brain areas would be an indication of cerebral reaches approximately adult size during the development abnormalities (2,5). early school years, and that this growth seems There is evidence that schizophrenic to be affected by the increase of gray matter brains are approximately 5-8% lighter and volume as opposed to white matter volume 4% smaller than healthy controls (2,6).
(2,3,5). It is also known that the fine tuning Nelson et al. (7), in a magnetic resonance Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001Neurodevelopmental risk factors in schizophrenia 157 imaging (MRI) meta-analysis study, demon- hood hyperkinetic syndrome, autism and strated a positive association between schizo- behavioral childhood disturbances).
MPA phrenia and the reduction of the bilateral found in the cephalic area, hands, and feet hippocampus and, probably, amygdala. can indicate a neurodevelopmental problem Akbarian et al. (8) found a reduction in dating back to the first gestational quarter.
neurons expressing NADPH-diaphorase in DM consists of digital and palmar line alter- more external cortical layers and an excess ations and indicates second-trimester devel- in the inferior layers of white matter of the opmental problems (13-17). frontal and temporal cortex of schizophrenics. The rationale underlying the association Several other studies of chronic institution- of MPA/DM and disturbed neurogenesis is alized patients demonstrated a reduction of based on the fact that each of these organs total cerebral weight, hemispheric volume, originates from the same primordial tissue.
cortical volume and gray matter size, to- The neural tube develops from the primitive gether with ventricular enlargement, sug- ectoderm, with the ventricular system and gesting that brain changes could be risk fac- cerebral tissues originating from the neural tors, rather than (cid:147)causal(cid:148) factors (3,9). Gur tube lumen. As a case in point, retinoic acid et al.
(10), using MRI measurements, found excess or deficit in the first trimester can a reduction in gray matter volume in chronic simultaneously affect both neuronal migra- and neuroleptic-naive schizophrenic patients, tion and cortical subplate development and also indicating a developmental process. non-neuronal surface ectoderm formation Ventricular enlargement is also found in sev- (18). Such maldevelopment can result in eral genetic and neurodevelopmental dis- craniofacial abnormalities, particularly of the eases, and in 15 to 30% of schizophrenic eyes and ears, as well as surface epidermal patients (3).
Many studies have reported anomalies, such as altered dermatoglyphic higher ventricular brain ratios in schizo- lines and extranumerary nipples (2,18). phrenic patients compared to controls (11), and there is also evidence that the enlarge- Dermatoglyphic marks ment is present before the onset of the dis- ease and is not progressive (12). Dermatoglyphs is the term used to de- According to Stevens (3) and others (9, scribe epidermal lines of the skin of digital 11), in spite of demonstrating smaller ven- pulps, palm of the hands and feet.
Epidermal tricular brain ratio differences than reported lines are already well developed around the in previous studies, this finding still is of second trimester, but the process is not con- unquestionable value for the understanding cluded until the last trimester. Once com- of the disease and for the demonstration of plete, the lines remain unchanged until the disease heterogeneity. end of an individual(cid:146)s life, except for growth in size (19).
In 1939, DM have been de- Chronological markers scribed in Down syndrome patients (17). Later, in 1966, unusual DM were summa- The chronological markers of neuroem- rized in 68 clinical diseases, including chrom- bryogenesis refer to anthropometric charac- osomal aberrations, monogenic diseases, and teristics that reflect a prenatal insult. The also diseases of uncertain genetic origin, most studied anthropometric markers in including congenital heart disease, psoria- schizophrenia are minor physical anomalies sis, and alterations due to toxic environmen- (MPA) and dermatoglyphic marks (DM).
tal factors such as thalidomide and rubella Several other psychiatric disorders show as- (20-22). Neurological and epidermal tissues sociation with MPA and DM (e.g., child- share some common aspects of development Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001158 M.I. Lobato et al.
such as similar ectodermal origin, rapid de- point of view, and it is acknowledged that velopment during the second trimester of normal people can have one to four of these gestation and susceptibility to neuronal anomalies. An excessive number of MPAs, growth factor. Cerebral and epidermal growth however, is associated with several child- are both influenced by hormones like testos- hood behavioral problems and suggests ge- terone, in both sexes, during dermatoglyphic netic neurodevelopmental influences.
Wald- development. It is well known that epider- rop et al. (30) elaborated a scale for 18 differ- mal growth factor stimulates astrocyte divi- ent abnormalities associated with the first sion after the beginning of differentiation of trimester of development involving head, glial cells at 12 weeks of gestation and that hands and feet.
These include low ear im- these emerging glial cells have an important plantation, hypertelorism, high-arched pal- role in blood-brain barrier definition (23). ate and microcephalus, among others. Sev- DM become especially interesting in the eral neurological disorders like epilepsy, study of association of problems of cerebral mental retardation and learning disabilities development involving several neurological are associated with the presence of these disorders in twins discordant for schizophre- anomalies.
Studies comparing schizophrenic nia. These include hippocampal-amygdala patients with normal controls also found an complex reduction, ventricular dilatation and excess of MPAs in schizophrenics (15,16). high scores of neurological alterations in the In a study correlating MPAs with Wechsler affected twins.
This evidence has encour- Scale performance a strong correlation of aged the search for environmental factors MPAs with lower verbal IQ and poor pre- acting as (cid:147)genotypic liberators(cid:148) (19,24-27). morbid adjustment was observed (16). The Bracha (25), in a study of monozygotic twins authors suggest that this finding can indicate discordant for schizophrenia, confirmed first-trimester insults leading simultaneously changes in dermatoglyphic counts, such as to MPAs and neurological abnormalities and had previously been described in schizo- consequently to impaired social adaptation phrenic patients, providing further evidence and, perhaps, schizophrenia (16).
of some deleterious effects around the sixth In any speculation about the role of MPA month of pregnancy leading to simultaneous in schizophrenia, it is important to keep in neurologic and dermatologic abnormalities. mind that MPAs are nonspecific predictors It is important to point out that monozygotic of potential psychopathology in schizophre- and dizygotic twins do not necessarily share nia, evidencing disruption of normal first- the same prenatal environment. One of the and second-trimester gestation.
Green et al. great determinants of the prenatal environ- (15), in a non-controlled study, found MPAs ment is the placenta. Approximately a third associated with early onset of illness (before of monozygotic twins and all dizygotic twins age 18).
A later study comparing patients are dichorionic. Davis et al. (19) proposed with schizophrenic and bipolar disease and that variations in twin placentations also family controls found increased prevalence account for differences in twin concordance, of MPAs among schizophrenic patients, con- even for schizophrenia, when it is consid- firming previous associations of these mark- ered that prenatal infections play a role in its ers with earlier age of onset and lower etiology (19,25,28,29).
premorbid adjustment. The authors suggest that MPA may be predominantly associated with congenital rather than genetically de- Minor physical anomalies termined cases of schizophrenia, linking pre- Individual physical alterations are not natal insults to increased risk for schizophre- very important from a clinical or cosmetic nia (15). However, at least one study has Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001Neurodevelopmental risk factors in schizophrenia 159 demonstrated high rates of MPAs in the during the prenatal period, and several au- relatives of schizophrenic probands, sug- thors have suggested that this might well be gesting a genetic association (18).
a consequence, rather than a cause of the disease, indicating that fetuses at higher ge- Risk factors netic risk for schizophrenia with intrauterine damage are at increased risk for asphyxia Countless factors have been associated and anomalous presentations, in the same with increased risk for schizophrenia, in- way as malformed fetuses (45). Jones et al. cluding maternal malnutrition or intoxica- (46), in a North Finland 28-year cohort study, tion, infections, obstetric complications, found associations between low birth weight maternal stress, in addition to different ge- (defined as less than 2,500 g) combined with netic factors.
The genetic factors are the prematurity (less than 37 weeks) and later most robust of all, contributing 30 to 40% of schizophrenia, also indicating problems in the agreement observed in monozygotic twins fetal development. McNeil and Cantor-Graae (31). This partial agreement in monozygotic (47) did not find support for this association twins provides additional support to the most in a recent study comparing schizophrenic, accepted hypothesis of a multifactorial syn- discordant and concordant monozygotic ergism in a threshold model for schizophre- twins for schizophrenia and individuals at nia (32-42).
genetic risk. They suggested that complica- tions occurring at labor-delivery do not rep- resent an epiphenomenal consequence of Obstetric complications preexisting fetal abnormality and are rather There are several lines of evidence sug- an etiological factor. gesting that obstetric complications are im- Some studies have suggested a possible portant risk factors for at least some types of connection between obstetric complications schizophrenia.
The concept of obstetric com- and ventricular enlargement but others have plications is, however, broad enough to al- failed to confirm it (2). It has also been low different meanings. It represents a vari- suggested that males are more sensitive to ety of different somatic deviations with prob- obstetric complications than females, prob- ably different risks for schizophrenia (38).
ably due to differences in timing of cerebral Schizophrenic patients at high genetic risk maturation (43,45). with a history of serious childbirth compli- cations, anoxia, secondary hemorrhage and Maternal nutrition birth complications are at increased risk to display enlarged third ventricle, periventricu- There is increased evidence concerning lar damage, and prevalence of negative symp- the association of nutritional factors and toms (43). Geddes (44), in a meta-analysis of schizophrenia.
Brown et al. (35), in a recent 12 studies looking for complications of preg- review, concluded that the effects of food nancy and labor in 700 schizophrenics and deprivation are compatible with increased 635 controls, found a significant association rates of schizophrenia and that food depriva- between schizophrenia and premature rup- tion causes adverse neurodevelopmental ef- ture of membranes, gestational age less than fects. To explain the small impact on fre- 37 weeks and use of resuscitation or of an quency distribution in countries with en- incubator.
They also found a borderline as- demic famine they emphasized the fact that sociation with forceps delivery and birth in these countries chronic malnutrition is weight lower than 2,500 g. often accompanied by other long-standing Some obstetric complications originate health and social problems such as infec- Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001160 M.I. Lobato et al.
tions and poor prenatal and postnatal care. association of birth seasonality with schizo- This, in turn, could decrease the chances of phrenia include infectious agents, nutritional survival of fetuses and newborns until the factors and environmental temperature age of risk for schizophrenia. The authors changes during childbirth.
Crow (52) argued also suggest that deficiency of specific nutri- for an interaction of these factors with ge- ents causing neural tube defects have been netic ones. Among these factors, prenatal reported even in countries with adequate viruses are among the most common expla- food supplies. Susser and Lin (48), in a nations.
retrospective study of a Dutch population Many infectious diseases show a sea- submitted to food deprivation during the sonal pattern, with typical peaks of inci- winter of 1944-45, found a larger number of dence. Rubella, for example, peaks in the psychiatric admissions for schizophrenia 20 autumn, following maternal infection during years later, suggesting that food deprivation spring (peak season for adult rubella). The during pregnancy increased the risk for seasonality for anencephaly, congenital ab- schizophrenia.
normalities and mental retardation is ex- In spite of these observations, the only plained in the same way. However, seasonal definitive evidence is the association of low- changes or any other environmental changes ered ingestion of folic acid during the first contributing to the etiology of schizophrenia trimester of pregnancy with an increased may not necessarily occur during the prena- risk for neural tube defects (spina bifida, tal period (38). All the above-mentioned hydrocephalus, anencephaly).
Evidence re- factors provide clues pointing to altered bio- lating nutritional deprivation in utero to sub- chemistry in schizophrenia. This happens in sequent schizophrenia can be considered to primates mainly because of the maturational be a strong argument favoring the retinoid delay of the central nervous system (CNS), theory of schizophrenia developed by Good- with brain development continuing into early man (18,49). and late childhood.
This results in several critical periods over many months and years after birth. This long developmental time- Seasonality table contributes to the chance of increased Epidemiological studies in temperate CNS vulnerability to negative environmen- countries have pointed to the increased preva- tal effects. lence of births of schizophrenics in late win- ter and early spring.
Similar, but less pro- Infectious diseases nounced increases have been reported for bipolar disorder, but not for neurotic or per- Several epidemiological studies have sonality disorders. Fanªnas et al. (50) have shown that maternal exposure to influenza suggested that higher rates of winter and virus or other viruses during the second tri- spring births could result from seasonal varia- mester of gestation is associated with in- tion of parental procreational habits that may creased incidence of schizophrenia later in be age and class associated, but not associ- adulthood.
There is still controversy about ated with variables related to the disease the role of viruses in the etiology of schizo- itself. However, subsequent studies failed to phrenia. This is due to the lack of direct confirm this explanation (51).
evidence for this association, which could Much evidence links seasonal atmosphere be demonstrated by the identification of an changes with fetal damage, growth retarda- antiviral antibody or virus itself in serum, tion and increased risk for schizophrenia fluid or cerebral tissue of schizophrenic pa- (38). Environmental factors suggesting the tients. An additional difficulty in the confir- Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001Neurodevelopmental risk factors in schizophrenia 161 mation of this theory derives from the long association in the 1959 epidemic) (53,54).
period of time from gestational exposure to A factor confounding a viral causation outcome (20 or 30 years later) (32-34,36,43, may be the maternal use of analgesics to treat 53-56). viral infection during gestation. Use of anal- Wright and Murray (57) reviewed the gesics has been associated with increased association of prenatal influenza and au- risk of anencephaly and other congenital toimmunity in schizophrenia.
The authors CNS defects. Acetylsalicylic acid is a potent cited Esquirol who, in 1838, noticed (cid:147)epi- anticoagulant that can increase fetal brain demics(cid:148) of psychotic disorders he called hemorrhages. The association between de- (cid:147)insanity(cid:148) involving large numbers of indi- creased aspirin use in Finland and Scandina- viduals.
Also, Kraeplin described a (cid:147)preco- via in the sixties and reduced incidence of cious(cid:148) insanity and hypothesized that infec- schizophrenia later in the 1990(cid:146)s (38) still tions (cid:147)in developmental years(cid:148) could have needs confirmation by additional studies. some causal role. This idea was later rein- forced by the endemic nature of several bac- Final considerations terial infections at the beginning of this cen- tury, like syphilis, tuberculosis, typhoid fe- The present review shows that in a large ver, cholera and influenza after the 1917 number of cases of schizophrenia there is epidemic (52,57).
Still, the mechanism of consistent evidence supporting a combined viral CNS damage has not been well de- effect of genetic and congenital factors gen- scribed. It is known that several neurotrophic erating neurodevelopmental abnormalities. viruses like influenza, Epstein-Barr or cy- These, in turn, could lower the threshold for tomegalovirus can cross the blood-brain bar- schizophrenia through several biochemical rier.
In the case of influenza this can occur and physiologic mechanisms, with faulty through the expression of capsular neura- (cid:147)thalamic filtering(cid:148), lowering (cid:147)buffering ca- minidase that alters (cid:147)sialic moiety acids(cid:148), pacity(cid:148) for stress control, and other feedback enzymes of neural adhesion molecules that mechanisms for environmental adjustment. regulate neuronal migration during neuro- More detailed tests of this theory using vari- embryogenesis (38,57). It is also possible ous combinations of specific risk factors that maternal virus antibodies act as fetal invoking the threshold model of schizophre- anti-cerebral antibodies, since these antibod- nia are needed to describe the full range of ies are known to cross the placenta.
It is also neurodevelopmental abnormalities in the dis- possible that some unspecific factors of in- ease. Neuronal migration abnormalities in fection like fever or anoxia could account for schizophrenia have been associated with CNS pathology (38). maternal famine (48), and more recently with Recent population studies evaluating the retinoid dysregulation (18,49).
A precise influenza epidemics of 1954, 1957 and 1959 identification of these mechanisms under in Australia and Japan have revealed posi- the neurodevelopmental theory of schizo- tive associations between gestational expo- phrenia would allow a better understanding sure to virus and later schizophrenia. The of the physiopathology and biochemistry of Japanese study found an increased risk for the disease and also permit a better risk female schizophrenia. McGrath et al.
(54) assessment and early intervention in differ- suggested a difference related to the month ent stages of the disorder. Furthermore, un- of viral exposure (excess of male schizo- derstanding causation in schizophrenia could phrenia births 4 months after inception of provide avenues for specific interventions the 1954 epidemic and of female births 5 for high-risk subjects and preventive correc- months after the 1957 epidemic, with no tion of altered nutritional or biochemical Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001162 M.I. Lobato et al.
defects. This is the case in possible retinoid road for specific and potent treatments for cascade dysregulation (18,49) and in altered these catastrophic disorders. expression of phospholipids (58) or ectoen- zymes (5(cid:146)-nucleotidase) (59).
These possi- Acknowledgments bilities, if confirmed according to the neurodevelopmental theory of schizophre- We thank Ann Goodman for the careful nia and related illnesses, would pave the review and suggestions. References 1. Bogerts B (1993).
Recent advances in the (1999). Reduced gray matter volume in Unusual dermatoglyphic findings associ- neuropathology of schizophrenia. Schizo- schizophrenia.
Archives of General Psy- ated with rubella embryopathy. New Eng- phrenia Bulletin, 19: 431-445. chiatry, 56: 905-911.
land Journal of Medicine, 274: 148-150. 2. O’Connell P, Woodruff PW, Wright I, 11.
Abreu P, Busnello E, Chaves M, Ilha D, 21. Holt SB (1961). Quantitative genetics of Jones P & Murray RM (1997).
Develop- Baron A, Camozzatto A, Lobato M & fingerprint patterns. British Medical Bulle- mental insanity or dementia praecox: was Schestatsky G (1995). Case-control study tin, 17: 247-250.
the wrong concept adopted? Schizophre- of tomographic alterations in schizophre- 22. Purvis-Smith SG & Menser MA (1973).
nia Bulletin, 23: 97-106. nia. Revista de Psiquiatria do Rio Grande Genetic and environmental influences on 3.
Stevens JR (1997). Anatomy of schizo- do Sul, 17: 112-120. digital dermatoglyphics in congenital ru- phrenia revisited.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12. Illowsky B, Juliano DM, Bigelow LB & bella. Pediatric Research, 7: 215-219.
23: 373-383. Weinberger DR (1988). Stability of CT 23.
Patterson PH (1995). Neuronal growth and 4. Davidson M, Reichenberg A, Rabinowitz scan findings in schizophrenia: results of differentiation factors and synaptic plas- J, Weiser M, Kaplan Z & Mark M (1999).
an 8-year follow-up study. Journal of Neu- ticity. In: Bloom FE & Kupper DJ (Editors), Behavior and intellectual markers for rology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 51: Psychopharmacology: the Fourth Genera- schizophrenia in apparently healthy male 209-213.
tion of Progress. Raven Press, New York. adolescents.
American Journal of Psychia- 13. Cannon M, Byrne M, Cotter D, Sham P, 24. Belmaker R, Pollin W, Wyatt RJ & Cohen try, 156: 1328-1335.
Larkin C & O’Callaghan E (1994). Further S (1974). A follow-up of monozygotic 5.
Rakic P (1988). Defects of neuronal mi- evidence for anomalies in the handprints twins discordant for schizophrenia. Ar- gration and the pathogenesis of cortical of patients with schizophrenia: a study of chives of General Psychiatry, 30: 219-222.
malformations. Progress in Brain Re- secondary creases. Schizophrenia Re- 25.
Bracha HS (1991). Etiology of structural search, 73: 15-37. search, 13: 179-184.
asymmetry in schizophrenia: an alterna- 6. Powchik P, Davidson M, Haroutunian V, 14. Fañanas L, Moral P & Bertranpetit J tive hypothesis.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, Gabriel SM, Purohit DP, Perl DP, Harvey (1990). Quantitative dermatoglyphics in 17: 551-553. PD & Davis KL (1998).
Postmortem stud- schizophrenia: study of family history sub- 26. Davis JO & Bracha S (1996). Prenatal ies in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulle- groups. Human Biology, 62: 421-427. growth markers in schizophrenia: the tin, 24: 325-341.
15. Green MF, Satz P, Gaier DJ, Ganzell S & monozygotic co-twin control study. Ameri- 7.
Nelson MD, Saykin AJ, Flashman LA & Kharabi F (1989). Minor physical anoma- can Journal of Psychiatry, 153: 1166-1171. Riordan HJ (1998).
Hippocampal volume lies in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulle- 27. Lohr JB & Bracha HS (1992).
The monozy- reduction in schizophrenia as assessed by tin, 15: 91-99. gotic mirror-image twin pairs with discor- magnetic resonance imaging: a meta-ana- 16. Guy JD, Majorski LV, Wallace CJ & Guy dant psychiatric illnesses: the neuropsy- lytic study.
Archives of General Psychia- MP (1983). The incidence of minor physi- chiatric and neurodevelopmental evalua- try, 55: 433-440. cal anomalies in adult male schizophren- tion.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 149: 8. Akbarian S, Vinuela A, Kim JJ, Potkin SG, ics. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 9: 571-582.
1091-1095. Bunney Jr WE & Jones EG (1993). Dis- 17.
Varma SL, Chary TV, Singh S, Azhar MZ & 28. Bracha HS, Torrey EF, Gottesman II, torted distribution of nicotinamide-ad- Dharap AS (1995). Dermatoglyphic pat- Bigelow LB & Cunniff C (1992).
Second- enine dinucleotide phosphate-diaphorase terns in schizophrenic patients. Acta Psy- trimester markers of fetal size in schizo- neurons in temporal lobe of schizophren- chiatrica Scandinavica, 91: 213-215. phrenia: the study of monozygotic twins.
ics implies anomalous cortical develop- 18. Goodman A (1996). Congenital anomalies American Journal of Psychiatry, 149: ment.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 50: in relatives of schizophrenic probands 1355-1360. 178-187. may indicate a retinoid pathology.
Schizo- 29. Bracha HS, Torrey EF, Bigelow LB, Lohr 9. Chua SE & McKenna PJ (1995).
Schizo- phrenia Research, 19: 163-170. JB & Linington BB (1991). Subtle signs of phrenia - a brain disease?
A critical review 19. Davis JO, Phelps JA & Bracha HS (1995). prenatal maldevelopment of the hand ec- of structural and functional cerebral ab- Prenatal development of monozygotic toderm in schizophrenia: a preliminary normality in the disorder.
British Journal twins and concordance for schizophrenia. monozygotic twin study. Biological Psy- of Psychiatry, 166: 563-582.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21: 357-366. chiatry, 30: 719-725. 10.
Gur RE, Turetsky BI, Bilker WB & Gur RC 20. Achs R, Harper RG & Siegel M (1966). 30.
Waldrop M, Pederson F & Bell R (1968). Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001Neurodevelopmental risk factors in schizophrenia 163 Minor physical anomalies and behavior in sue: genes, experience, and chance in 95: 7240-7244. preschool children.
Child Development, schizophrenia positioning for the 21st cen- 50. Fañanas L, Marti-Tusquets JL & Bertran- 39: 391-400. tury.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 23: 547-561. petit J (1989). Seasonality of birth in 31.
Torrey EF (1992). Are we overestimating 41. Murphy KC & Owen MJ (1996).
Schizo- schizophrenia. An insufficient stratifica- the genetic contribution to schizophrenia? phrenia, CATCH 22 and FISCH.
British tion of control population? Social Psychia- Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18: 159-170. Journal of Psychiatry, 168: 397-398.
try and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 24: 266- 32. Adams W, Kendell RE, Hare EH & Munk- 42. Myhrman A, Rantakallio P, Isohanni M, 270.
Jorgensen P (1993). Epidemiological evi- Jones P & Partanen U (1996). Unwanted- 51.
Torrey EF & Rawlings RR (1996). Fluctua- dence that maternal influenza contributes ness of a pregnancy and schizophrenia in tions in schizophrenic births by year. Brit- to the etiology of schizophrenia.
An analy- the child. British Journal of Psychiatry, ish Journal of Psychiatry, 169: 772-775. sis of Scottish, English, and Danish data.
169: 637-640. 52. Crow TJ (1994).
Prenatal exposure to in- British Journal of Psychiatry, 163: 522- 43. Wright T, Takei N, Rifkin L & Murray RM fluenza as a cause of schizophrenia: there 534. (1995).
Maternal influenza, obstetric com- are inconsistencies and contradictions in 33. Adams W & Kendell RE (1996). Influenza plications and schizophrenia.
American the evidence. British Journal of Psychia- and schizophrenia (Comments). British Journal of Psychiatry, 152: 1714-1720.
try, 164: 588-592. Journal of Psychiatry, 169: 252-253. 44.
Geddes JR (1999). Schizophrenia and 53. Kunugi H, Nanko S, Takei N, Saito K, 34.
Barr CE, Mednick SA & Munk-Jorgensen complications of pregnancy and labor: an Hayashi N & Kazamatsuri H (1995). Schizo- P (1990). Exposure to influenza epidem- individual patient data meta-analysis.
phrenia following in utero exposure to the ics during gestation and adult schizophre- Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25: 413-423. 1957 influenza epidemics in Japan. Ameri- nia.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 47: 45. Cantor-Graae E, McNeil TF, Rickler KC, can Journal of Psychiatry, 152: 450-452. 869-874.
Sjostrom K, Rawlings R, Higgins ES & 54. McGrath J, Pemberton MR, Welham JL 35. Brown A, Susser E, Butler P, Andrews R, Hyde TM (1994).
Are neurological abnor- & Murray RM (1994). Schizophrenia and Kaufmann C & Gorman J (1996). Neuro- malities in well discordant monozygotic the influenza epidemics of 1954, 1957 and biological plausibility of prenatal nutritional co-twins of schizophrenic subjects the re- 1959: a southern hemisphere study.
deprivation as a risk factor for schizophre- sult of perinatal trauma? American Jour- Schizophrenia Research, 14: 1-8. nia.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis- nal of Psychiatry, 151: 1194-1199. 55. Mednick AS, Machon RA, Huttunen MO ease, 184: 71-85.
46. Jones PB, Rantakallio P, Hartikainen A, & Bonett D (1988). Adult schizophrenia 36.
Cannon M, Cotter D, Coffey VP, Sham P, Isohanni M & Sipila P (1998). Schizophre- following prenatal exposure to an influ- Takei N, Larkin C, Murray RM & O’Callag- nia as a long term outcome of pregnancy, enza epidemic. Archives of General Psy- han E (1996).
Prenatal exposure to the delivery, and perinatal complications: a 28- chiatry, 45: 189-192. 1957 influenza epidemic and adult schizo- year follow-up of the 1966 North Finland 56. Takei N, Lewis S, Jones P, Harvey I & phrenia: a follow-up study.
British Journal general population birth cohort. American Murray RM (1996). Prenatal exposure to of Psychiatry, 168: 368-371.
Journal of Psychiatry, 155: 355-364. influenza and increased cerebrospinal 37. Gottesman II & Bertelsen A (1989).
Con- 47. McNeil T & Cantor-Graae E (1999). Does fluid spaces in schizophrenia.
Schizophre- firming unexpressed genotypes for schizo- preexisting abnormality cause labor-deliv- nia Bulletin, 22: 521-534. phrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, ery complications in fetuses who will de- 57.
Wright P & Murray RM (1993). Schizo- 46: 867-872. velop schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia Bul- phrenia: prenatal influenza and autoimmu- 38. Huttunen MO, Machon RA & Mednick AS letin, 25: 425-435. nity.
Annals of Medicine, 25: 497-502. (1994). Prenatal factors in the pathogen- 48.
Susser E & Lin SP (1992). Schizophrenia 58. Horrobin DF (1998).
The membrane phos- esis of schizophrenia. British Journal of after prenatal exposure to the Dutch hun- pholipid hypothesis as a biochemical ba- Psychiatry, 164 (Suppl 23): 15-19. ger winter of 1944-1945.
Archives of Gen- sis for neurodevelopmental concept of 39. Jones P & Murray R (1991). The genetics eral Psychiatry, 49: 983-988.
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, of schizophrenia is the genetics of neu- 49. Goodman A (1998).
Three independent 30: 193-208. rodevelopment. British Journal of Psychia- lines of evidence suggest retinoids as 59.
Lara DR & Souza DO (2000). Schizophre- try, 158: 615-623. causal to schizophrenia.
Proceedings of nia: a purinergic hypothesis. Medical Hy- 40. Moldin SO & Gottesman II (1997).
At is- the National Academy of Sciences, USA, potheses, 54: 157-166. Braz J Med Biol Res 34(2) 2001
Schizophrenia (DSM-IV-TR #295.1–295.3, 295.90) Schizophrenia is a chronic, more or less debilitating illness simple subtypes, with a large proportion of patients, however, characterized by perturbations in cognition, affect and failing to clearly fit any subtype and being characterized as behavior, all of which have a bizarre aspect. Delusions, also having “undifferentiated” schizophrenia. generally bizarre, and hallucinations, generally auditory in type, also typically occur.
The original name for this illness, Hallucinations are very common in schizophrenia. Patients “dementia praecox,” was coined by Emil Kraepelin, a may hear things, often voices, or they may see things; German psychiatrist in the late nineteenth and early twentieth hallucinations of taste, touch, and smell may also occur. But century, whose description of the illness remains a guiding of all these, the hearing of voices is most characteristic of force for modern investigators.
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is a relatively common disorder, with a The voices may come from anywhere. They come from the lifetime prevalence of about 1%.
Although the overall sex air; God or angels send them. They may come from the ratio is almost equal, males tend to have an earlier onset than television or radio; wiring may emanate the voices. Special females, a finding accounted for by the later age of onset in devices may be planted in the walls or furniture.
Sometimes those females who lack a family history of the disease. they are in clothing; often they are localized to certain parts of the body. They come from the bowels, the liver, from “just ONSET behind the ear.” They may be male or female; the patient may or may not be able to recognize the identity of the speaker.
It is a sibling, or a dead parent. Most often, though, Although most patients fall ill in late teenage or early adult the voices are not recognized as belonging to anyone; they years, the range of age of onset is wide: childhood onset may are from strangers. They may be clear and easily understood; occur, and in some instances symptoms may not appear until sometimes they are deafening and compelling—“everything the sixties.
else is shut out.” At other times they may be soft, “just a mumbling,” indistinct and fading. There may or may not be a prodrome before the actual onset of symptoms. In some cases the “pre-morbid personality” What the voices say is extremely varied: however, certain appears completely normal.
In others, however, peculiarities themes are relatively common. Voices may comment on what may have been apparent for years or even decades before the the patient is doing. Often two voices argue with one another onset.
In cases where the prodrome began in childhood, the about the patient. Often the voice echoes or repeats what the history may reveal introversion and peculiar interests. In patient thought.
Thoughts are “audible”; they are “heard out cases where the prodrome began later, after the patient’s loud”; they are repeated on the television. personality was formed, family members may recall a stretch of time wherein the patient “changed” and was no longer “the same.” Prior interests and habits may have been abandoned At times “command hallucinations,” or voices that tell the and replaced by a certain irritable seclusiveness, or perhaps patient what to do, may be heard. At times these are suspiciousness.
imperious and irresistible; at other times they are soft, “suggestive only.” Sometimes they command innocuous things; the patient may be directed to shave again. At other The onset of symptoms per se may be acute or insidious. times they may command the patient to commit suicide or to Acute onsets tend to span a matter of weeks or months and hurt others.
Usually the commands can be resisted, but not may be characterized by confusion or at times by depressive always. Sometimes they are overwhelmingly compelling— symptoms. Patients may recognize that something is wrong, “they must be obeyed.” and they may make some desperate attempts to bring some order into the fragmenting experience of life.
By contrast, in cases with an insidious onset the patient may not be The patients generally hear only short phrases, perhaps single particularly troubled at all. Over many months or a year or words. Only very rarely do the voices speak at length in a more, evanescent changes may occur: fleeting whispers, coherent way.
Often the patient is tortured by the voices. vague intimations, or strange occurrences. Patients may hear threats of death, accusations of unspeakable sins, or announcements that the gallows are being erected.
CLINICAL FEATURES Rarely patients are encouraged or comforted by the voices. Although the clinical presentation of schizophrenia varies An angel’s voice may proclaim their divinity; seductive widely among patients, certain signs and symptoms, though voices may whisper enticement; their names may be praised. present to different degrees, are consistently present, and Unutterable joys are set aside for them.
Patients who hear these include hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech such voices may have a beatific countenance. and catatonic or bizarre behavior. “Negative” symptoms (e.g., flattening of affect) are often also seen but in some cases are quite mild.
Generally, based on the constellation of Most patients find the voices as real sounding as the voice of symptoms present, one may classify any given case of any other person. They may talk back to them out loud or schizophrenia into one of several subtypes, namely the may even argue with them. At times when the voices are paranoid, catatonic, hebephrenic (“disorganized”) and2 unpleasant, the patient may try to drown them out by efforts with the local police.
Plain-clothes officers follow the listening to music or to the television. patient. At times the surveillance is covert.
Satellites are used. Listening devices have been placed in the walls; the telephone is tapped. The patient is followed by cars; In addition to hearing voices patients may also hear sounds, headlights blink on and off to indicate that capture is such as a creaking or a rattling of chains.
Footsteps or a imminent. The food is poisoned. Electrical currents are tapping on the windows is heard.
Hissing and whistling also passed through the body at night; internal organs are horribly may be heard. Sometimes a ringing of church bells or an manipulated during sleep. Tortures are prepared; escape is explosion is heard.
Hammering means the gallows are being not possible. Sometimes patients may stoically endure their constructed. Very rarely the patient may hear music.
persecution, and at other times they may fight back. To the patient, this unprovoked assault may be a justifiable defense. Visual hallucinations, though common, play a relatively less Other patients attempt to flee their persecutors and may move prominent part in the clinical picture of schizophrenia than do to another state.
For a time they may feel less insecure, but auditory hallucinations. They may be poorly formed, eventually they see signs that they have been found and again indistinct, seen only “out of the corner of the eye.” They the persecution begins. Some patients attempt to protect may, however, be vivid and compellingly realistic.
Strange themselves against noxious influences by armoring people walk the halls; the devil in violent red appears in front themselves or their apartments. One patient who believed that of the patient; heads float through the air. Reptilian forms persecutors sent electrical charges down through the ceiling appear in the bath; things crawl in the food; a myriad of at night papered the entire ceiling with aluminum foil and for insects appear in the bedding.
The electric chair is made a time felt protected. ready; torturers approach; a chorus of sympathetic angels is seen. Grandiose delusions also occur frequently, often in conjugation with delusions of persecution.
Patients are Hallucinations of smell and taste, though not common, may attacked by jealous enemies who seek to bar them from the be particularly compelling to the patient. Poison gas is throne. They are to be exalted; the angel of the Lord has smelled; it seems to be coming from the heating ducts.
The visited them. Millions of dollars are kept secretly away from patient smells putrefied flesh, so the corpses must be buried them. They embark for Washington; the President wishes nearby.
At times inexpressibly beautiful perfumes are their advice. Commonly most patients do not act on their appreciated, a seduction seems close at hand. delusions; rather they seem content to be comforted and sustained by them.
Exceptions do occur, of course. One patient announced a plan for world happiness in a full-page Tastes, often foul and bitter, may appear on the tongue “from newspaper ad; another sent a letter of advice to the Secretary nowhere.” Often, however, something is detected in food or of State. drink.
Patients detect something brackish, a poisonous or medicinal taste. Patients may refuse all food and drink and declare that they have had enough poison already. Delusions of reference are intimately tied to delusions of persecution or of grandeur.
Here patients believe that otherwise chance occurrences or random encounters have Hallucinations of touch, also known as haptic or tactile special meaning for them. What was done refers to them; it hallucinations, are relatively common. Something is crawling pertains to them.
A busboy leaves a particle of food on the on them; a pricking is coming from behind. At night all table; it is an intentional offense to the patient. The street manner of things are felt.
Fluids are poured over the body; a lights blink on; it is a sign for the persecutors to close in for caressing is felt, as are lips on all parts. Electrical sensations the final attack. The television newscaster speaks in code; the may be felt at any time.
Sometimes patients may feel things songs on the radio hold special meaning for the patient. There inside their bodies. Their intestines shrivel up; the ovaries are no more coincidences in life, no accidental happenings.
burst; the brain is pressed upon. To the grandiose patient the events of creation are exalting; to the persecuted patient, walking the streets can provoke a Delusions are almost universal in schizophrenia. The content terrifying self-consciousness.
Everything is pregnant with of the delusions is extremely varied: patients may feel meaning. persecuted; they may have grandiose ideas; all manner of things may refer and pertain to them; thoughts may be Some patients may develop some peculiarly bizarre beliefs broadcast, withdrawn, or inserted into them; they may feel about thinking itself, known as thought broadcasting, thought influenced and controlled by outside forces; bizarre, withdrawal, and thought insertion. In thought broadcasting loathsome events may occur.
These beliefs may grow in the patients experience thoughts as being broadcast from their patient slowly. At first there may be only an inkling, a heads, as if by electricity. “It is like radio broadcasting,” suspicion; only with time does conviction occur.
Conversely, explained one patient. These thoughts may then be picked up sudden enlightenment may occur; all may be immediately by others. Some patients compare it to telepathy; some feel clear.
Sometimes patients may have lingering doubts about they can receive others’ thoughts. “There is mind reading the truth of these beliefs, but for most they are as self-evident going on,” commented one patient. Sometimes the television as any other belief.
Occasionally patients may argue with may broadcast their thoughts back to them. In thought those who disagree, but for the most part they do not press withdrawal the patients’ thoughts are removed, taken from their case on the unbeliever. Most often the delusions are them.
The mind is left blank. “There are no thoughts poorly coordinated with each other; typically they are anymore,” complained one patient. Magnetic devices may be contradictory and poorly elaborated.
Occasionally, however, used; the thoughts are never returned. they may be systematized, and this is especially the case in the paranoid subtype. Patients who experience this symptom of thought withdrawal may concurrently, if they happen to be speaking their Delusions of persecution are particularly common.
There is a thoughts, display the sign known as “thought blocking.” conspiracy against the patient; the FBI has coordinated its Here, patients in the middle of speaking abruptly cease3 talking, and this happens precisely because they abruptly find that meaning is private and inaccessible to the listener. When themselves with no thoughts to express. In thought insertion, one patient was offered a cup of coffee, the reply was, “Yes, a phenomenon opposite to that of thought withdrawal occurs.
doctor, thank you. With bufkuf.” When asked the meaning of Here patients experienced the insertion of thoughts into their “bufkuf,” the patient replied “Oh, you know,” and made no minds. The thoughts are alien, not their own; they were further effort to define or explain it.
placed there by some other agency. The thoughts are transmitted toward them electrically; they can feel a tingling Catatonic symptoms include negativism, certain peculiar as they enter their brain. They cannot rid themselves of them.
disturbances of voluntary activity known as catalepsy, posturing, stereotypies and echolalia or echopraxia. Allied to the foregoing three delusions are what are known as delusions of influence, or control. Patients experience their Negativism is characterized by a mulish, automatic, almost thoughts, emotions, or actions to be directly controlled by instinctual opposition to any course of action suggested, some outside force or agency.
They are made to experience demanded, or merely expected. In some cases this negativism or do these things; they are like robots or automatons, is passive: if food is placed in front of patients, they do not without any independence of will. The influence may eat; if their clothes are set out for them, they do not dress; if a emanate from the television broadcast tower; a spell may be question is asked, they do not answer, and a bizarre scowl cast on them; a massive computer has merged its workings may mar the facial expression.
In more extreme cases the into them. They are not themselves anymore. negativism becomes active, and patients may do the exact opposite of what is expected: if shown to their room, they Other delusions may occur.
In fact any imaginable belief may may enter another; if asked to open their mouths, they may be held, no matter how fantastic. Angels live in the patient’s clamp shut; if asked to walk from a burning room, they may nose; sulphur is cast on the body during sleep; parents have walk back in. Such active negativism seems neither thought risen from their graves; all fluids have evaporated from the out nor done for a purpose; rather it appears instinctual, as if body.
Another delusion is the delusion of doubles, also the patients themselves had no choice but to do the opposite. known as the “Capgras phenomenon,” or the delusion of Remarkably, in some patients one may see the exact opposite impostors. Here the patient believes that someone, or of negativism in the symptom known as “automatic something, has occupied the body of another.
Although the obedience.” Here, patients do whatever they are told to do, body looks the same and the voice is the same, indeed, for all regardless of what it is. In the nineteenth century, one way to intents and purposes, it is the same person, yet the patient test for this symptom was to tell a patient that you wished knows without doubt that it is an impostor. The patient may him to stick the tongue out so that it might be pierced with a see subtle signs of it elsewhere; it is part of the conspiracy.
needle. Patients would protrude their tongues and not flinch The senses cannot be trusted anymore; appearances must be when pierced by the needle. doubted.
Doubles may be used for one’s spouse or children; no one is immune. The patient must be on guard at all times. Catalepsy, or, as it is also known, waxy flexibility, is characterized by a state of continual and most unusual Disorganized speech is the next symptom to consider.
Here, muscular tension. If one attempts to bend the patient’s arm, it we are concerned not so much with the content of the is as if one were bending a length of thick metal wire, like patient’s speech, that is to say with delusions, but rather with soldering wire. Definite resistance, though not great enough the form of speech.
This “formal thought disorder” is most to hinder movement, is nevertheless present. The remarkable often characterized as “loosening of associations”; less aspect here is that, as in bending the wire, the patient retains frequently it is referred to as incoherence or “derailment.” whatever position the limb, or for that matter, the body, is The patient’s speech becomes illogical; ideas are juxtaposed placed in. This happens regardless of whether the patient is that have no conceivable connection.
A family member may instructed to maintain the position or not. In this way the say that the patient “doesn’t make sense.” At its extreme, most uncomfortable, grotesque, and strenuous positions may loosening of associations may present as a veritable “word be maintained for hours. This symptom, rarely seen in salad.” An example of loosening of associations follows.
A modern times, was common before the advent of patient was asked to report the previous day’s activities; the antipsychotic medicines in the middle of the twentieth patient replied, in part, “The sun bestrides the mouse doctor. century. The back wards of state hospitals housed many In the morning, if you wish.
Twenty-five dollars is a lot of catatonic patients who held their bodies in positions money! Large faces and eyes. Terrible smells.
Rat in the throughout each nursing shift, day in and day out. socket. Can there be darkness?
Oh, if you only knew!” Here any inner connection among the various ideas and concepts is Posturing is said to occur when the patient, for no discernible lost; it is as if they came at random. Or to put it another way reason, assumes and maintains a bizarre posture. One may the thoughts are no longer “goal-directed”; they no longer keep the arms cocked; another stood bent at the waist to the cohere in pursuit of a common purpose.
If patients are side. pressed to explain what they mean, they are unable to offer a satisfactory reply. The question may be responded to, but only with another incoherent utterance.
Interestingly, also, Stereotypies are constituted by bizarre, perseverated these patients seem little concerned about their incoherence. behaviors. A patient may march back and forth along the They seem oblivious to it and make little if any effort to same line for hours; another may repeatedly dress and clarify what they say.
undress. Other persons may be approached again and again, each time being asked the same question. The same piece of paper may be folded and unfolded until it disintegrates.
Most Allied to loosening of associations are neologisms. These are patients can offer no reason for their senseless activity. When words that occur in the normal course of the patient’s speech asked, a patient replied, “it must be so.” and that the patient treats as an integral part of it, but that convey no more meaning to the listener than if they were from a long-dead foreign language.
To the patient, however, Echolalia and echopraxia are said to occur when the patient’s they have as much meaning and status as any other word, but behavior mirrors that of the other person, and, importantly,4 when this happens automatically, and in the absence of any Negative symptoms include flattening of affect, alogia (also request. If asked a question the echolalic patient will simply commonly known as poverty of speech and thought), and repeat it, sometimes over and over again. The echopraxic avolition.
patient may clumsily mirror the gestures and posture of the interviewer and, as in echolalia, may continue to do this long Flattening of affect, also known, when less severe, as after the other person has left, as if uncontrollably compelled “blunting” of affect, is characterized by a lifeless and wooden to maintain the same activity. Here it as if the ability to will facial expression accompanied by an absence or diminution something independent of the environment has been lost, and of all feelings. This is quite different from a depressed the patient is thus left enslaved in a mimicry of whatever is appearance.
In depression patients appear drained or close at hand. weighted down; there is a definite sense of something there. In flattening, however, patients seem to have nothing to Bizarre behavior may manifest as mannerisms, bizarre affect express; they are simply devoid of emotion.
They appear or an overall disorganization and deterioration of behavior. unmoved, wooden, and almost at times as if they were machines. Mannerisms are bizarre or odd caricatures of gestures, speech, or behavior.
In manneristic gesturing patients may Poverty of speech is said to occur when patients, though offer their hands to shake with the fingers splayed out, or the perhaps talking a normal amount, seem to “say” very little. fingers may writhe in a peculiar, contorted way. In There is a dearth of meaningful content to what they say and manneristic speech, cadence, modulation, or volume are speech is often composed of stock phrases and repetitions.
erratic and dysmodulated. One patient may speak in a sing- Poverty of thought is characterized by a far-reaching song voice, another in a telegraphic style, and yet another impoverishment of the entire thinking of the patient. The with pompous accenting of random syllables.
Overall patient may complain of having “no thoughts,” that “the head behavior may become manneristic. Rather than walking, is empty,” that there are no “stirrings.” Of its own accord some patients may march in bizarre, stiff-legged fashion. nothing “comes to mind.” If pressed by a question the patient may offer a sparse reply, then fail to say anything else.
Bizarre affect appears to represent a distortion of the normal connection between felt emotion and affective expression. Avolition, referred to by Kraepelin as “annihilation of the Often, facial expression appears theatrical, wooden, or under will,” is said to be present when patients have lost the a peculiar constraint. Patients may report feeling joy, yet the capacity to embark on almost any goal-directed activity.
Bills rapturous facial expression may appear brittle and tenuous. are not paid; the house is not cleaned; infants are neither Conversely patients may report grief, and indeed tears may changed nor fed. This is not because patients feel inhibited, be present, yet the emotion lacks depth, as if patients were lack interest, or suffer from fatigue, but rather because the merely wearing a mask of grief that might disappear at any ability to will an action has become deficient.
moment. Inappropriate affect may also be seen. Here the connection between the patient’s ideas and affect seems Before leaving this discussion of the individual signs and completely severed.
A young patient, grief stricken at a symptoms of schizophrenia and proceeding to a discussion of parent’s funeral, was seen to snicker; another patient, relating subtypes, two other symptoms, neither of which fit neatly the infernal tortures suffered just the night before, smiled into the categories employed above, should be mentioned, beatifically. namely ambivalence and “double bookkeeping.” Another, very important form of bizarre affect is unprovoked Ambivalence may render patients incapable of almost any and mirthless laughter. For no apparent reason patients may volitional activity.
Here, patients experience two opposed break into bizarre and unrestrainable laughter. Though courses of action at the same time, and for lack of ability to appearing neither happy nor amused, the laughter continues. decide between them, do nothing.
One patient stood at the Some patients report that they were unable to not laugh, that washstand for hours unable to decide whether to shave or to the laughter moved itself no matter how they felt. use the toothbrush. This “paralysis of will,” however, may at times be easily removed if another person gives directions.
In The overall deterioration of behavior in schizophrenia is what this case an aide simply told the patient to brush his teeth and often makes these patients “stand out” in public. Patients then put the toothbrush in the patient’s hand. Immediately become untidy and may neglect to bathe or wash their and with peculiar alacrity the patient then set to brushing his clothes; the fingernails may become very long.
Dress and teeth. This kind of ambivalence found in schizophrenia is to grooming may become bizarre. Several layers of clothing are be distinguished from the indecisiveness seen at times in often worn, even during the summer.
Bits of string or cloth depression and the “normal” ambivalence that anyone may may festoon the patient’s hair or garments; makeup may be experience. The depressed patient’s inability to embark on smeared on. Not uncommonly, paranoid patients shave their decision-making stems more from a lack of energy and heads, and this often reliably predicts an oncoming initiative; unlike the patient with schizophrenia, the exacerbation of illness, and also some form of self- depressed patient generally is not able to act when others mutilation.
Patients may pluck out their eyelashes or cut deep make the decision. In normal circumstances competing gouges in their legs. Some seem to be almost completely desires may leave the patient unable to decide.
With time, analgesic: an eye may be plucked out; pieces of flesh may be however, a normal person makes a decision because the bitten off; in extreme cases, self-evisceration may occur, capacity to do so is not lost. In schizophrenia, however, it is “just to see” what the intestines look like. Although most this very capacity that is no longer present.
often no purpose seems to drive this bizarre behavior, at times the patient may offer a reason. One patient wallpapered “Double bookkeeping,” a phenomenon first identified by the walls, ceiling, and floors with aluminum foil “to keep the Bleuler, refers to the patient’s ability to, as it were, live in rays out”; another kept cotton in the ears “to keep the voices two worlds at the same time. On the one hand is the world of away.” voices, visions, and delusions, and on the other hand, and5 quite coincident with this psychotic world, is the world as negativism, mutism, posturing, and waxy flexibility.
One perceived by others. To the patient both worlds seem quite patient curled into a rigid ball and lay on the bed, unspeaking, real. For example, a patient may hear a voice as clearly as the for days, moving neither for defecation nor urination, and voice of the physician and believe it just as real, yet at the catheterization was eventually required.
Saliva drooled from same time acknowledge that the physician does not hear it. the mouth, and as there was no chewing, food simply lay in Or the grandiose patient who fully believed that a coronation the oral cavity and there was danger of aspiration. Another was imminent may yet continue to work at a janitor’s job and patient stood praying in a corner, mumbling very softly.
A go on doing so, living in two worlds, and feeling little if any degree of waxy flexibility was present, and the patient’s arm conflict between them. A variant of double bookkeeping, would, for a time, remain in any position it was placed, only known as “double orientation,” or “delusional eventually to slowly return to the position of prayer. disorientation,” may at times mislead the interviewer into thinking that the patient is disoriented.
For example, a In the excited form of catatonia one may see purposeless, grandiose patient believed that he was John F. Kennedy, and senseless, frenzied activity, multiple stereotypies, and at when asked what year it was replied 1962. Later on, times extreme impulsivity.
Patients may scream, howl, beat however, when filling out a form, he put down the correct their sides repeatedly, jump up, hop about, or skitter back and year. forth. A patient leaped up and attacked a bystander for no reason, then immediately returned to a corner and restlessly Subtypes of schizophrenia are characterized by particular marched in place, squeaking loudly.
Often speech is constellations of symptoms and include the following: extremely stereotyped and bizarre. Patients may shout, paranoid, catatonic, hebephrenic (or “disorganized”), and declaim, preach, and pontificate in an incoherent fashion. simple (which has also been referred to as “simple Words and phrases may be repeated hundreds of times.
deteriorative disorder”). Patients whose illness does not fall Typically, despite their extreme activity, these patients into any of these subtypes are said to have an remain for the most part withdrawn. They often make little or “undifferentiated” subtype.
Subtype diagnosing is not an no effort to interact with others; they keep their excitation to academic exercise, for, as discussed under Course, the themselves, perhaps in a corner, perhaps under a bed. Rarely different subtypes may have different prognoses. Stauder’s lethal catatonia may occur.
Here, as the excitation Furthermore, knowing the subtype allows one to predict with mounts over days or weeks, autonomic changes occur with better confidence how any given patient might react in any hyperpyrexia, followed by coma and cardiovascular collapse. specific situation. Although some patients with catatonic schizophrenia may Paranoid schizophrenia, which tends to have a later onset display only one of these two forms, in most cases they are than the other subtypes, is characterized primarily by seen to alternate in the same patient.
In some cases a form hallucinations and delusions. Other symptoms, such as may last days, weeks, or longer, before passing through to the loosening of associations, bizarre behavior, or flattened or other. In other cases, however, a rapid and unpredictable inappropriate affect, are either absent or relatively minor.
The oscillation from one form to another may occur. A stuporous hallucinations are generally auditory and typically hostile or patient suddenly, without warning, jumped from his bed, threatening. The delusions are generally persecutory and screamed incoherently, and paced agitatedly from one wall of referential.
Voices warn patients that their supervisors plot the room to another. Then, in less than an hour, the patient against them. They begin to suspect that their co-workers talk again rapidly fell into mute immobility.
about them behind their backs and laugh quietly as they pass by. Newspaper headlines pertain to them; the CIA is Hebephrenic schizophrenia tends to have an earlier onset involved; meal portions at the factory cafeteria are secretly than the other subtypes and tends to develop very insidiously. poisoned, and patients may refuse to eat at work.
At times Although delusions and hallucinations are present, they are these patients may appeal to the police for help, or they may relatively minor, and the clinical picture is dominated by suffer their slights in rigid silence. Their attitude becomes bizarre behavior, loosened associations, and bizarre and one of intense, constrained anger and suspiciousness. inappropriate affect.
Overall the behavior of these patients Occasionally they may move away to escape their seems at times a caricature of childish silliness. Senselessly persecutors, yet eventually they are “followed.” At times they they may busy themselves first with this, then with that, may turn on their supposed attackers, and violent outbursts generally to no purpose, and often with silly, shallow may be seen. laughter.
At other times they may be withdrawn and inaccessible. Delusions, when they occur, are unsystematized In paranoid schizophrenia, more so than in the other and often hypochondriacal in nature. Some may display very subtypes, the delusions may be somewhat systematized, even marked loosening of associations to the point of a fatuous, plausible.
In most cases, however, inconsistencies appear, almost driveling incoherence. which, however, have no impact on the patients. Often, along with persecutory delusions, one may also see some grandiose Simple schizophrenia has perhaps the earliest age of onset, delusions.
Patients believe themselves persecuted not for a often first beginning in childhood, and shows very gradual trivial reason; others now know that the patient recently and insidious progression over many years. Delusions, acquired a controlling interest in the company. Rarely, hallucinations, and loosening of associations are sparse, and grandiose delusions may be more prominent than persecutory indeed are for the most part absent.
Rather the clinical picture ones and may dominate the entire clinical picture. A patient is dominated by the annihilation of the will, impoverishment may believe herself anointed with holy oil; trumpets blared of thought, and flattening of affect. Gradually over the years forth her appearance as a prophet.
She has a message that these patients fall away from their former goals and often will save the world, and sets about spreading it. become cold and distant with their former acquaintances. They may appear shiftless, and some are accused of laziness.
Catatonic schizophrenia manifests in one of two forms: Few thoughts disturb their days, and they may seem quite stuporous catatonia or excited catatonia. In the stuporous content to lie in bed or sit in a darkened room all day. form one sees varying combinations of immobility, Occasionally some bizarre behavior or a fragmentary6 delusion may be observed.
For the most part, however, these The waxing and waning course is marked by exacerbations patients do little to attract any attention; some continue to and partial remissions. The pattern of these changes is often live with aged parents; others pass from one homeless quite irregular, as are the durations of the exacerbations and mission to another. partial remissions, ranging from weeks, to months, or even years.
Some patients, during episodes of partial remission of the “positive” symptoms, may develop a sustained and Undifferentiated schizophrenia is said to be present when the pervasive depressed mood accompanied by typical vegetative clinical picture of any individual case does not fit well into symptoms. This condition, often referred to as a one of the foregoing subtypes. This is not uncommonly the “postpsychotic depression,” increases the risk of suicide.
case, and it also appears that in some instances the clinical Importantly, such a postpsychotic depression should not be picture, which initially did “fit” a subtype description, may confused with the frequent, transient, and isolated depressive gradually change such that it no longer squares with one of symptoms seen during an exacerbation of the other the specific subtypes: this appears to be more common with symptoms of the illness. the catatonic and hebephrenic subtypes than with paranoid or simple schizophrenia. At times, exacerbations may be precipitated by life stresses; however, at other times they simply happen.
Among the Before leaving this discussion of subtypes, it is appropriate to stresses that can precipitate exacerbations, living in a family briefly discuss another proposal for subdividing with high “expressed emotion” is important. Such family schizophrenia, which is said by some to have more predictive members tend to be intrusive, critical, and over-involved, and and heuristic value than the classical subtyping just patients exposed to such an onslaught, even when provided discussed. Two subdivisions are proposed: “good prognosis,” with optimum medical treatment, are likely to relapse.
Some “reactive,” or “type I” schizophrenia, and “poor prognosis,” patients experience this fluctuating course for their entire “process,” or “type II” schizophrenia. The contrasting lives; in many others, however, after 5 to 20 years, this characteristics of these two subdivisions are outlined in Table pattern gives way to one of stable chronicity. 67–1 .
“Positive” symptoms are hallucinations, delusions and disorganization of speech, whereas “negative” symptoms consist of flattening of affect, poverty of thought and The stable chronicity seen in some patients may appear in avolition. some cases after the initial onslaught of symptoms seen at the onset of the disease has dampened, and in others, as for example those with simple schizophrenia, it may be apparent Although this “good prognosis”/“poor prognosis” scheme is from the onset itself. Over long periods of time, patients with useful, many patients do not fit neatly into type I or type II this course may show very slow progression until the disease but rather evidence a mixture of features of both types.
eventually “burns out” leaving them in a deteriorated state. Indeed, whether this typology represents an advance over the old “classical” subtypes is not yet clear. One might, for example, argue that the type I patient The classical subtype diagnosis may allow for some prediction as to course.
Those with paranoid or catatonic schizophrenia tend to pursue a fluctuating course, and of the two the eventual outcome appears to be worse for the TABLE 67-1 -- Type I and Type II Schizophrenia catatonic subtype. The hebephrenic and simple subtypes tend to pursue either a stable or progressively deteriorating chronicity, and of the two the simple subtype seems to often Type I Type II undergo the greatest deterioration. Premorbid personality Normal Poor adjustment As noted earlier one may also make predictions as to course Age of onset Late, often Early by subdividing cases into Type I and Type II, with the Type I adult years cases showing a waxing and waning course and the Type II cases undergoing a more or less chronic deterioration.
Mode of onset Acute Gradual and insidious Before leaving this discussion of the course of the disease, it Symptoms associated Confusion and Few is appropriate to consider whether or not schizophrenia, in with onset depression the natural course of events, and in the absence of antipsychotic treatment, ever undergoes a full and complete Kind of symptoms Positive Negative remission. Certainly, far-reaching remissions have been Ventriculomegaly on CT Absent Present documented; indeed, in many cases patients may appear at scan first glance to be recovered, and if one’s definition of “recovery” or “remission” is broad enough, as is the case in Course More favorable Unfavorable many published studies, one might say that a remission did occur. However, on closer inspection one may generally find lingering residual symptoms in these “recovered” patients, has paranoid schizophrenia and the type II patient has simple such as fleeting hallucinations, odd thoughts, mannerisms or schizophrenia.
Further research is needed. a certain poverty of thought. Thus, although “social” recoveries in the absence of treatment, although rare, do COURSE occur, it is very unlikely that, in the natural course of the disease, there is ever a restitutio ad integrum.
Schizophrenia is a chronic disease, and, in most cases, exhibits one of two overall patterns. In one, the course of symptoms is waxing and waning, whereas in the other there is a more or less stable chronicity.7 COMPLICATIONS Of the multiple environmental factors investigated, there is reasonably good evidence for two. First, it appears clear that patients with schizophrenia are more likely to have had a Academic and business failure are common; most patients difficult birth or to have suffered obstetrical trauma, and such are incapable of sustaining intimate relationships.
About half events are capable of disrupting neuronal migration, which attempt suicide, and about 10% succeed. Most suicides occur continues long after birth. Second, it also appears that there is early in the course of the illness; depressive symptoms, as are an excess of winter births in patients with schizophrenia.
seen in postpsychotic depression, male sex and Clearly, many factors could account for this, but one that has unemployment increase the risk. stood out has been the possibility of a seasonal viral infection that could have affected patients in utero. Fetal viral A not uncommon, but often overlooked, complication is infections can clearly distort neuronal migration, and it has hyponatremia.
Some patients become “compulsive water been speculated that what is inherited in schizophrenia is a drinkers”; however, the hyponatremia appears not to be vulnerability of neurons to viruses which, in normal caused solely by excessive intake of water. The renal tubule circumstances, are not neurotropic. cells appear to be hypersensitive to ADH, leading to a urine osmolality that is less than maximally dilute relative to the This “neurodevelopmental” theory of the etiology of degree of hyponatremia.
Symptoms are as described in the schizophrenia, though reasonable in light of the evidence, is chapter on hyponatremia. not without controversy, and the reader is encouraged to watch the literature closely. ETIOLOGY DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS CT and MRI scans have conclusively demonstrated ventricular dilitation and cortical atrophy in schizophrenia; Given the broad range of symptoms that may occur in furthermore there is a good correlation between the degree of schizophrenia, it is not surprising that the differential atrophy of the posterior portion of the left superior temporal diagnosis is quite large.
gyrus and the severity of auditory hallucinations and speech disorganization. Some studies have also demonstrated atrophy of the thalamus; however, these findings are not as A manic episode of a bipolar disorder may “cross- robust. Enlargement of the basal ganglia, demonstrated in sectionally” appear similar to hebephrenia, excited catatonia, earlier studies, now appears to be an artifact of antipsychotic or paranoid schizophrenia.
If, however, one has an accurate treatment. Interestingly, the ventricular dilitation and cortical history, the diagnosis is relatively straightforward. In atrophy are present at the onset of the disease, and some schizophrenia, which is a chronic illness, psychotic studies have also suggested that they may progressively symptoms almost always precede the excitation; in mania, worsen over time.
which occurs as an episodic illness, however, affective symptoms appear first, and psychotic ones only appear as the patient progresses into the acute stage of mania and on up to Neuropathologic findings in schizophrenia have been the height of a manic episode, delirious mania. When a notoriously difficult to replicate; however, certain findings history is lacking, certain symptomatic differences may allow appear to be standing the test of replication. First, it appears for a differential diagnosis.
The mood and affect of a patient that there is neuronal loss in the mediodorsal nucleus of the with mania are typically “infectious” and well developed. By thalamus. Second, there is, in the subcortical white matter in contrast, the mood of an excited hebephrenic is one of silly, the frontal and temporal lobes, an increased number of shallow hilarity, which, rather than provoking laughter, might residual neurons, neurons which, in the normal course of leave the interviewer with a sense of puzzlement.
development, either undergo apoptotic death or migrate on Furthermore the activity of a manic patient is outgoing and through the white matter to settle in the overlying cortex. extroverted; this is in striking contrast to an excited catatonic who, though hyperactive, remains withdrawn and may Inheritance plays a very large part in schizophrenia. The actually avoid contact with others.
Finally, the irritable manic lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia, as noted earlier, is is “on the attack,” whereas the agitated patient with paranoid about 1%; in first-degree relatives of patients, however, it is schizophrenia is “on guard.” Both are dangerous, the manic about 5%. Furthermore, whereas among dizygotic twins the recklessly so, the schizophrenic only if approached in what concordance rate is from 10 to 15%, the concordance in appears to the patient to be a hostile manner. monozygotic twins is roughly 50%.
These findings, of course, could also be explained on the basis of environmental During depressive episodes, occurring either as part of a influence; however, adoption studies have clearly major depression or bipolar disorder, one may see delusions demonstrated that the influence here is genetic. Despite this and hallucinations. Here, however, the psychotic symptoms evidence for inheritance; however, it has been extraordinarily are preceded by the depressive ones and only occur when the difficult to conclusively identify any specific genes or depressive symptoms are severe.
By contrast, whereas establish linkage for schizophrenia. This being said, however, depressive symptoms may occur in schizophrenia, no there is some evidence for linkage to loci on chromosomes 6, invariable relationship exists between them and the psychotic 8 and 22. symptoms.
In schizophrenia one sees psychotic symptoms both when the patient is depressed and also when free of Taking these findings together, it is not unreasonable to depressive symptoms. Should this history regarding the consider that schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental disorder course of the depression be unavailable, certain “cross- characterized by defective neuronal migration, leading to sectional” features may assist in the differential diagnosis. thalamic and cortical atrophy, and that this defect is, at least Delusions, when they appear in a depressive episode, tend to in part, determined genetically.
Environmental factors, be “mood congruent”; that is, they make sense given the way however, are clearly at work, given that the monozygotic the patient is feeling. Conversely, in schizophrenia the concordance rate is only 50%.8 delusions tend to be bizarre and generally unrelated to the dysmodulated or inappropriate; associations may be mood. somewhat loosened; a mannerism may be seen.
The differential diagnosis between a catatonic stupor and a Schizotypal personality disorder is distinguished from most psychomotorically retarded depression may be facilitated if of the subtypes of schizophrenia by the absence of psychotic the patient is closely observed for movement over an symptoms. Differentiation from simple schizophrenia may extended period of time. In stupor one may occasionally see not be possible on the basis of “cross-sectional” data.
The rapid movements as the negativism briefly remits; by course of the illness, however, enables a differential contrast, in a psychomotorically retarded depression all diagnosis: the patient with schizotypal personality disorder movements are always slowed down. presents a stable clinical picture over time, whereas the patient with simple schizophrenia presents a clinical picture marked by progressive deterioration. The differential diagnosis between schizoaffective disorder and schizophrenia rests on a thorough and accurate history of the course of the illness.
Both illnesses are characterized by Patients with borderline personality disorder when under chronic psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations and great stress may occasionally experience hallucinations and delusions; however, in schizoaffective disorder one also sees delusions. By contrast, in schizophrenia these symptoms, the occurrence of full and sustained affective episodes though exacerbated by stress, are present also in calm times. (depressive, manic or mixed manic) during which, importantly, one also sees an exacerbation of the pre-existing Obsessions and compulsions may occasionally be seen in the psychotic symptoms.
Although schizophrenia may also be prodrome to schizophrenia; the eventual appearance of marked by mood disturbances, these tend to be transient and unrelated psychotic symptoms, however, clarifies their not severe. One exception to this is the post-psychotic differential import. depression, described earlier under “Course,” which is sustained and may be quite severe.
Here, however, there is not an exacerbation of psychotic symptoms and it is this Autism may at times be difficult to distinguish from which distinguishes the depression of post-psychotic schizophrenia of childhood onset. Certainly, if symptoms depression in schizophrenia from the depression seen in appear before the age of 3 years, autism is the more likely schizoaffective disorder. diagnosis, as the earliest noted age of onset of schizophrenia is 5 years of age.
The presence of hallucinations and delusions indicates schizophrenia; their absence, however, As alcoholism and schizophrenia not uncommonly occur in does not rule against schizophrenia, as young children may the same patient, the differential diagnosis between alcohol not be able to report such symptoms. Conversely the hallucinosis or alcoholic paranoia and schizophrenia may be presence of typical autistic symptoms, such as gaze difficult. Certainly, if the psychotic symptoms began before avoidance or a “flapping” tremor, argues strongly for a the patient started to drink or relatively early on in the diagnosis of autism.
drinking career, then the diagnosis of schizophrenia would be favored. When, however, psychotic symptoms begin after many years of alcoholism and repeated episodes of delirium Mental retardation and schizophrenia are two not uncommon tremens, the differential between paranoid schizophrenia and illnesses, and their coincidence in the same patient is not rare. alcohol hallucinosis or alcoholic paranoia may be difficult.
Such “engrafted” schizophrenia may be heralded by a The presence of mannerisms, stereotypies, or loosened deterioration in a previously stable condition or by the associations favor schizophrenia; a remission of symptoms appearance of delusions, hallucinations, or loosening of after 6 months or more of abstinence would favor alcohol associations, features that are not seen in straightforward hallucinosis or alcoholic paranoia. mental retardation. However, in patients with severe or profound mental retardation, such symptoms may not be ascertainable at all.
In such instances close examination Delusional disorder, or paranoia, is distinguished from should be made for signs such as bizarre or flattened affect, paranoid schizophrenia by the systematization and echopraxia, and waxy flexibility. “plausibility” of the delusions in paranoia and by the absence of symptoms typical of schizophrenia, such as loosening of associations, mannerisms, and stereotypies. Hallucinations, Intoxication with phencyclidine, stimulants, or cocaine may though they may appear in paranoia, play only a minor role produce psychotic symptoms; the prior history of substance in contrast with paranoid schizophrenia, where they are often use, a compatible urine or serum toxicology, and the abundant.
remission of symptoms with enforced abstinence make the diagnosis. Paranoid personality disorder may be very difficult to distinguish from paranoid schizophrenia. Certainly the Folie à deux, as described in that chapter, is distinguished by presence of delusions or hallucinations would favor a the presence of a “dominant” partner who does have diagnosis of schizophrenia; however, in both disorders schizophrenia, and by recovery with forced separation of the patients may be very guarded and secretive, and the patient from this dominant partner.
Malingering or factitious interviewer may not be able to reliably determine if psychotic illness may at times cause diagnostic difficulty. Certainly the symptoms are present. In such instances the overall demeanor presence of mannerisms and similar symptoms would argue and behavior of the patient may help.
The patient with for schizophrenia because these symptoms are generally not paranoid personality disorder presents a fully integrated and known to the public at large and in any case are very difficult internally consistent behavioral repertoire; indeed one may to fake. get the sense of a seamless fabric of anger and resentment. By contrast, the patient with paranoid schizophrenia often Psychosis may also occur secondary to a large number of displays some fragmentation: affect may be somewhat neurologic disorders, as discussed in the chapter on Secondary Psychosis.
Of these, the most likely to be9 confused with schizophrenia are the chronic interictal for their therapeutic superiority over the first generation psychosis, Huntington’s disease, Wilson’s disease and agents. The choice between olanzapine and risperidone is not metachromatic leukodystrophy. easy, as it is not as yet clear whether one is therapeutically superior to the other.
In terms of side effects, olanzapine carries the risks of weight gain, diabetes and hyperlipidemia, Before leaving this section on differential diagnosis, a word whereas risperidone is more likely than olanzapine to cause is in order regarding the putative entities known as “brief extrapyramidal side effects such as akathisia or psychotic disorder” and “schizophreniform disorder,” each of parkinsonism. Olanzapine may be used in doses ranging from which are discussed in more detail in their own chapters. 10 to 30 mg daily, and in the case of risperidone a dose of 4 Both these illnesses are characterized by symptoms mg daily appears optimal.
essentially identical to those which may be seen in schizophrenia: where they differ is in their supposed course. Patients who experience a full and complete remission of In some cases, it may be appropriate to use a first generation their psychosis in less than one month are said to have brief agent. Cost is an issue for many patients: the oral psychotic disorder and those whose psychosis persists past preparations of the first generation agents, unlike the second one month but fully remits before six months are said to have generation ones, are all available in generic form, and the schizophreniform disorder.
There is debate as to whether cost differences can be very large. Another issue is a history either disorder actually exists. Certainly there are patients of a good response: for patients who have done perfectly well with psychosis who remit fully with antipsychotic treatment, on a first generation agent, there may be little reason to but whether there are patients who remit fully and change.
Finally, there is the availability of two of the first completely, without a lingering trace of psychosis, without generation agents, haloperidol and fluphenazine, in long- treatment, has not been demonstrated conclusively. Although acting injectable decanoate preparations: noncompliance with by convention a diagnosis of schizophrenia is withheld until oral medications is very common in schizophrenia, and in the patient has been ill for at least six months, one should some cases the use of a long-acting injectable is the only way always be prepared to revise the diagnosis of brief psychotic to maintain the patient in the community. Although a long- disorder and schizophreniform disorder as the months go by acting injectable form of risperidone has been developed, it and the patient, as is almost always the case, remains ill.
has not, as of this writing, been released in the United States; if it is released, then this reason for using a first generation agent may well disappear. Choosing among the first TREATMENT generation agents is simplified, as discussed in that chapter, by dividing them into “low potency” drugs, such as The treatment of schizophrenia almost always involves the chlorpromazine, and “high potency” drugs, such as use of an antipsychotic drug. Patients may also be seen in haloperidol or fluphenazine.
Low potency agents tend to supportive psychotherapy, either on an individual basis or in cause sedation, hypotension and anticholinergic effects (e.g., a group, and in social skills training groups. A “token dry mouth, blurry vision, constipation, urinary hesitancy), but economy” approach may be required for severely debilitated have a lower tendency to cause extrapyramidal side effects patients. Families may also be seen, not only for educational (e.g., parkinsonism, dystonia, akathisia); high potency drugs, purposes, but also to enable them to lessen the kinds of by contrast, exhibit a high potential for extrapyramidal side family interactions that tend to be followed by relapse.
effects, but are relatively benign otherwise. Sometimes the Assistance may be required to enable the patient to secure choice between low and high potency drugs may be made on housing and employment. the basis of side effects: for example, a patient with postural dizziness probably should not be given a low potency agent that might exacerbate postural hypotension; on the other hand The antipsychotics may be broadly divided into two groups, a patient in traction might not tolerate a dystonia very well at namely “first generation,” or “typical” drugs, and “second all and might be better served by a low potency agent.
In generation,” or “atypical” drugs. All of these agents are cases where side effects are not a compelling issue, then covered in detail in their respective chapters in the Section on using either haloperidol or fluphenazine is probably best, as Psychopharmacology, and discussion here will be limited to this would facilitate transition to a decanoate form should only a few. Commonly used first generation antipsychotics that become necessary.
include haloperidol, fluphenazine and chlorproamzine. There is an ever growing number of second generation drugs, which now includes clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, Once an antipsychotic has been chosen, it should be given at ziprasidone and aripiprazole. Clozapine, olanzapine and an adequate trial, not only in terms of duration but also dose.
risperidone are probably all therapeutically superior to the In general, presuming the dose is adequate, two weeks is long first generation agents (especially with regard to negative enough to see an initial response. Adequate doses for symptoms), and, in the cases of olanzapine and risperidone, risperidone and olanzapine were discussed earlier; doses for are generally better tolerated. Although quetiapine, the other atypicals are discussed in the respective chapters.
ziprasidone and aripiprazole are also in general better Adequate oral doses for haloperidol and fluphenazine are 5 to tolerated than the first generation agents, it is not as yet clear 15 mg/d, and for chlorpromazine 100–300 mg. Obviously, that they are therapeutically superior. lower doses are indicated for the elderly and frail and for patients with significant hepatic dysfunction or for those with significant general medical illnesses.
In some cases, in All other things being equal, it is probably best to begin particular with agitated or assaultive patients, one may have treatment with a second generation agent, such as olanzapine to use adjunctive treatments at the start, and continue them or risperidone; clozapine, although therapeutically superior to until the antipsychotic has had a chance to take effect. either of these, has such severe side-effects that it is generally Divalproex, given in a loading dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg/d for held in reserve for treatment-resistant patients, as discussed otherwise healthy patients, is effective, as is use of as needed below. The other second generation agents (quetiapine, doses of a benzodiazepine, such as lorazepam at 2 mg orally ziprasidone and aripiprazole) cannot be as strongly roughly every four hours.
In some cases one may also simply recommended: although they are in general better-tolerated use much higher doses of the antipsychotic; however, this than the first generation drugs, there is not yet good evidence always incurs the risk of worse side effects. Although10 experience with high dose risperidone and olanzapine is antipsychotic-induced bradykinesia (or akinesia), as may be limited, haloperidol has been given in doses of 60 mg daily seen especially when high potency first generation agents are and chlorpromazine in doses of up to 3000 mg daily. These used.
Bradykinesia, as discussed in the chapter on first issues are more thoroughly discussed in the chapter on Rapid generation neuroletics, when occurring in isolation, may Pharmacologic Treatment of Agitation. appear similar to a psychomotorically-retarded depression. ECT may also be helpful in post-psychotic depression.
Interestingly, ECT is also at times effective in catatonic If the patient gets an initial good response, then the agent schizophrenia, whether excited or stuporous, regardless of may be continued as maintenance treatment, as discussed whether depressive symptoms are present. below. If the response is only partial, but otherwise promising, one may continue treatment for an additional four weeks.
At that point, if the response is good one may move to Before leaving the subject of antipsychotic treatment, a word maintenance treatment. If the response is less than adequate, is in order regarding akathisia. This extrapyramidal side- then one should first review the case, and make sure the effect, also discussed in more detail in the chapter on first diagnosis is correct.
Assuming the diagnosis is correct, then generation antipsychotics, may “masquerade” as an one should consider significantly increasing the dose, and exacerbation of psychosis, and if this diagnosis is missed observing the patient for another couple of weeks. If the then the clinician, mistakenly believing that the exacerbation response is still inadequate or if side effects are unacceptable, of psychotic symptoms is resulting from an exacerbation of then one may consider switching to another agent. Certainly, the underlying illness, might go ahead and increase the dose if the patient had not been given a trial of risperidone or of the antipsychotic, thus increasing the akathisia and olanzapine, one of these should be considered, and if one of initiating a downwardly spirally therapeutic misadventure.
these two had been used and found wanting, then the other should be given a trial. A good response is followed by After antipsychotics have brought more florid symptoms maintenance treatment; an inadequate response should under control, patients may profit from cognitive-behavioral prompt consideration of clozapine. therapy and, if still in contact with family, family therapy.
Insight or psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy is Clozapine is superior to every other antipsychotic, and may contraindicated. Not only does it not help, but also indeed succeed where all the others have failed. Enthusiasm for its some patients may worsen while being thus treated.
use, however, is tempered by its many side effects, most notably the risk of agranulocytosis and the necessity for When families are involved, psychoeducationally oriented routine CBCs. Details regarding clozapine are covered in the multiple-family groups are very helpful. Parents should be respective chapter.
clearly told that they did not “cause” the illness and that no connection exists between child-rearing or early childhood Maintenance treatment is appropriate for almost all patients. events and the appearance of schizophrenia. When family Initially, patients should be maintained on a dose similar, if members are critical, intrusive, and over-involved, behavioral not identical, to that which initially provided relief.
Once family therapy aimed at reducing these behaviors is very patients are stable in the community, cautious dose helpful and reduces the number of hospital stays required. adjustments may be considered once every three or four months. As noted earlier, in many cases the course of Hospitalization is required for most patients at some point in schizophrenia is characterized by a waxing and waning of their illness, and in some cases, repeated admissions occur.
symptoms, and in these cases, it is appropriate to attempt to Involuntary admission may be required and may be “titrate” the dose to the underlying severity of the disease. lifesaving. Partial hospitalization services are available in Furthermore, some patients may become so distressed at side many areas and have enabled many former “back ward” effects that they find a mild increase in the symptoms of the patients to survive and maintain themselves in the disease a reasonable price to pay for a reduction in the community.
intensity of side effects. Should patients become almost symptom free, some psychiatrists may elect to decrease the dose in a step-wise fashion every 3 months until either symptoms reappear or drug discontinuation is achieved, with the patient being left with only mild, residual symptoms. BIBLIOGRAPHY Unfortunately, however, even when patients and family members are instructed regarding the “early warning signs” Andreasen NC.
Negative symptoms in schizophrenia: of relapse, troublesome symptom recurrence is common; definition and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry therefore, chronic maintenance treatment, albeit with low 1982;39:784–788. doses, may be better than intermittently attempting trials at drug discontinuation.
In general, over long term follow-up it Barta PE, Pearlson GD, Powers RE, et al. Auditory is appropriate to keep the dose overall as low as possible to hallucinations and smaller superior temporal gyral volume in reduce the risk of tardive dyskinesia. This side effect, schizophrenia.
The American Journal of Psychiatry discussed in its own chapter, occurs in a significant minority 1990;147:1457–1462. of patients who take antipsychotics over the long haul, and hence the physician must always be alert to the emergence of Black DW, Boffeli TJ. Simple schizophrenia: past, present any abnormal involuntary movements.
and future. The American Journal of Psychiatry 1989;146:1267–1273. Should a post-psychotic depression occur, it is appropriate to Byne W, Buchsbaum MS, Mattiace LA, et al.
Postmortem give an antidepressant, such as an SSRI, and to treat the assessment of thalamic nuclear volume in subjects with patient in the same fashion as one would acutely treat a schizophrenia. The American Journal of Psychiatry depressive episode that occurred in a major depression, as 2002;159:59–65. described in the chapter.
One must always be careful, however, to distinguish between a depression and a11 Cahn W, Pol HE, Lems EB, et al. Brain volume changes in first-episode schizophrenia: a 1-year follow-up study. Archives of General Psychiatry 2002;59:1002–1010.
Csernansky JG, Mahmoud R, Brenner R, et al. A comparison of risperidone and haloperidol for the prevention of relapse in patients with schizophrenia. The New England Journal of Medicine 2002;346:16–22.
Fenton WS, McGlashan TH. Natural history of schizophrenia subtypes. I.
Longitudinal study of paranoid, hebephrenic, and undifferentiated schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 1991;48:969–977. Kane JM, Davis JM, Schooler N, et al.
A multidose study of haloperidol decanoate in the maintenance treatment of schizophrenia. The American Journal of Psychiatry 2002;159:554–560. Kasai K, Shenton ME, Salisbury DF, et al.
Progressive decrease of left superior temporal gyrus gray matter volume in patients with first-episode schizophrenia. The American Journal of Psychiatry 2003;160:156–164. Kelleher JP, Centorrino F, Albert MJ, et al.
Advances in atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia: new formulations and new agents. CNS Drugs 2002;16:249– 261. Marder SR.
Integrating pharmacological and psychosocial treatments for schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 2000;102(Suppl):87–90. Pilling S, Bebbington P, Kuipers E, et al.
Psychological treatments in schizophrenia: I. Meta-analysis of family intervention and cognitive behavior therapy. Psychological Medicine 2002;32:763–782.
Pilling S, Bebbington P, Kuipers E, et al. Psychological treatments in schizophrenia: II. Meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of social skills training and cognitive remediation.
Psychological Medicine 2002;32:783–791. Rioux L, Nissanov J, Lauber K, et al. Distribution of microtubule-associated protein MAP2-immunoreactive interstitial neurons in the parahippocampal white matter in subjects with schizophrenia.
The American Journal of Psychiatry 2003;160:149–155. Sawa A, Snyder SH. Schizophrenia: diverse approaches to a complex disease.
Science 2002;296:692–695. Shenton ME, Kikinis R, Jolesz FA, et al. Abnormalities of the left temporal lobe and thought disorder in schizophrenia: a quantitative magnetic resonance imaging study.
The New England Journal of Medicine 1992; 327:604–612. Thakar GK, Carpenter WT. Advances in schizophrenia.
Nature Medicine 2001;7:667–671. Volavka J, Czobor P, Sheitman B, et al. Clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, and haloperidol in the treatment of patients with chronic schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder.
The American Journal of Psychiatry 2002;159:255– 262.
Psychiatry Information about SCHIZOPHRENIA in children and adolescentsWHAT IS SCHIZOPHRENIA in children and adolescents? Schizophrenia is an illness that affects and distorts Around 20 per cent of children and adolescents thoughts, feelings and actions. Many people are of with a diagnosis of schizophrenia are cured.
The the belief that those with schizophrenia are split remaining 80 per cent can have long periods between two personalities, but this is not correct. without symptoms, but also periods where the Rather, it is a psychosis, i.e. a distorted perception symptoms deteriorate or become so serious that of reality, often characterised by delusions and they require hospitalisation in a Mental Health hallucinations.
For example, children and Centre for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. adolescents with schizophrenia may see things and hear noises that do not exist. However, the visions and sounds are no less totally real to the person HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE SCHIZOPHRENIA?
who is ill. · It is extremely rare for children and adolescents to develop schizophrenia; the Children and adolescents with schizophrenia often risk of getting the condition is less than one find that the world has fundamentally changed. per cent.
They have experiences that they cannot share with · Boys develop schizophrenia more often than other people. It can change the perception that girls. children or adolescents have of themselves and · In Denmark, around 25,000 people (children, their surroundings, and it can cause their behaviour adolescents and adults) are living with to change.
As a consequence, the early schizophrenia. development of language, motor skills and social · The lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia function may be delayed. is 0.7 per cent in Denmark.
Children and adolescents with schizophrenia can feel fundamentally changed and have a sense of not being present, or not being alive, as much as other people. This affects all areas of the child or adolescent's life and means it is difficult for the child or adolescent to maintain contact with friends and family, or cope with schooling and leisure time interests. It makes living with schizophrenia very demanding at times.
3SYMPTOMS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA Schizophrenia can be diagnosed with certainty in children from around the age of seven years. Only THOUGHT ALIENATION EXPERIENCES at this age are children aware enough of their · Thought withdrawal (the feeling that a emotional state to be able to describe their person's thoughts are being taken out of their symptoms. head or otherwise removed) · Thought insertion (the experience of having Schizophrenia often develops more slowly and thoughts that are not one's own and which are insidiously in children and adolescents than it does being imposed from outside by an alien force) in adults.
Often, a number of years can pass from · Thought broadcasting (the experience that the first symptoms occur until a doctor is able to one's thoughts are not private, but are directly make a definite diagnosis. available to others) · Audible thoughts (the experience of hearing Symptoms of schizophrenia can occur both singly, one's thoughts spoken aloud inside one's and in many different combinations. What all head) symptoms have in common, however, is that in all cases they need to have been present for at least AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS one month.
· Commenting voices (voices discussing and The most common presentation of the illness in commentating on the person's thoughts or children and adults is a combination of actions) hallucinations, delusions, negative symptoms and · Discussing voices (several voices talking linguistic thought disturbances. together about a person's thoughts or actions) CONTROL EXPERIENCES · Imposed actions (the experience that one's movements or action are imposed by an alien will) · Imposed will impulses (the experience that one's will has been replaced by another will, so one is controlled from outside by an alien power or force) · Imposed emotions (the experience of having emotions that are not one's own, imposed from outside) 4BODILY ALIENATION EXPERIENCES If your child needs emergency psychiatric help, (Strange sensory experiences, combined with contact the 24-hour Psychiatric Emergency thoughts that this is due to some external Department for children and adolescents in influence). This may, for example, be the feeling Glostrup.
either that the brain is shrinking, or is too big For more information, go to www.psykiatri- for the cranium. regionh.dk/akut or the Akuthjælp app. NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS · Sluggishness (slow in movement and thought) · Drowsiness · Affective flattening (the loss of the ability to express emotions) · Lack of initiative · Passivity · Language poverty (speaking less than previously) · Reduced contact (difficulties with normal contact and conversation) · Lack of initiative or interests · Empty or aimless behaviour · Social withdrawal or searching for solitude HOW CAN A PERSON GET HELP?
Where schizophrenia is suspected, it is important to discuss it with the child's or adolescent's GP. The doctor can help to clarify whether or not there are grounds to think that it is schizophrenia. If there are, the doctor can refer the person for examination and treatment by a specialist practising psychiatrist, or at the Mental Health Centre for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, if necessary.
5TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA Treatment begins with a thorough discussion to effect on agitation, sleeplessness and the generally clarify whether it is schizophrenia. If it is, an tortured state that the child or adolescent is in. assessment is made as to which course of treatment would be most beneficial.
The discussion It is necessary to alleviate the psychotic symptoms takes place either with a GP, with a privately in order for the child or adolescent to benefit from practising specialist in child and adolescent the psychological forms of therapy such as talk psychiatry, or with the doctor at a Mental Health therapy, environmental therapy, and any special Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. facilities at school or in the institutions, or in conjunction with leisure time activities. Where schizophrenia is suspected in a child, the doctor will always talk to the child's parents.
It is In some cases, the medication can have side important to hear the parents' account of the course effects, such as fatigue, weight gain and an of the illness, as the child may have difficulty increase in cholesterol and insulin in the blood. describing the changes that have taken place. The More rarely, there can also be movement same applies to adolescents over the age of 15, disturbances such as shaking, stiffness of the unless otherwise agreed.
muscles or tripping, and there can be disturbances in body functions, e.g. dry mouth, constipation and The treatment of schizophrenia at Mental Health dizziness. Centre for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry is done as a multi-disciplinary collaboration between the If side effects do arise, it is important to contact the doctor and a range of other professional groups, doctor to discuss the side- effects.
The effects and e.g. psychologists, nurses, social and health side effects of the medication vary from one person assistants, physiotherapists and occupational to another, and it may therefore be necessary to try therapists, as well as teachers and educationalists. out several types of medicine in order to find the As a rule, treatment is carried out in close one that produces the fewest side effects possible.
collaboration with the parents. It is important to complete the whole course of medicinal treatment. If medicinal treatment needs to MEDICINAL TREATMENT be stopped, this must be done gradually, and by In the vast majority of cases, anti-psychotic agreement with the doctor.
medication is necessary in order to treat schizophrenia. The medication alleviates the psychotic symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions, thus reducing anxiety, and it becomes possible to create a trusting contact with the child or adolescent. The medication often has a modifying 6PREVENTATIVE MEDICINAL TREATMENT TALK THERAPY When a person has the illness known as Talk therapy consists of talks with a therapist, often schizophrenia, it means they are at risk of a relapse a doctor or psychologist who specialises in child or deterioration of their symptoms several times and adolescent psychiatry.
These talks can be held during their lives. There may, therefore, be grounds either one-to-one or in groups. Generally, talk to take preventative medication to minimise the risk therapy with children is carried out together with the of a recurrence of the symptoms.
parents. If, despite this, symptoms of schizophrenia arise Talk therapy often includes cognitive behavioural while the child or adolescent is taking preventative therapy, where there is a discussion about how the medication, it is important to contact the doctor. In illness is being perceived.
The therapist attempts these cases, the doctor will decide whether the type are made to help the child to change his or her or dose of medication needs to be changed. thoughts, feelings, actions and body reactions. Agreements are made as to the goal of the treatment, and on how to achieve the desired HOW DOES THE MEDICATION WORK?
improvement. Anti-psychotic medication primarily works to counter symptoms such as hallucinations and Talk therapy should provide an insight into the delusions. The medication suppresses racing illness and put the child or adolescent in a position thoughts, improves the ability to think clearly, to be in control of their life with schizophrenia.
For and suppresses anxiety and tension. In a large instance, it may be to provide the child or proportion of patients, the medication adolescent with specific tools for what they can do suppresses or removes the symptoms when, for example, they hear voices. completely.
Children and adolescents with schizophrenia can Medication is prescribed at the lowest possible often only take part in, and benefit from, talk dosage in order to minimise the problems of therapy once the medicinal treatment has begun to side effects. work and the hallucinations and delusions have been suppressed. 7EDUCATION ABOUT MENTAL ILLNESS Environmental therapy is offered during periods of (PSYCHOEDUCATION) hospitalisation, and is adapted to the needs of the Knowledge and education about schizophrenia can individual child or adolescent.
One way in which help to increase the understanding of what type of environmental therapy works is as preparation for illness the child or adolescent has. A good discharge from the Mental Health Department for understanding of symptoms, illness and treatment Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. help to reduce the risk of relapses, as it provides greater awareness of the symptoms to keep an eye COMPULSION on and react to.
It is part of schizophrenia that the child or adolescent does not necessarily have a realistic Education about mental illness is also called picture of how ill they are. Nor is it certain that they psychoeducation, and this forms part of most understand they have an illness that requires courses of treatment under Mental Health Services treatment. In order to help and alleviate the – Capital Region of Denmark.
The family and other symptoms, it can be necessary to treat children and close relatives can benefit greatly from taking part adolescents admitted with schizophrenia against in the education. their will. It is the doctor who decides whether there Psychoeducation for the whole family increases the is a need to use compulsion in the treatment.
family's knowledge about schizophrenia, and You can find out more about the use of coercion and provides support to the relatives in solving the the rights of patients in respect of coercion in the problems associated with having a child with leaflet "Tvang i psykiatri (Coercion in psychiatry). schizophrenia. For instance, the parents also gain Information for admitted children and adolescents – knowledge and help with setting reasonable and their parents", which is published by Mental requirements for and expectations of the child or Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark.
adolescent. The staff at the Mental Health Centre for Child and For further information, see www.psykiatri- Adolescent Psychiatry can provide information regionh.dk/patientinfo. about the possibilities of taking part in psychoeducation.
WHAT CAN RELATIVES DO TO HELP? The most important task for the relatives of children ENVIRONMENTAL THERAPY and adolescents with schizophrenia is to provide Children or adolescents with schizophrenia can support in finding professional help. It can be have great difficulty in planning and carrying out the difficult to distinguish between when your child simplest day-to-day routines and tasks for merely has a good imagination, or needs to be left themselves, such as going to school and leisure alone a little, and when there are actual signs of time activities, or maintaining contact with friends.
schizophrenia. It is for the doctor to decide. Environmental therapy is about (re)training the person's ability to cope and be together with other people, and to carry out normal day-to-day actions.
8The relative of a child or adolescent undergoing treatment is best able to provide support by listening, being there for them, and making everyday life easier for the child or adolescent. For example, you can pay particular attention to supporting the child in conjunction with leisure activities, help to arrange visits with friends or help with homework. Being the relative of a child or adolescent with schizophrenia can be very challenging.
People have to be prepared to be rejected, while at the same time being able to show care and interest. It is an illness that cannot be controlled or guided by force of will. For some people, meeting people via a network for the relatives of schizophrenia sufferers is of help.
Read more at www.psykiatri-regionh.dk/patientinfo. Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark has published a leaflet containing information about the role of relatives, the involvement of relatives in the treatment and the potential for help and support for relatives. Please feel free to contact the staff at the Mental Health Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry or find the leaflet at www.psykiatri- regionh.dk/patientinfo.
9FURTHER INFORMATION TIPS FOR RELATIVES www.psykiatri-regionh.dk · Find out what schizophrenia is. · Support the child or adolescent during You also have the opportunity to consult with treatment, and follow the doctor's instructions PsykInfo for further information, advice and and advice. guidance on mental illness.
PsykInfo is a · Allow them some space. Everyone can feel psychiatric information center, located in central the need for ‘time out’. Both parents and child.
Copenhagen, which caters to all citizens who seek · Focus on the areas where you can make a knowledge about mental illness. difference. Accept that you cannot solve all See www.psykinfo-regionh.dk.
the problems yourself. · Solve problems step by step. Make changes gradually, and work on one thing at a time.
· Allow normal life to continue. Resume the family routines as far as possible. See friends and family as normal.
· Provide comfort, e.g. by saying: "Remember, you will get better. You have an illness, which you can get treatment for".
· Avoid reproaches. · Reduce your expectations. Use a personal measuring stick for success and compare, for example, this month with last month.
Has there been any progress?. · Keep an eye out for warning signs, and contact a professional therapist if symptoms of schizophrenia arise after treatment, or if the child or adolescent feels worse during the treatment. · Seek help for yourself if you have questions, lack support or need assistance in your everyday life.
· Remember that schizophrenia is not anyone's fault. 1011Order no.: REGH0016 • RegionH Design • 17612 This booklet is for you who is a patient at Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark and for your relatives. With this booklet, we want to help you and your family experience a good and comprehensive course of treatment – and good cooperation with the staff at Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark.
It is you and your immediate family, who live with the illness and is most aware of how you feel and how your illness is affecting your life. We place great emphasis on keeping you well informed about the treatment throughout the course of treatment, and you are always welcome to ask questions. THE PATIENT AT THE CENTRE The treatment at Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark often consists of a combination of a number of therapies and is always based on the patient's individual and immediate needs.
Therefore, no courses of treatment are alike. The mental health staff has professional insight into how mental illnesses can develop and be treated. We want to hear how you experience your illness and what your treatment goal is.
We use both as a basis when we plan the treatment together. The goal is for the treatment to heal you or make you considerably better. It varies when and how much people with mental illness recover.
But with the right treatment, anyone can develop and create or resume daily life. REGION HOVEDSTADENS PSYKIATRI (MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES – CAPITAL REGION OF DENMARK) Many people encounter a mental illness during the course of their lifetime. At Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark, every year we treat approx.
41,000 children and adults for a variety of mental illnesses. The treatment is done on an outpatient basis by visiting teams and, where necessary, by Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark. Mental Health Services – Capital Region of Denmark Kristineberg 3 DK - 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark Tel.: 3864 0000 www.psykiatri-regionh.dk Graphic design: RegionH Design Photo: Phillip Drago Jørgensen 2014
(cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:79)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:84) (cid:72) (cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:67) (cid:65) (cid:78) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:68) (cid:69) (cid:80) (cid:82) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:71) (cid:82) (cid:79) (cid:85) (cid:80) (cid:69) (cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32) (cid:40)(cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:54)(cid:50)(cid:45)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:54) (cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:46)(cid:122)(cid:97) (cid:75)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:33) (cid:70)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:33) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102) (cid:33) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:109)(cid:97) (cid:8220)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:8221)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:46) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:63) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:50) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:45)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:41)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:47)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:107)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:80)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:59)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:80)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:46) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:40)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:46) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:63) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:86)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:46) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:63)(cid:32) (cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:79)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:46) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:51)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:47)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:8221)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:40)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:41)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:41)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:45) (cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:86)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:63) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:80)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:85)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:69)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:8221)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:79)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:39)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:39)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:52) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109) (cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:46) (cid:79)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:58)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:45)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:46) (cid:78)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:109) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:8221)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116) (cid:33) (cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115) (cid:79)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:121)(cid:8221)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:8221)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:46) (cid:65)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:65)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:53)(cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:45)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:59)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115) (cid:77)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:8220)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:8221)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:47)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:8221)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:107) (cid:33) (cid:70)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:86) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100) (cid:33) (cid:75)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:58) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102) (cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:116) (cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:59)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:8221)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:8220)(cid:71)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:8221)(cid:46) (cid:54) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:63) (cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:66)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:102) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101) (cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:33) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116) (cid:84)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:80)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:46) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:40)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:45)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:45)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101) (cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:106)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:85)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:45)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:116) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:98)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:98)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:97) (cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:55)(cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:63) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:71)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:58) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:120)(cid:121)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:46) (cid:78)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:108)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:45)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:79)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:58) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:46) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:63) (cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:46) (cid:56) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:46) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:33) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:100) (cid:33) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:58) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:58) (cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:63) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121) (cid:33) (cid:69)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:57)(cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:73)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:73)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:63) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:40)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:45)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114) (cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116) (cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100) (cid:33) (cid:68)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:69)(cid:120)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:65)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:73)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:107)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:63) (cid:65)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:45)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:122)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100) (cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121) (cid:33) (cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:46) (cid:49)(cid:48) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:79)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:46) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:120)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:109)(cid:103)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:109)(cid:103)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:122)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:76)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:79)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:122)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:90)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:81)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:82)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:82)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:32) (cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:120)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:32) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:82)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:82)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:53)(cid:32) (cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:120)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:109)(cid:103)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:109)(cid:103)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:104)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:76)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:80)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:122)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:79)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:32) (cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:69)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:120)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:32) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:41)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:120)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:120)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:8211)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:90)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:120)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:120)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:63) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111) (cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103) (cid:33) (cid:83)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116) (cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:33) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:63) (cid:33) (cid:77)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44) (cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:63) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101) (cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121) (cid:73)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:63) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:46) (cid:80)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:58) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:67)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:41) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:49)(cid:50) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:40)(cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:41)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:58) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:65)(cid:66)(cid:68)(cid:65)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:69)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:58) (cid:76)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103) (cid:33) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:85)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:47)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115) (cid:70)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:75)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:121) (cid:33) (cid:83)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101) (cid:33) (cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108) (cid:33) (cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104) (cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:76)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104) (cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:33) (cid:65)(cid:115)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116) (cid:76)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:116) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103) (cid:33) (cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97) (cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121) (cid:79)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:58) (cid:33) (cid:76)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:106)(cid:111)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108) (cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110) (cid:33) (cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101) (cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46) (cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100) (cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:58) (cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:45)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:58) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114) (cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:63) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:52) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:58) (cid:49)(cid:46) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:50)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:121)(cid:58)(cid:32) (cid:80)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104) (cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:47)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116) (cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:58) (cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:68)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:69)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:46) (cid:86)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:47)(cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:79)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:44)(cid:34)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:79)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:34)(cid:73)(cid:39)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:34)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:34)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:47)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:46) (cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:47)(cid:73)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:47)(cid:77)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:45)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:39)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:59)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:65)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:47)(cid:76)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:79)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:59)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:69)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:99)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:70)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:106)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:106)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:54) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:75)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:46) (cid:80)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:45)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:45)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:44) (cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:41)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:100) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:46) (cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110) (cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:51)(cid:46) (cid:83)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:118)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:98)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:34)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:34)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:34)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:34)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:34)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:73)(cid:34)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:34)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:34)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:52)(cid:46) (cid:73)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:47)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:32)(cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:47)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:53)(cid:46) (cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:39)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:121)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:120)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:45)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:46) (cid:65)(cid:100)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:58) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:58) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:107) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115) (cid:33) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:87)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32) (cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:58) (cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:39)(cid:32) (cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:107)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:39)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:58)(cid:32) (cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:86)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:102)(cid:45)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:39)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:39)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32) (cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32) (cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32) (cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:46) (cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46) (cid:77)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101) (cid:70)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:58)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:101)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:84)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32) (cid:118)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:49)(cid:56) (cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:67)(cid:65)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:69)(cid:84)(cid:89)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:119)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101) (cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:76)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:84)(cid:121)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:51)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:86)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:71)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:103) (cid:67)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:78)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:54) (cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:52) (cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:53) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:107)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:69)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:51) (cid:70)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:71)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:56) (cid:75)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:50) (cid:70)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101) (cid:66)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:66)(cid:111)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:85)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:77)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:97) (cid:76)(cid:121)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:51)(cid:51) (cid:82)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:87)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:111) (cid:69)(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:120)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:56) (cid:72)(cid:97)(cid:121)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:47)(cid:50) (cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:50) (cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:32)(cid:75)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:49) (cid:75)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:65)(cid:100)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:39)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:41) (cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:41) (cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101) (cid:75)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:49) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:56)(cid:50) (cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:77)(cid:97)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:53) (cid:87)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:49) (cid:79)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:54)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:54) (cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:55) (cid:83)(cid:67)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:65) (cid:84)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:117)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:101) (cid:49)(cid:57)(cid:83)(cid:65)(cid:68)(cid:65)(cid:71)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:56)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:54) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:49) (cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:73)(cid:110)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:51)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:57) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:48) (cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:86)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:57)(cid:54) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:55)(cid:51) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:103) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:50) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:50)(cid:55) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:48) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:110) (cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:55) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:101)(cid:109) (cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:47)(cid:51) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:80)(cid:46)(cid:69) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:50) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:48) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:97) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:56)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:52)(cid:54) (cid:70)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:45)(cid:32)(cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:111) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:50) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:115) (cid:69)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:118)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:57) (cid:82)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:87)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:107)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:56) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:55)(cid:51) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:49) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:49) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:50) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:52) (cid:80)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:50) (cid:68)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:56) (cid:68)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:98)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32) (cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:53)(cid:53) (cid:83)(cid:119)(cid:97)(cid:122)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:50) (cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:122)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:99)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:69)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:122)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:57)(cid:53) (cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:97) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:53) (cid:87)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:48) (cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:98)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:103)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:47)(cid:32)(cid:56) (cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:89)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:97) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:57)(cid:55) (cid:80)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:56) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:57) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:55) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:121)(cid:39)(cid:115) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:53) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:112)(cid:32)(cid:74)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:32)(cid:78)(cid:97)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:48) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:32)(cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:50) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:52)(cid:32)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:56)(cid:54) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:56)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:48) (cid:67)(cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:84)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:67)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:99) (cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:32)(cid:53)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:56)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:48) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:84)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:111)(cid:107)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:101)(cid:120)(cid:112)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:114)(cid:117)(cid:103)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:102)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:111)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:32) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:102)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:8217)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:32)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:102)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:100)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:66)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32) (cid:83)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:38)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:71)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:32)(cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:67)(cid:32)(cid:82)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:32)(cid:117)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:65)(cid:110)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:116)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:116)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:32)(cid:68)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:75)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:50)(cid:48) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32)
Dimensional psychopharmacology Integrated treatment of schizophrenia Il trattamento integrato della schizofrenia A.C. Altamura1, A. Fagiolini2, S.
Galderisi3, P. Rocca4, A. Rossi5 1 Department of Psychiatry, University of Milan; 2 University of Siena, Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of Mental Health; 3 Department of Psychiatry, Second University of Naples SUN; 4 Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin; 5 Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of L’Aquila, Italy Summary It has been made a considerable effort to improve adherence Psychosocial therapies play an important role in the treatment to antipsychotic treatment through the development of drugs of schizophrenia.
These therapies are aimed at improving the with better tolerability, in formulations that enable long-term functioning of the patient in the community, which in turn can administration of the drug, including injectable long-acting (de- lead to clinical improvement, such as reduction in the number pot) antipsychotics. In recent years the development of these of relapses or hospitalizations. Substantial evidence supports the formulations of atypical antipsychotics and the promising results use of many psychosocial therapies in schizophrenia, including obtained in clinical trials are changing the attitude toward these cognitive behavioral therapy, assertive community treatment, cognitive remediation and functional skills training.
drugs, traditionally reserved for patients with repeated non-ad- The customization of pharmacological therapy in schizophrenia, herence to treatment. besides the experience of the clinician and individual prefer- ences of the patient, should be based on three sets of objective Key words data: 1) clinical predictors of response to therapy; 2) predict- able side effects of therapy; 3) pharmacogenetic and pharma- Pharmacological treatment • Rehabilitative and psychosocial psycho- cogenomic data. therapy Pharmacological treatment, rehabilitative Thus, the psychiatrist should be part of a multidisciplinary team, composed of mental health professionals and other and psychosocial psychotherapy medical specialists, as well as providers of social services S.
Galderisi and other relevant entities (e.g. authorities who organise housing and employment). Introduction Treatment with antipsychotics Schizophrenia is caused by complex interactions between biological, genetic and environmental factors; as a conse- Antipsychotics are a fundamental element of treatment of quence, patients affected by the disorder should receive schizophrenia 2.
Undoubtedly, they are very effective in integrated treatments that include drugs and psychosocial reducing the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. How- therapy, care of physical health and treatment of comor- ever, at present, the available antipsychotics have signifi- bidities. In general, drugs are administered in the initial cant limitations (Table I); in particular, negative symptoms phases of schizophrenia when symptoms lead to an indi- and cognitive alterations are not treated adequately, and vidual to consult psychiatric services.
Psychosocial thera- many patients continue to present persistent psychotic pies are frequently not initiated until the appearance of symptoms. In addition, the lack of insight that accom- uncontrolled symptoms. This model could change, how- panies schizophrenia is a partially unsolved problem.
ever, once early diagnosis and timely therapeutic inter- Clinical studies have consistently demonstrated that an- vention become more common and non-pharmacological tipsychotics reduce positive symptoms such as delirium treatments can be initiated at an earlier stage. An integrat- and hallucinations 3 4. In this regard, large studies have ed and multifaceted approach involving drugs, psycho- demonstrated that second-generation agents are at least as social interventions and attention to environmental cir- efficacious (if not more so according to some studies) than cumstances can improve the outcomes of schizophrenia1.
first-generation antipsychotics, and that they are generally Corrispondenza A. Altamura • E-mail: carlo.altamura@unimi.it; A. Fagiolini • E-mail: andreafagiolini@gmail.com; S.
Galderisi • E-mail: silvana.galderisi@gmail. com; P. Rocca • E-mail: paola.rocca@unito.it; A.
Rossi • E-mail: alessandro.rossi@cc.univaq.it 168 Journal of Psychopathology 2015;21:168-193Integrated treatment of schizophrenia better tolerated with a reduced propensity to induce ad- al population 13. Suicidal behaviour is present in about verse effects such as motor symptoms; accordingly, they 50% of affected individuals and about 5-10% of persons are associated with better compliance 3 5. The safety pro- with schizophrenia commit suicide.
Clinical studies with files of older and newer agents, however, are significantly some antipsychotics have shown that they are associated different 5. with a reduction in suicidal behaviour 14. Antipsychotics have been shown to be effective in the Limitations of antipsychotics treatment of acute psychotic episodes 6.
About 85% of The negative symptoms of schizophrenia, such as apa- previously untreated patients show improvement of thy, anhedonia and decreased emotional expression, can symptoms and 60% remain in remission at 3 years7. Ef- be present at the onset of disease and may represent the fective, timely treatment of psychoses in the initial phases predominating symptoms; in fact, in around 70% of cases can avoid a long duration of untreated psychosis, which these symptoms develop before positive symptoms 3. In is associated with poorer clinical and social outcomes 8 9.
reality, there is evidence to support the existence of a Maintenance therapy reduces the risk of relapse in pa- form of disease (deficit schizophrenia) that identifies a tients with schizophrenia. An analysis of 65 clinical stud- subgroup of patients characterised by the presence of ies involving more than 6000 patients with schizophrenia primary and persistent negative symptoms 15. The avail- demonstrated that maintenance treatment reduces the able antipsychotics have a limited effect on negative incidence of relapse and hospitalisation by around 60% symptoms and are ineffective on primary and persistent (Fig.
1) 10. It is important to highlight that this analysis symptoms 3. This limitation is an important problem since also showed that the number needed to treat (NNT) of negative symptoms are associated with compromised pharmacological therapy is related to adequate psycho- employment and social functioning, and are thus a sig- social therapy: under these conditions, in fact, treatment nificant obstacle in maintaining an independent life 16.
of only 3 patients for 7-12 months can prevent another Almost all patients with schizophrenia have deficits in relapse and treatment of 5 patients can prevent another cognitive function, which affects domains such as ver- hospitalisation 10. bal fluency, memory, attention, velocity of elaboration, In some patients, relapse can delay or halt progression of ability to assign priorities and make decisions 3. Such disease 11.
Moreover, by preventing relapse and improv- deficits present early in the course of disease, in general ing insight, antipsychotics can assure a period of stabil- years before the appearance of overt psychosis, and are ity and facilitate the introduction of additional treatments strong predictors of compromised social functioning and such as psychosocial therapy 12. There is evidence that unfavourable outcomes. Unfortunately, currently-avail- the greater the improvement of symptoms after the start able antipsychotics have limited impact on the cognitive of pharmacotherapy, the greater the probability of a good symptoms of schizophrenia: any improvements observed response to psychosocial therapy 12.
appear to be correlated with a reduction in other symp- Behavioural symptoms such as hostility and aggression toms rather than to direct effects on cognitive ability 17 18. are common in schizophrenia, and there is evidence that Antipsychotics are associated with several collateral ef- these symptoms are susceptible to antipsychotic drugs 13. fects that can be severe and limit adherence to therapy, In general, good adherence to therapy seems to be as- thus decreasing the possibility of recovery (Table II) 3.
sociated with low levels of aggression, and persons with Individual antipsychotics differ in their safety profile, schizophrenia who adhere to therapy and are clinically but some adverse effects, such as motor symptoms and stable do not seem to be more violent than the gener- metabolic hormonal disorders, are common to all these Table I. Potential benefits and limitations of current antipsychotic medication (from Fleischhacker et al., 2014, modified) 1. Possibili benefici e limiti degli attuali farmaci antipsicotici (da Fleischhacker et al., 2014, mod.) 1.
benefits limitations Reduction of positive symptoms Limited efficacy against negative symptoms Treatment of acute episodes Inadequate treatment of cognitive impairment Reduced risk of relapse Troubling side effects or tolerability issues Provision of stability and a platform for other treatments Low acceptability to some patients • Poor adherence Reduction of aggression and hostility • Negative perceptions Reduced suicidal behaviour 169A.C. Altamura et al. non-adherent to oral therapy 19, even if this percentage is higher in long-term studies.
The main reasons for low adherence include: • lack of information about the disease and its treat- ment; • lack of improvement of psychotic symptoms; • adverse effects (that resolve if the patient interrupts therapy); • lack of knowledge about the need for treatment; • economic difficulties (especially in countries in eco- nomic difficulty); • complexity of treatment schemes; • fear of discrimination; • poor physician-patient relationship; • lack of support by caregivers. The lack of adherence to therapy is commonly associated with relapse, which often leads to hospitalisation; how- ever, the association between adherence and hospitalisa- FIgure 1. tion can also depend on the fact that lack of adherence Long-term treatment of schizophrenia (maintenance) significantly reduces the number of relapses (7-12 months) and may represent a symptom of progression of disease 20.
the number of hospitalizations in patients with schizophrenia, The frequency of hospitalisation (often used as an indica- compared with placebo (data from a combined analysis of tor of severe relapse) is up to 400% higher in non-adher- 65 clinical trials) (from Leucht et al., 2012, modified) 10. La ent patients than those who are adherent to therapy 21. terapia antipsicotica a lungo termine (di mantenimento) riduce Moreover, non-adherent individuals have a greater prob- in maniera significativa il numero di recidive (a 7-12 mesi) e ability of low overall function in the long term and to be il numero di ricoveri nei pazienti con schizofrenia, rispetto al placebo (dati derivanti da un’analisi combinata di 65 trial clinici) (da Leucht et al., 2012, mod.) 10.
drugs. In general, typical antipsychotics tend to have more motor effects, while several atypical antipsychotics can cause metabolic adverse effects; all first-generation antipsychotics and most second-generation antipsychot- ics can cause hyperprolactinaemia, with the exception of aripiprazole, clozapine and quetiapine. Motor symptoms influence movement and muscular tone and can lead to Parkinsonism (tremor and muscular rigidity) and muscle spasms (dystonia) as well as subjective and objective rest- lessness (akathisia).
These symptoms are known collec- tively as acute extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS). Another EPS, which usually appears late in the course of treatment together with aging of the patient, is tardive dyskinesia, a symptom characterised by involuntary and repetitive movements of the limbs, trunk and more characteristical- ly of the libs, tongue and jaw. Metabolic disorders include weight gain and changes in blood glucose, cholesterol and other lipids.
These disorders can negatively influence the physical health of patients with schizophrenia. Other hormonal disorders, and in particular an increase in the levels of prolactin, can give rise to secondary problems such as sexual dysfunction. Adherence to antipsychotic therapy is often low in per- sons with schizophrenia 5: about 50% of patients are 170 )%( stneitap fo snoitroporP 70 64 Untreated 60 Treated 50 40 30 27 26 20 10 10 0 relapse Hospitalisation Table II.
Potential side effects of current antipsychotic medication (from Fleischhacker et al., 2014, modified) 1. Possibili effetti collaterali degli attuali farmaci antipsicotici (da Fleischhacker et al., 2014, mod.) 1. • Extrapyramidal symptoms – Slow, stiff movement and tremor (parkinsonism) – Abnormal muscle tone/muscle spasms (dystonia) – Involuntary movements (tardive dyskinesia) – Subjective experience of restlessness and restless move- ments (akathisia) • Weight gain • Metabolic disturbances – Changes in blood glucose levels – Increases in cholesterol and triglycerides • Sedation • A feeling of being ill-at-ease (dysphoria) • Hormonal changes • Sexual dysfunction • Changes in the electrical activity of the heart (rare) • Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (a rare but life-threaten- ing neurological disorder) • Agranulocytosis (very low levels of white blood cells, also life-threatening but rare)Integrated treatment of schizophrenia more violent and attempt suicide more frequently than Assertive community treatment patients who are adherent to therapy.
Assertive community treatment (ACT) is a model that Adherence to antipsychotic therapy can be improved was developed to improve the rate of relapse and hos- through better understanding of the individual motiva- pitalisation following the transition from institutionalisa- tions for the lack of adherence and involving the patient tion to territorial care in the USA starting in the 1980s 25. in treatment decisions. One possible obstacle to adher- This approach, aimed at a subgroup of patients who are ence is the common practice of using polytherapy to con- strong users of services, involves a multidisciplinary team trol symptoms, which renders it difficult for patients to re- working in the community to provide a range of services member when to take various medications.
Polytherapy, comprising management of pharmacological therapy, whenever possible, should be avoided. In addition, the practical support (e.g. housing) and rehabilitation.
ACT use of long-lasting injectable formulations (depot) of an- is characterised by a high frequency of outpatient visits tipsychotics may be associated with better adherence 22. and a low number of patients (usually about 10) who An individualised approach to therapy should be encour- are followed by each member of the team: these two aged, which should also include patient preferences 1. characteristics obviously require considerable resources, Drugs with tolerability and safety profiles that are ade- even if it has been demonstrated that, for treatment of quate to the needs of the patient should be chosen (e.g., schizophrenia as for other psychological therapies, an in- avoiding drugs that lead to weight gain if this represents crease in the time spent with the patient can contribute to a problem).
Weight gain can be a significant problem in achieving positive results 24 25. Studies in several countries younger patients. About 25% of patients with a new di- have demonstrated that ACT is associated with a lower agnosis of schizophrenia are less than 18 years of age incidence of homelessness and hospitalisation compared and can be particularly sensitive to side effects such as with standard care in patients who are frequent users of weight gain or menstrual cycle disorders associated with services 24-26.
One analysis revealed that, on average, drug-induced hormonal changes. Careful and frequent there is a reduction in homelessness by 37% in patients monitoring of adverse effects should be carried out in all undergoing ACT compared with standard care 26. Even patients undergoing long-term therapy.
if ACT can help individuals with schizophrenia to live Antipsychotics are effective in reducing psychotic symp- a stable life in the community, several studies have sug- toms, but many patients show only partial response to gested that it has a relatively limited impact on other treatment 3. Even when patients obtain remission, few outcomes such as social functioning or employment. Re- are completely free of symptoms.
Moreover, up to one- cently, the OPUS study 27, carried out on patients with third of patients affected by schizophrenia show a poor a first episode of schizophrenia, showed that ACT was response to antipsychotics, and some develop resistance superior to standard therapy in reducing both positive to treatment. Treatment resistance generally occurs with and negative symptoms and substance abuse, increasing disease progression 23, but in about 10% of cases it is overall patient satisfaction and adherence to therapy and already evident after the first episode 19. in reducing the number of hospitalisations.
Cognitive-behavioural therapy Psychosocial therapies Psychotic symptoms can persist despite antipsychotic In addition to pharmacological therapy, psychosocial medications, which constitute a large obstacle to social therapy also plays an important role in treatment of recovery. CBT (a talking therapy that helps people man- schizophrenia 1 24 25. These therapies have the aim of im- age their disease by changing their way of thinking and proving the functioning of the patient in the community, listening) directed towards psychotic symptoms aims to which can also lead to clinical improvement, such as a reduce their severity and consequent distress 24 25.
Many reduction in the number of relapses or hospitalisations. studies have demonstrated that this approach improves The use of psychosocial therapies is supported by sub- social functioning, reduces positive and negative symp- stantial evidence; these include cognitive behavioural toms and decreases mood disorders vs a control group. therapy (CBT) for psychosis, in addition to cognitive re- Other studies, however, have not demonstrated such im- mediation and functional skills training; other approach- provements, and the effects of CBT on outcomes such as es also appear promising (Tables III, IV) 1 24 25.
Schizophre- hospitalisation, depression, suicidal tendency and insight nia associated disabilities often involve several areas, and have not been clearly established 28. A recent systematic psychosocial therapies can be combined to confront a review concluded that CBT does not offer a clear advan- range of problems. For example, social skills training can tage over other psychosocial therapies such as family be used as part of an integrated program that includes therapy and psychoeducation 29.
Evidence supporting the family psychoeducation, cognitive remediation and CBT. use of CBT is largely shown by studies in which partici- 171A.C. Altamura et al.
Table III. Many psychosocial interventions have been shown to improve outcomes in schizophrenia (evidence-based approaches), and others are being developed and evaluated (promising approaches) (from Fleischhacker et al., 2014, modified) 1. Molti interventi psicosociali hanno dimostrato di migliorare l’outcome nella schizofrenia (approcci evidence-based) e altri sono in fase di sviluppo e di valutazione (approcci promettenti) (da Fleischhacker et al., 2014, mod.) 1.
evidence-based approaches Promising approaches • Assertive community treatment • Cognitive adaptive therapy • Cognitive behavioural therapy for psychosis • Healthy lifestyle intervention • Cognitive remediation • Interventions targeting older individuals • Family therapy/psychoeducation • Prodromal stage intervention • Peer support and self-help strategies • Social cognition training • Social skills training • Social rehabilitation (Clubhouse Model) • Supported employment • Integrated treatment for coexisting substance abuse disorder Table IV. Potential benefits of psychosocial therapies (from Fleischhacker et al., 2014, modified) 1. Possibili benefici delle terapie psicosociali (da Fleischhacker et al., 2014, mod.) 1.
Intervention Potential benefits • Assertive community treatment • Reduction in rates of homelessness and length of hospital stays • Cognitive behavioural therapy for psychosis • Decreases in both positive and negative symptoms and mood disturbances, and improved social functioning • First episode intervention for psychosis • Improvements in quality of life, social functioning and adherence • Cognitive remediation • Improvements in cognition and psychosocial functioning • Family psychoeducation • Some improvement in social functioning and family coping and empowerment • Peer support and illness self-management training • Enhancement of empowerment and ability to cope with the illness • Social skills training • Improvements in social functioning • Supported employment • Increases in employment rates, hours worked and wages earned. Gains in self-esteem and quality of life • Integrated treatment for coexisting substance • Reductions in substance use and arrests; improved functioning abuse disorder pants received at least 16 sessions 6: CBT requires special- ity of studies have revealed that this approach is effec- ist training and experience, and thus cost is an important tive in improving cognitive function, while its effects on consideration. An analysis by the National Institute for psychosocial functioning have been quite variable 24 25.
Health and Care Excellence (NICE), however, concluded Models for cognitive remediation differ greatly and the that CBT likely has a good cost-efficacy ratio, since the number of reliable studies in this area is rather limited. costs are compensated by a decrease in hospitalisation 6. It has been suggested that cognitive remediation aug- ments the effects of other types of psychotherapy and Cognitive remediation improves the capacity to learn new abilities.
Moreover, Cognitive remediation programs usually utilise exercises there is very limited evidence that its use for 2 years is aimed at improving aspects related to cognitive function, associated with a reduction in the loss of cerebral grey often combined with teaching strategies to improve the matter correlated with schizophrenia 30 and an increase results of such exercises; these can also include differ- in the number of connections between brain cells and ent ways to limit cognitive deterioration 24 25. The major- functional networks 31. In a meta-analysis on over 2000 172Integrated treatment of schizophrenia patients, 32 a long-lasting, mild-moderate effect of cogni- personnel guide a group of individuals with schizophre- tive remediation was seen on cognitive function and on nia and their families who are given information about overall functioning that did not depend on the methodol- the course of disease and treatment of psychotic disor- ogy of the study (type of approach, duration, etc.).
Cogni- ders. Participants also undergo problem-solving exercises tive remediation was more effective when patients were that are designed to specifically help them to deal with clinically stable, and greater significant differences were the difficulties associated with care of a person with a seen on functioning when cognitive remediation was car- psychotic disorder 37. A multifamily approach can signifi- ried out in combination with other forms of psychiatric cantly reduce the rates of relapse compared with mono- rehabilitation 32.
family psychoeducation, which already reduces the rates of relapse vs treatment with no family psychoeducation Family psychoeducation (Fig. 2) 38. Moreover, the addition of multifamily group Many persons with schizophrenia live with their families, psychoeducation to therapy with antipsychotics doubles and as such family intervention (also known as family the effects of pharmacological therapy alone 38.
psychoeducation in the USA) can play an important role Paradoxically, however, providing information can in- in care 24 25. Education of patients and families about the crease self-stigma of persons with schizophrenia, induc- nature of schizophrenia and the symptoms of the disease ing them to expect prejudice and discrimination. The helps them to develop coping strategies, capitalise on potential impact of self-stigma is shown in the Interna- their strengths and learn to take better care of oneself.
Pa- tional Study of Discrimination and Stigma Outcomes, an tients (and their families) treated with family intervention international study carried out in 27 countries in which are better able to participate in shared decisional pro- 64% of participants referred that they no longer looked cesses. Family psychoeducation offers a valuable oppor- for employment, training, or education, and almost 75% tunity for persons with schizophrenia, their families and said they felt the need to hide their diagnosis because of healthcare providers to exchange their personal experi- predictable discrimination 39. However, in the long-term, ences about the disease and its treatment.
It is important psychoeducation – supported by adequate antipsychotic to highlight that family members can provide a continuity and psychosocial therapies – seems to be effective in of care for persons with schizophrenia, even if the health- reducing the burden experienced by many people with care operators involved in treatment change over time. A schizophrenia and their families 28. psychoeducational approach aims to promote collabora- Mutual support and self-help strategies tion between the family and healthcare providers.
Stud- ies have consistently shown that psychoeducational ap- Persons with schizophrenia and their caregivers have proaches are effective in reducing the rates of relapse and noteworthy and accurate comprehension of the problems hospitalisation and in improving social functioning 24 25. There is also evidence that these benefits are long-lasting (> 5 years) 33. Since according to other studies the effects 70 65 of family psychoeducation tend to subside after about 2 years due to an extinguishing effect, it has been suggested 60 that ‘recall sessions’ in a multifamily setting may be use- 50 ful in reducing the economic impact 34.
An initial analysis 40 demonstrated that relapse and hospitalisations can be re- 30 27 duced by about 20% when family members are included 20 16 in treatment compared to traditional care 35. In another 10 study, the rate of relapse at 2 years was 40% in patients 0 in whom families received psychotherapeutic interven- No family Single-family Multi-family tion and 75% when families did not receive any interven- psychoeducation psychoeducation psychoeducation tion 36. The greatest advantages of family psychoeduca- tion seem to be present in persons with a first episode FIgure 2.
of psychosis or recent onset of schizophrenia. Moreover, Family psychoeducation reduces schizophrenia relapse rates, the benefits of psychoeducation also extended to fam- compared with treatment without family psychoeducation, and multifamily group psychoeducation is particularly effective ily members who referred reduced levels of stress, better (from Fiorillo et al., 2011, modified) 34. La psicoeducazione family relationships and greater ability to cope with prob- familiare riduce la percentuale di recidive di schizofrenia lems and responsibilities 28.
rispetto al trattamento senza psicoeducazione familiare, e la Group multifamily psychoeducation is another useful in- psicoeducazione multifamiliare di gruppo è particolarmente tervention based on the family. In this model, qualified efficace (da Fiorillo et al., 2011, mod.) 34. 173 )%( etar espaler sraey-2A.C.
Altamura et al. associated with the disease. As a consequence, mutual petitive job according to most studies 28.
The principal support interventions can have an important role in the characteristics of such interventions are: focus on com- management of schizophrenia; this type of approach has petitive employment; rapid search for work rather than a been actively promoted in the USA and UK 40. Mutual lengthy work training program; integration of psychiatric support groups, such as the National Alliance on Mental and employment services; emphasis on individual work Illness (NAMI), the European Federation of Associations preferences; continuous support in the workplace. of Families of People with Mental Illness (EUFAMI) and One of the most utilised supported employment models the GAMIAN-Europe work together for affected individu- is Individual Placement and Support (IPS), according to als and caregivers.
These groups can provide support in which the only criterion for admission is the desire of the a number of different areas 40. While peer-to-peer coun- person to have a competitive job. The IPS model can pro- selling seems to be useful when included as part of rou- duce notable savings in both social and healthcare costs, tine care, a self-help approach is generally more effective as well as potential benefits for the individual in terms of in other contexts (e.g., alcohol abuse or weight control) fewer hospital admissions and increased rates of employ- than in schizophrenia.
However, in a recent report by the ment 49. Supported employment, however, has not been Schizophrenia Commission in the UK, 48% of patients clearly demonstrated to improve long-term employment with schizophrenia identified a self-help strategy as an and economic independence in patients with schizophre- important part of individual care 41. There is also some nia.
For this reason, it has been suggested that these strate- evidence that self-help strategies can be useful in delay- gies be adequately integrated with interventions such as ing hospital readmission, even if one study found no dif- CBT, cognitive remediation and social skills training 28. ference in clinical or social outcomes between individu- Even if access to employment has a positive impact on als who participated in self-help groups compared with mental health, the right type of employment must be those who did not 42. considered: workplaces with low overall quality can cause stress, which can lead to psychological prob- Social skills training lems 47.
This is an important point since employers often In persons with schizophrenia, problems in psychoso- have low expectations of persons with schizophrenia, cial functioning are related to disabilities in social skills and thus sometimes believe these individuals can only that may be present before the onset of disease and per- carry out jobs requiring low skill sets or with limited sist if they are not addressed 24 25. Social skills training responsibility, or only volunteer work 48. Retribution of can improve social proficiency, daily life, community work can be useful for persons with schizophrenia, even functioning and other aspects of social functioning.
The if this carries the additional risk of interrupting routine approach also has a small but significant effect on re- and consolidated habits. lapse 43. The value of social skills training can be limited in some way to cognitive dysfunction in persons with Limitations of psychosocial therapy schizophrenia 43; however, its integration with cognitive Psychosocial therapy has some limitations that cannot remediation programs (or strategies aimed at improving be appreciated if symptoms are not well controlled and attention and cognitive capacity), seem to be useful in patients are not aware of their condition and the need to improving the acquisition of social skills in patients with treat it.
Involving the patient in the choice of treatment, schizophrenia 44-46. for example, can be important in achieving a positive outcome: individuals who are highly motivated generally Supported employment respond better to cognitive remediation than those who Schizophrenia can significantly reduce the ability of are less motivated 50. Moreover, some persons affected a person to work: on average, only 10-20% of persons with schizophrenia, if not treated with antipsychotics, affected with schizophrenia participate in the competi- can worsen when subjected to psychosocial interven- tive workplace 24 25.
Persons with severe mental disorders tions 51. The costs of some therapies, such as CBT, can be such as schizophrenia are 6-7 times more likely to be prohibitive in countries in which adequate public health- unemployed than those without such disorders 47. Data care resources are not available.
from the UK suggest that only 8% of persons with schizo- The design of studies aimed at investigating the efficacy phrenia are employed, despite evidence that many would of psychosocial therapies is not always as robust as the like to work 48. Supported employment approaches can methodology applied to clinical studies for authorisation help persons with schizophrenia to obtain competitive of a new drug. Thus, precisely planned, randomised con- employment, work longer and have higher salaries than trolled studies with adequate enrolment are needed in persons without such support 26.
At least 50% of individu- order to make strict recommendations regarding the use als who receive supported employment obtain a com- of these treatments. 174Integrated treatment of schizophrenia Individualisation of treatment second-generation antipsychotics (clozapine, olanzap- ine, thioridazine, risperidone, quetiapine for weight gain in schizophrenia and metabolic effects; ziprasidone for increasing the QTc A. Rossi interval) have caused significant concern (Tables VI-X).
In spite of the progress made in psychopharmacology, Introduction many patients with schizophrenia interrupt or switch antipsychotics for lack of efficacy and/or treatment- In spite of significant progress in understanding the na- adverse events, and a large proportion of patients re- ture of the disease, schizophrenia remains a challenging main symptomatic despite treatment. Individualisation condition to treat. Schizophrenia is characterised by high of pharmacological treatment in schizophrenia, in ad- morbidity and mortality: available treatments are inad- dition to clinical experience and patient preference, equate, with variable efficacy, and are associated with should be based on three types of objective data: 1) several adverse effects.
In spite of these obstacles, how- clinical factors predictive of response to therapy; 2) pre- ever, the availability of a wide range of individualised dictable adverse effects of therapy; 3) pharmacogenetic treatments, rehabilitative services and social support can and pharmacogenomic data. effectively promote recovery of persons with schizophre- nia 52 (Fig. 3).
In reality, even if current antipsychotic treat- Clinico-demographic variables and prevalent ments are not completely sufficient, they can nonetheless clinical dimension as predictive factors significantly reduce the burden of disease and improve of response to therapy daily life of patients. Towards this end, critical evalua- tion of the considerable amount of available information The factors that influence variability of response to ther- on antipsychotics and their individualised use is essen- apy with antipsychotics have not been clarified, thus tial, and further efforts are needed to answer clinically rendering it difficult to develop effective treatment strat- important questions 53-57. In clinical practice, decisions egies for individual patients.
The identification of clini- about the best antipsychotic with which to initiate treat- cal factors associated with outcomes in the treatment ment – or switch to another following treatment failure – of schizophrenia would be of significant advantage in is essentially an empirical process, since there is a limited clinical practice. In fact, early identification of patients amount of data in this regard on guiding treatment choic- with poor response would allow avoiding ineffective es. In fact, while it is believed that the available antipsy- treatments and associated adverse effects.
Moreover, chotics have an efficacy that is broadly similar in treat- since some predictive factors can be corrected for, their ment of schizophrenia 5, they differ significantly in their individuation could provide a specific objective for treat- adverse event profiles. Given the notable variability in the ment. Lastly, better understanding of factors related to pharmacokinetics of drugs and response to treatment in response to therapy could help to better comprehend the individual patients, it is worthwhile highlighting that ef- physiopathology of the disease.
However, to date studies ficacy is generally equivalent between groups of patients, that have attempted to identify factors associated with re- although this is not necessarily the case when consider- sponse to therapy have been largely negative. Nonethe- ing the single patient. At present, it is not possible to pre- less, some clinico-demographic variables have been as- dict which antipsychotic is optimal for any given patient.
sociated with pharmacological response, including sex, There is no drug or dose that is valid for all patients, even duration of disease and duration of untreated disease, if it seems that there is a dose range for optimal efficacy. age of onset, comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders Decisions about the choice of antipsychotic often follow and substance abuse 58. a process of trial and error that includes careful monitor- In recent years, data have emerged that associate differ- ing of response and adverse effects, prompt evaluation of ences in clinical response to pharmacotherapy in rela- the risk-benefit ratio and when needed prudent switch to tion to the prevalent clinical dimension of the patient.
another drug 56 (Table V). The available data indicate that the presence of prevalent In general, typical or first-generation antipsychotics are positive symptoms is associated with good response to effective in improving positive symptoms, but often cause antipsychotic therapy. A recent study, for example, dem- motor symptoms or EPS that can be irreversible in the onstrated that response to pharmacological treatment is case of tardive dyskinesia.
The most recent atypical or directly proportional to the severity of positive symptoms, second-generation antipsychotics can improve both posi- showing that psychotic symptoms respond better to med- tive and negative symptoms and are less frequently as- ical therapy 59. sociated with EPS and tardive dyskinesia than first-gen- The negative dimension is more difficult to treat, and if eration agents. However, weight gain, metabolic altera- prevalent, is associated with poor long-term prognosis 60.
tions and cardiovascular effects are associated with some Olanzapine, aripiprazole and risperidone are more effec- 175A.C. Altamura et al. tive than haloperidol in treating the negative symptoms of chotics on cognitive function are generalised or concen- schizophrenia, confirming data on the greater efficacy of trated on specific areas is still debated 68.
atypical antipsychotics on this dimension 61 62. There is limited information on correlations between de- The severity of disorganised thought in patients with pression and outcomes in patients with schizophrenia. schizophrenia is associated with poor long-term prog- The available data suggest that atypical antipsychotics nosis 63.
Moreover, the prevalence of symptoms of dis- are not only not inferior to first-generation antipsychot- organised thought in patients with schizophrenia is pre- ics in this regard 69, but that at least some (amisulpride, dictive of response to antipsychotic therapy 64. Disorgan- aripiprazole, clozapine, olanzapine and quetiapine) ised thought and the positive dimension respond better seem to be more effective in treatment of depression in to treatment with neuroleptics, even if recent data have schizophrenia 4. demonstrated that disorganised thought responds better The presence of aggressive impulses is strongly correlated to atypical antipsychotics 65.
with suicidal behaviour in patients with schizophrenia 70. One of the biggest problems in the treatment of schizo- While aggression is well controlled even by typical anti- phrenia is recovery or at least maintenance of cognitive psychotics, there is much evidence showing that atypical function. It is known that the severity of cognitive deficits antipsychotics, and in particular clozapine, improve im- is one of the most important predictive factors in long- pulsive behaviour and especially self-harm 14.
term outcomes in schizophrenic disorders 66. The avail- able data are in fair agreement in sustaining that new Predictable adverse effects of therapy antipsychotics are more effective than neuroleptics on cognitive function in schizophrenia 67. It is still unclear, Current guidelines 53 55 recommend that the safety profile however, to what degree the effects of second-genera- of the drug is a critical factor in the choice of antipsy- tion antipsychotics have on the cognitive dimension in chotic in patients with schizophrenia.
In reality, adverse schizophrenia, and especially if there are statistically sig- effects of antipsychotics are a crucial aspect of therapy nificant differences between second-generation agents 68. since they are the major cause of discontinuation of ther- Moreover, whether or not the effects of atypical antipsy- apy. Adverse effects, therefore, can complicate and un- FIgure 3.
Healing can be obtained by optimizing individual treatment (from Tandon et al., 2006, modified) 52. La guarigione può essere ottenuta ottimizzando il trattamento individuale (da Tandon et al., 2006, mod.) 52. 176 secivres rehto dna tnemtarT recovery means optimizing individual outcomes Treatment (reduce symptoms and prevent relapse) • Antipsychotics and other medications • Cognitive behavioral therapy reduce reCoVery rehabilitation (enhance adaptive skills) disease • Social skills training burden Health and wellness • Vocational and/or educational functioning Supports (environmental changes) • Independent living • Supported housing • Instrumental competence • Supported employment • Social integration • Quality of life add Costs and unintended adverse consequences • Side effects • Fiscal costs treatment • Related health risks • Discrimination burdenIntegrated treatment of schizophrenia Table V.
Steps to achieve optimum outcomes with currently available antipsychotics (from Bruijnzeel et al., 2014, modified) 56. Passaggi per ottenere un outcome ottimale con i farmaci antipsicotici attualmente disponibili (da Bruijnzeel et al., 2014, mod.) 56. 1.
Considerations in selecting the best antipsychotic for a particular patient • Equivalent efficacy across agents • Individual variability in response • No good predictor of individual response to different agents • Different agents have different side effects • Different patients have different vulnerabilities and preferences 2. Proper antipsychotic trial sequence • Begin with systematic 6-10 week trial of one antipsychotic with optimal dosing • If inadequate response, follow with systematic trial of monotherapy with one or more other antipsychotics at adequate dose and duration • If inadequate response, follow with a trial of clozapine or a long-acting antipsychotic • Follow with a trial of clozapine, if not tried before • Only then consider other strategies (e.g., antipsychotic polypharmacy) 3. good practice guidelines for ongoing antipsychotic treatment • Measurement-based individualized care • Repeated assessment of efficacy using reliably defined treatment targets (facilitated by use of standard rating scales) • Careful assessment of adverse effects • Care consistent with health monitoring protocols • Standard protocols customized to individual vulnerabilities/needs and specific agent • Ongoing collaboration with patien tin decision-making Table VI.
A summary of the first-generation and second-generation antipsychotic medications (from Xu Q, et al., 2013, modified) 81. Riassunto delle caratteristiche dei farmaci antipsicotici di prima e di seconda generazione (da Xu Q, et al., 2013, mod.) 81. First-generation Second-generation antipsychotic medications antipsychotic medications Main content Butyrophenones, Clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, phenothiazines thioxanthenes ziprasidone, etc.
Calming effect Powerful Weaker (except clozapine) Receptor targets Narrow, mainly D2 receptors Multitarget, D2 receptors and serotonin receptors High prolactin Common Less common(except risperidone) Efficacy Good Equivalent or superior Positive symptoms Good efficacy Good efficacy Negative symptoms Weaker efficacy Better efficacy Cognitive symptoms Weaker efficacy Better efficacy Extrapyramidal symptoms Serious Light Tardive dyskinesia Common Rare Effective dose Large dosage Generally small Compliance Bad Better Weight gain Obvious More obvious(except ziprasidone) Metabolic syndrome Common, higher risk Rare, lower risk 177A.C. Altamura et al. Table VII.
Table VIII. Recommendations for the antipsychotic treatment in the acute Recommendations for the antipsychotic treatment in relapse phase of schizophrenia (from Hasan et al., 2012, modified) 53. phase of schizophrenia (from Hasan et al., 2012, modified) 53.
Raccomandazioni per la scelta del farmaco antipsicotico nella Raccomandazioni per la scelta del farmaco antipsicotico nella fase acuta della schizofrenia (da Hasan et al., 2012, mod.) 53. recidiva della schizofrenia (da Hasan et al., 2012, mod.) 53. antipsychotic agent Category recommendationb antipsychotic agent Category recommendationb of evidencea of evidencea Olanzapine A 1 Amisulpride A 1 Quetiapine A 1 Asenapine1 A 1/2 Risperidone A 1 Aripiprazole A 1 Clozapine1 A 2 Clozapine2 A 1/2 Haloperidol A 2 Haloperidol A 2 Amisulpride B 2 Iloperidone1 A 1/2 Aripiprazole B 2 Olanzapine A 1 Ziprasidone B 2 Paliperidone1 A 1/2 Asenapine2 F – Quetiapine A 1 Iloperidone2 F – Risperidone A 1 Paliperidone2 F – Sertindole1,3 A 1/2 Lurasidone2 F – Ziprasidone A 1 Sertindole2 F – Lurasidone B 3 Zotepine2 F – Zotepine B 3 a Category of evidence: Category of evidence where A = full evidence a Category of evidence: Category of evidence where A = full evidence from controlled studies.
b Safety rating = recommendation grade de- from controlled studies. b Safety rating = recommendation grade de- rived from categories of evidence and additional aspects of safety, rived from categories of evidence and additional aspects of safety, tolerability, and interaction potential. 1 Clozapine is highly effective tolerability, and interaction potential.
1 These drugs are not approved in the treatment of first-episode patients, but because of its side effect for the treatment of schizophrenia in all countries and therefore it profile it should be considered as recommendation grade 2. 2 It can should be generally considered as recommendation grade 2 in these be assumed that these antipsychotics are effective in the treatment of countries. 2 Clozapine is highly effective in the treatment of multi- first-episode schizophrenia, but we could not identify any study to episode patients, but it is only recommended as second line treat- give an evidence-based recommendation.
ment due to its special side-effect profile (see main text). 3 Sertindole has a safety rating of 1, but due to its cardiovascular side effect profile the use is restricted in some countries. In these countries, it should be considered as recommendation grade 2 for legal reasons.
dermine treatment with antipsychotics in various ways. In fact, adverse effects can cause or worsen the symptoms associated with schizophrenia, including positive, nega- effects (weight gain, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes) are more tive, cognitive symptoms and agitation, 71 and can also frequently associated with atypical antipsychotics 75. In contribute to increased risk for other mental disorders 72.
recent years, particular attention has been given to meta- Lastly, adverse effects are subjectively difficult to toler- bolic adverse effects, also because it has been demon- ate and can compromise the quality of life. Most adverse strated that metabolic syndrome is more common in effects caused by antipsychotics are due to their action patients with schizophrenia than in the general popula- on neurotransmitter systems and anatomic regions that tion. An alternative classification has been proposed for are different from those involved in their therapeutic ef- antipsychotics based on metabolic risk, in which they fects 73.
Adverse effects are both class- and agent-specific are divided in: a) antipsychotics with high metabolic and are often dose-related: these include neurological, risk (clozapine, olanzapine, thioridazine, risperidone, cardiovascular, anticholinergic and antiadrenergic effects quetiapine); b) antipsychotics with low metabolic risk in addition to weight gain, metabolic disorders involving glucose and lipids and sexual dysfunction 53 73 (Table XI). (ziprasidone, fluphenazine, haloperidol, aripiprazole, Adequate treatment of adverse effects, especially during amisulpride). In particular, among atypical antipsychot- long-term treatment of schizophrenia, can affect adher- ics aripiprazole, ziprasidone and amisulpride have a ence and therefore improve outcomes 74.
Neurological neutral effect on weight gain and lipid metabolism, while adverse effects such as EPS tend to be more frequently aripiprazole and amisulpride do not increase the risk of associated with typical antipsychotics, while metabolic developing type 2 diabetes 76. 178Integrated treatment of schizophrenia Table IX. Recommendations for the antipsychotic treatment of negative symptoms in schizophrenia (from Hasan et al., 2012, modified) 53.
Raccomandazioni per la scelta del farmaco antipsicotico nel trattamento dei sintomi negativi della schizofrenia (da Hasan et al., 2012, mod.) 53. Primary negative symptoms Secondary negative symptoms antipsychotic agent Category of evidencea recommendationb Category of evidencea recommendationb Amisulpride A 1 A 1 Asenapine1 F – B 3 Aripiprazole C3 4 A 1 Clozapine C3 4 A 1 Haloperidol2 F – A 1 Iloperidone F – F – Lurasidone F – B 3 Olanzapine A 1 A 1 Paliperidone1 F – A 1 Quetiapine B 3 A 1 Risperidone F – A 1 Sertindole1,3 F – A 1/2 Ziprasidone B 3 A 1 Zotepine D 5 A 1 Primary negative symptoms are considered a core symptom of schizophrenia, whereas secondary negative symptoms are a consequence of posi- tive symptoms (e.g. social withdrawal because paranoid ideas), depressive symptoms (e.g.
post-psychotic of antipsychotic-induced depression) or environmental factors (e.g. social understimulation due to hospitalism) (Carpenter et al. 1985).
a Category of evidence: Category of evidence where A = full evidence from controlled studies. b Safety rating = recommendation grade derived from categories of evidence and additional aspects of safety, tolerability, and interaction potential. 1 These drugs are not approved for the treatment of schizophrenia in all countries and therefore it should be generally considered as recommendation grade 2 or lower in these countries.
2 Haloperidol is the most commonly used FGA across all studies. Please see the main text for other FGAs. 3 Sertindole has a safety rating of 1, but due to its cardiovascular side effect profile the use is restricted in some countries.
In these countries, it should be considered as recommendation grade 2 or lower for legal reasons. Pharmacogenetic and pharmacogenomic data of the dopaminergic system is at the basis of the phys- iopathology of schizophrenia. Dopamine has different The basis of individualised medicine consists in the pre- subtypes of receptors (D1 to D5), but only D2, D3 and supposition that the unique characteristics of an individu- D4 have been extensively studied by pharmacogenetics al have a significant role in the choice of the most appro- 78 79.
In reality, a number of studies have evaluated the re- priate therapy. Such characteristics include genetic alter- lationship between response to antipsychotic drugs and ations and epigenetic modifications, clinical symptoms, genetic variations in dopamine receptors. Another area modification of biomarkers and environmental factors.
of research involves the pharmacokinetics of antipsy- The objectives of personalised medicine are to predict an chotics, and in particular on the family of cytochrome individual’s susceptibility to disease, obtain accurate di- P450 enzymes that metabolise most of these drugs. agnosis and determine efficacy and favourable response Variants in genes that code for these enzymes can lead to treatment 77. In particular, the aim of pharmacogenet- to an increase or decrease in the metabolism of antipsy- ics is to predict which patients will benefit from a certain chotics that can alter plasma levels of the drug.
In the drug based on genetic information in order to provide tai- last 15 years, many variants of genes have been studied lored treatment that will optimise reduction in symptoms in relation to response to antipsychotic drugs 78 79. The and minimise adverse effects of the drug 78 79. majority of pharmacogenetic studies on antipsychotics Pharmacogenetic studies are concentrated on the main have investigated selected candidate genes, focusing on pathways of molecules hypothesised to be involved in polymorphisms in genes that code for receptors of the the mechanism of action (pharmacodynamics) and on dopamine and serotonin systems, in addition to genes enzymes that metabolise antipsychotics (pharmaco- that code for enzymes that metabolise antipsychotics kinetics).
It is known since the 1960s that dysfunction such as COMT and CYP2D6 78 79. A number of phar- 179A.C. Altamura et al.
Table X. Choice of treatment in the acute phase of schizophrenia (from Lehman et al., 2004, modified) 54. Scelta del farmaco nella fase acuta della schizofrenia (da Lehman et al., 2004, mod.) 54.
Consider Medication From Patient profile group 1: group 2: group 3: group 4: first-generation risperidone, olanzapine, clozapine long-acting agents quetiapine, ziprasidone, injectable or aripiprazole antipsychotic agents First episode Yes Persistent suicidal ideation or behavior Yes Persistent hostility and aggressive Yes behavior Tardive dyskinesia Yes; all group 2 drugs may not Yes be equal their lower or no tar- dive dyskinesia liability History of sensitivity to extrapyramidal Yes, except higher doses side effects of risperidone History of sensitivity to prolactin Yes, except risperidone elevation History of sensitivity to weight gain, Ziprasidone or aripiprazole hyperglycemia, or hyperlipidemia Repeated nonadherence to Yes pharmacological treatment macogenetic studies have attempted to identify genes many different genes. In addition, it is highly unlikely that that may be involved in inter-individual differences in a single pharmacological agent can reverse multifacto- adverse events induced by antipsychotics, although the rial mechanisms associated with neuronal dysfunction results are inconsistent 78 79. of most processes of the central nervous system with a Pharmacogenetics involves the use of genomic techniques, complex phenotype that involves mood, personality, be- such as genotyping, sequencing, gene expression, genetic haviour, cognition and functioning.
Treating such a het- epidemiology, transcriptome, proteomics, metabolome erogeneous clinical picture generally requires the admin- and bioinformatics to study drugs in clinical use, and ap- istration of a combination of diverse drugs 80. ply high-throughput systemic approaches to accelerate the discovery of markers for response to therapy that may be Clinico-pharmacological management related to the drug’s target, its metabolism or course of dis- of the patient with schizophrenia ease 80 81. Pharmacogenomics is different from pharmaco- genetics as the former studies a wide range of genes that A.
Fagiolini, A. Altamura, P. Rocca may be involved in the response to a drug, while the lat- ter primarily examines specific candidate genes.
For many Introduction drugs, interindividual differences are mainly due to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in genes that code for en- The discovery and development of antipsychotics started zymes that metabolise or transport drugs and/or are targets more than 50 years ago and has profoundly improved the of the drug (e.g. enzymes, receptors and defective proteins quality of life of many patients with schizophrenia. As that alter metabolic pathways, leading to expression of the such, there is little doubt on the benefits (and disadvan- phenotype of the disease) 80.
tages) of antipsychotics 82. Antipsychotic drugs are gener- The use of these techniques in disorders of the central ally recommended in all phases of schizophrenia, from nervous system is an extremely complicated process treatment of acute episodes to prevention of relapse 83. since the majority of neuropsychiatric disorders, includ- The important long-term objectives of treatment plans for ing schizophrenia, are complex pathologies that involve schizophrenia include improving adherence to therapy, 180Integrated treatment of schizophrenia Table XI.
Main side effects of typical and atypical antipsychotics (from Marder et al., 2004, modified) 73. Principali effetti collaterali degli antipsicotici tipici e atipici (da Marder et al., 2004, mod.) 73. Drug ePS Increased Increased Hyperglycemia Hyperlipidemia QTc Sedation Hypotension anticholinergic prolactin weight prolongation effects Perfenazine ++ ++ + +(?) +(?) + + Haloperidol +++ +++ + ++ Clozapine +++ +++ +++ +++ +++ +++ Risperidone + +++ ++ ++ ++ + + + Olanzapine +++ +++ +++ + + ++ Quetiapine ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ Ziprasidone ++ Aripiprazole +* * Sedation is indicated with higher doses of therapeutic range.
rehabilitation through psychosocial interventions – that less destructive psychotic episodes, while delayed access involve patients and often even family members – and to mental health services in recent onset schizophrenia improving the quality of life. A combination of antipsy- seems to be associated with slower and incomplete re- chotics with other types of intervention is very important covery, increased risk of relapse and poorer prognosis. in achieving these long-term objectives.
Continuity of treatment in the initial phases appears to be Several important questions regarding pharmacotherapy crucial and can modify long-term prognosis. A study by of schizophrenia – in particular when to initiate treatment Robinson 64 clearly showed that in spite of a good overall and how long to continue it – are still unresolved and of- response to initial treatment, patients with a first episode ten lead to inadequacy of therapy for many patients (e.g. of schizophrenia had a rate of relapse that was > 80% premature discontinuation or delayed access to pharma- at 5 years.
Following initial remission, discontinuation of cological therapy) 82. Poor adherence to pharmacological the antipsychotic was identified as a significant factor for therapy is an important aspect that contributes to inad- relapse, increasing the risk by almost 5-fold. equate treatment 84.
Considerable efforts have been made To date only a few controlled clinical trials have evalu- to improve adherence by developing antipsychotics with ated the possibility of preventing relapse, which is seen better tolerability in formulations that enable prolonged in 41-79% of cases at 12 months after dose reduction or administration of the drug, including long-acting inject- discontinuation of treatment 11 (Table XII) in patients with ables, also known as depot antipsychotics. In recent a first episode of schizophrenia. In one of these studies 86, years, these formulations of atypical antipsychotics have 131 patients with a first episode in remission for at least shown promising results in clinical trials that have led 6 months were randomised to gradual discontinuation of to changes in attitudes towards these drugs, which were therapy or to continue treatment, consisting in the major- traditionally reserved for patients with recurrent poor ad- ity of cases of low doses of antipsychotics, and followed herence to treatment 82 85.
for 18 months. Discontinuation of therapy was associated with a significantly higher rate of relapse (43% vs 21%, p < 0.011). A more recent randomised controlled trial 87 The continuity of treatment compared the efficacy of additional maintenance therapy In about 75% of cases, the course of schizophrenia is to intermittent treatment in prevention of relapse in pa- characterised by a remission phase that alternates with tients with a first episode of schizophrenia in remission relapses; after the initial episode, it is estimated that only and who had been on maintenance therapy for at least 14-20% of patients can completely recover 83.
Moreover, one year. The percentage of relapses was significantly knowledge of the neurobiological bases of schizophrenia higher in the group receiving intermittent treatment than has provided evidence regarding the potentially progres- in those undergoing continuous maintenance therapy. sive nature of the disease.
There is clear evidence indi- Both these trials further highlight the importance of con- cating that interruption of treatment is associated with tinuous maintenance treatment in patients with a first epi- relapse in the majority of cases 83. In addition, it is in- sode, even after one year in remission. creasingly evident that early treatment is associated with In light of results that indicate the importance of continu- 181A.C.
Altamura et al. Table XII. Studies reporting symptom recurrence rates after treatment reduction/discontinuation after a single episode of psychosis (from Emsley et al., 2013, modified) 11.
Studi che riportano le percentuali di recidiva dopo riduzione/sospensione del trattamento a seguito di un singolo episodio di psicosi (da Emsley et al., 2013, mod.) 11. Sample Treatment Comparator Symptom recurrence rates authors size duration recurrence rate 9 months 12 months 18 months 24 months 36 months Kane et al. 28 Not specified 41% 0% Crow et al.
120 Not specified 62% 46% Gitlin et al. 53 3 months 78% 96% - in remission Wunderink et al. 161 6 months 43% 21% in remission Chen et al.
178 12 months + 79% 41% Gaebel et al. 44 12 months 57% 4% Boonstra et al. 20 12 months 82% 12% min remission Emsley et al.
33 24 months 79% 94% 97% - ous early treatment, the question can then be asked if long- problem of long-term, continuous antipsychotic treat- acting antipsychotics (LAI) should be used in first-episode ment is adverse effects. In addition to the well-known schizophrenia; at present, there are only limited data to neurological adverse effects of antipsychotics, there is answer this question 88 89. A two-year open-label study 90 good evidence that some atypical antipsychotics are as- in patients with a first episode of schizophrenia demon- sociated with adverse metabolic effects.
Some studies in strated that those assigned to long-acting risperidone had animal models have suggested that chronic exposure to a significantly lower rate of relapse and better adherence antipsychotics can contribute to a reduction in the vol- than those treated with an oral formulation of risperidone. ume of cerebral tissue associated with the disease 94. In another open-label study 91 on patients with schizo- However, a study 95 carried out in patients with recent phreniform disorder or schizophrenia at diagnosis, treat- diagnosis showed that prolonged treatment with long- ment for 2 years with risperidone LAI was associated with acting risperidone was associated with a stable volume remission in 64% of patients.
of white matter, in contrast to a reduction in volume observed in patients treated with the oral formulation of risperidone; the study concluded that modification of ad- Duration of therapy herence with long-acting risperidone may act differently An open question concerns the optimal means of ensur- on the process of myelinisation, which would explain the ing continuity of treatment, and in particular for how long better prognosis associated with the long-acting formula- maintenance treatment should continue in patients with tion compared with the oral formulation. schizophrenia that is in remission 82. On the basis of clini- It is thus clear that the risk-benefit ratio of long-term treat- cal evidence and studies demonstrating that a 5-year pe- ment should be carefully evaluated and that care must be riod following an acute episode represents the period in taken in prescribing the lowest dose of antipsychotic for which patients are particularly susceptible to relapse, main- effective control of symptoms.
tenance therapy should last for at least 2 to 5 years 92. Ac- cording to the guidelines of the Canadian Psychiatric Asso- adherence to treatment ciation 93, for treatment of a first psychotic episode antipsy- chotics should be continued for at least 2 years following One of the main factors that leads to inadequate treat- the initial remission of symptoms, while a minimum of 5 ment and early discontinuation is poor adherence to years of stability without relapse and adequate functioning therapy 84. In fact, poor adherence is one of the most should be observed before considering gradual discontinu- important problems in treatment of patients with mental ation of the antipsychotic over a period of 6-24 months 74.
disorders. The majority of hospital admissions are due to As in the treatment of other chronic diseases, a relevant non-adherence, even if it is often not clear if non-adher- 182Integrated treatment of schizophrenia ence was the cause or consequence of relapse 96. The mulations are used in maintenance treatment of patients percentage of patients that are partially or completely with schizophrenia, generally following clinical stabilisa- non-adherent to therapy has been estimated to be be- tion with oral antipsychotics.
LAI formulations of atypi- tween 40% and 60% 97. cal antipsychotics have been developed for risperidone, The factors that contribute to poor adherence to phar- olanzapine, paliperidone and, more recently, for aripip- macotherapy for schizophrenia are related to the patient razole: at present, there are 10 LAI formulations, 6 first- (low insight, depression, substance abuse), treatment generation and 4 second-generation 103. (adverse effects, poor efficacy, complexity of therapeutic Even if it is reasonable to expect that LAI antipsychot- regimen) and lack of support or therapeutic alliance with ics can improve adherence to therapy and clinical out- the medical team 82 98 99 (Table XIII).
Some of these fac- comes, the clinical evidence obtained over the years tors can be overcome by improving the strategies used regarding such benefits is not entirely clear, while the to administer the drug, such as long-acting formulations. analysis of more recently introduced LAI antipsychotics However, it should always be considered that for early is in progress. A series of analyses and systematic reviews recognition and intervention of poor adherence, better has been carried out to indirectly compare the efficacy of education of patients and training of healthcare providers LAI antipsychotics with oral formulations of both typical is extremely important.
Poor adherence has been identi- and atypical antipsychotics 104-108. fied as an important risk factor for relapse 84 100. The use A large systematic meta-review 104, covering 8 Co- of LAI antipsychotics has been demonstrated to improve chrane reviews of randomised clinical trials of individ- adherence to therapy, and is associated with fewer treat- ual typical LAI antipsychotics in patients with schizo- ment discontinuations, relapses and hospitalisations 101.
phrenia or schizophreniform disorder showed that the rates of relapse and tolerability profiles are similar for oral and LAI formulations, while general clinical im- Typical and atypical antipsychotics provement was significantly higher for LAI compared Even if atypical antipsychotics are widely used, there with oral formulations. is continued debate regarding their tolerability, which A recent systematic review 105, including studies with is presumed to be better than first-generation agents. different designs and comparing typical LAI antipsy- In recent years, the propensity of atypical antipsychot- chotics with atypical oral formulations, indicated that ics to induce weight gain and metabolic alterations in the LAI antipsychotics had greater clinical benefit than glucose and lipids has raised doubts about their ad- oral formulations, although the results were variable vantages over typical antipsychotics.
For this reason, and inconclusive mainly because of the heterogeneity the role of some atypical antipsychotics in treatment of in methods and interventions used in the various stud- schizophrenia has been reconsidered. Taken together, ies. In addition, a recent publication 109 confirmed that the results of recent analyses comparing typical and studies using different methodologies may give different atypical antipsychotics has demonstrated a high lev- results, and that studies on LAI antipsychotics may be an el of heterogeneity between the two classes of drugs example of a situation where conventional randomised that does not allow for any general conclusions to be trials may not be the gold standard: in fact, these types drawn.
The choice of drug should thus be made on of studies tend to increase adherence to treatment and an individualised basis considering the available thera- therefore lead to underestimation of the possible ben- peutic options 53 74 83 102. efits of LAI antipsychotics compared with the corre- sponding oral formulations. A significant reduction in the rates of relapse (21.6% vs 33.3%, RR 0.70, 95% CI long-acting injectable antipsychotics (laI) 0.57-0.87, p = 0.0009) and dropouts for inefficacy of LAI antipsychotics were introduced over 40 years ago be- typical LAI antipsychotics compared to oral antipsy- cause of their numerous potential advantages over oral chotics was reported in a systematic review and meta- formulations, including the possibility to monitor com- analysis of 10 long-term RCT lasting at least 12 months pliance and distinguish poor adherence from lack of re- published between 1975 and 2010, for a total of 1,700 sponse, regular contact with the patient and caregiver, outpatients 106.
reduced risk of accidental or deliberate overdose, better Another systematic review of studies published between bioavailability and more predictable correlation between 2000 and 2011 107 compared the efficacy of LAI and oral dose and plasma levels 97. antipsychotics on relapse, hospitalisation and all-cause However, LAI antipsychotics have several limitations discontinuation of therapy in schizophrenia revealed a such as slow dose titration, longer time to reach steady clear difference between observational studies (4 pro- state levels and sustained adverse effects if discontinued spective and 4 retrospective), which showed a significant for problems related to tolerability. Traditionally, LAI for- advantage for LAI formulations (prospective: RR = 0.62, 183A.C.
Altamura et al. Table XIII. Factors associated with non-adherence (from Kane et al., 2013, modified) 99.
Fattori associati con la mancata aderenza (da Kane et al., 2013, mod.) 99. Patient characteristics Provider/system/treatment Sex, age, race characteristics (continued) Education Duration of treatment (past and expected) Socio-economic status Complexity of administration Knowledge Accessibility and cohesion of services Perceived need for treatment (insight) Access to care Motivation Continuity of care Beliefs about treatment risks and benefits Reimbursement Past experiences/“transference” Ability to monitor adherence Past history of adherence Provision of psychoeducation Self-stigma Availability of trained psychosocial treatment specialists Illness characteristics Evaluation of obstacles to adherence Illness duration (first episode, chronic) Access to alternative formulations (e.g., long-acting Illness phase (acute, maintenance, etc.) injectable antipsychotics) Symptom type and severity (e.g., negative Complexity of administration symptoms, depression, demoralization) Cognitive function Family/caregiver characteristics Lack of insight Nature of relationship Substance use Perceived need for treatment (insight) Comorbidities Beliefs about treatment risks and benefits Degree of refractoriness Knowledge, beliefs, attribution Potential for relatively asymptomatic intervals or Involvement in psychoeducation “spontaneous remission” Involvement in adherence monitoring Stigma Medication characteristics Environmental characteristics Efficacy (consider different domains) Physical environment Effectiveness Level of supervision Adverse effects (of relevance for the patient) Orderliness Delivery systems/formulation Safety and privacy Dosage frequency Stigma Cost/access Extrafamilial support system Provider/system/treatment characteristics other resource characteristics Therapeutic alliance Financial Frequency and nature of contact with clinicians Transportation 95% CI 0.48-0.81, p < 0.001; retrospective: RR = 0.56, chotics. It was found that LAI antipsychotics were more 95% CI 0.44-0.71, p < 0.001), and randomised con- effective than placebo [p < 0.001 for PANSS (positive and trolled studies (5 trials), which showed a non-significant negative syndrome scale) score] and at least as effective difference favouring LAI formulations (RR = 0.89, 95% CI and safe than oral antipsychotics.
0.64-1.22, p = 0.416) (Fig. 4). The authors of this meta- analysis concluded that in this type of comparison the efficacy and safety of individual laI trial design can considerably influence the results, prob- antipsychotics ably since controlled clinical studies, even if avoiding confounding factors and possible selection bias associ- For risperidone LAI, despite studies that have demonstrat- ated with observational studies, are not reflective of a ed significant reduction in relapse with LAI formulations real-world treatment setting.
over oral formulations, other studies have not confirmed A meta-analysis of 13 randomised trials on 6,313 pa- this superiority 82 106 110 111. It is likely that the differences in tients 108 compared efficacy and safety of second-gen- results are related to dissimilarities in the quality, design eration LAI antipsychotics to placebo and oral antipsy- and methodologies of various studies 82. 184Integrated treatment of schizophrenia Study Favors Depot Favors oral rr 95% CI Weight rCTs Gaebel et al., 2010 0.58 0.39-0.86 15.13 Gaebel et al., 2010 0.50 0.38-0.67 17.14 Kane et al., 2010 2.03 1.31-3.16 14.38 Keks et al., 2007 0.92 0.72-1.18 17.77 Macfadden et al., 2010 1.07 0.84-1.37 17.76 Rosenheck et al., 2011 0.89 0.70-1.13 17.82 Pooled RCTs 0.89 0.64-1.22 Prospective studies Ciudad et al., 2008 0.80 0.60-1.06 24.18 Kim et al., 2008 0.30 0.14-0.67 8.15 Olivares et al., 2009 0.52 0.43-0.64 28.07 Olivares et al., 2009 0.89 0.57-1.39 17.07 Zhu et al., 2008 0.59 0.43-0.81 22.53 Pooled prospective studies 0.62 0.48-0.81 retrospective studies Emsley et al., 2008 0.25 0.09-0.70 5.02 Emsley et al., 2008 0.38 0.22-0.64 15.06 Tavcar et al., 2000 0.71 0.49-1.01 26.45 Tiihonen et al., 2006 0.61 0.38-0.99 17.91 Tiihonen et al., 2011 0.16 0.02-1.05 1.53 Tiihonen et al., 2011 0.69 0.35-1.35 10.48 Tiihonen et al., 2011 0.46 0.16-1.34 4.66 Tiihonen et al., 2011 0.64 0.41-1.02 18.89 Pooled retrospective studies 0.56 0.44-0.71 0.01 0.10 1.00 10.00 Adjusted Relative Risk (log scale) Hospitalization Relapse All-cause discontinuation RCT: randomized controlled trial; RR: risk ratio.
FIgure 4. Meta-analysis of adjusted risk ratios, by study design (from Kirson et al., 2013, modified) 107. Meta-analisi del rischio relativo standardizzato, a seconda del disegno dello studio (da Kirson et al., 2013, mod.) 107.
The efficacy and tolerability of olanzapine LAI (olanzap- the PANSS score in patients with symptomatic acute ine pamoate) has been investigated in two randomised, schizophrenia or in delaying the appearance of relapse double-blind, studies, one versus placebo 112 and the oth- in patients with stable disease 114 115. Paliperidone LAI er versus oral olanzapine 113. In the former, olanzapine has been demonstrated to have a metabolic profile simi- was found to be significantly more effective that placebo lar to other second-generation antipsychotics; more- in reducing the PANNS score, but with weight gain and over, as in the case of olanzapine LAI and risperidone alterations in lipid metabolism.
The second study dem- LAI, its use has been associated with worsening of psy- onstrated the efficacy of olanzapine LAI in maintenance chosis in some patients 116. treatment up to 24 weeks. More recently, the EMA has approved aripiprazole LAI Several studies have demonstrated that paliperidone LAI for maintenance treatment of schizophrenia in adult pa- (paliperidone palmitate) is more efficacious than place- tients stabilised with oral aripiprazole 117.
The clinical bo and is non-inferior to risperidone LAI in improving efficacy of aripiprazole LAI has been established in two 185A.C. Altamura et al. randomised, double-blind clinical studies in patients seen in 6.4% of patients treated with aripiprazole LAI with schizophrenia.
In the first 118, aripiprazole LAI was and 5.2% of subjects in the placebo group; weight loss ≥ shown to be non-inferior to oral aripiprazole consider- 7% was seen in 6.4% in the aripiprazole LAI group and ing both the rate of relapse after 26 weeks and improve- 6.7% of patients in the placebo group; the mean change ments in the PANSS score. In a previous study 119, ar- in weight from baseline to last visit was -0.2 kg for LAI ipiprazole LAI was associated with a risk of relapse at and -0.4 kg for placebo (p = 0.812). 52 weeks that was 5.03 fold lower than placebo.
The most common adverse events observed in the two stud- Quality of life, functioning and treatment ies were: weight gain (9.0%), motor symptoms (7.9%), satisfaction of patients with laI antipsychotics insomnia (5.8%) and injection site pain (5.1%). In par- ticular, injections site reactions were generally mild to Quality of life is an important parameter in evaluating moderate and self-limiting; injections site pain appeared the benefits of treatment, especially in chronic diseases. at a median of 2 days after injection and lasted for a me- Studies that have examined patients switching from an dian of 4 days.
Aripiprazole LAI was associated with a oral to LAI formulation of an antipsychotic have reported greater frequency of EPS (18.4 %) than oral aripiprazole significant improvements in the quality of life, overall (11.7%); motor symptoms were the most frequent ad- functioning and treatment satisfaction 101. verse effect and generally appeared around 10 days af- In one study, following unsatisfactory treatment with ter the first injection and lasted for a median of 56 days, oral antipsychotics, 182 patients with schizophrenia while Parkinsonism was slightly less frequent (6.9%). were switched to a LAI antipsychotic for 6 months 120.
In the study by Fleischhacker 118, weight gain ≥7% vs Compared to baseline, over the 6-month observation baseline and last visit was 9.5% in the group treated period significant improvement (p < 0.05) was seen in with aripiprazole LAI and in 11.7% the oral aripiprazole the PANSS score. Moreover, significant improvement group; weight loss ≥7% from baseline values to last visit (p < 0.05) was seen in Global Assessment of Function- was seen in 10.2% of patients treated with aripiprazole ing, health-related quality of life and patient satisfac- LAI and 4.5% of patients in the aripiprazole oral group. tion.
The effects of LAI on functional improvements In a previous study by Kane 119, weight gain ≥ 7% was and quality of life were also evaluated in a placebo- Table XIV. Decision algorithm for choosing a long-acting antipsychotic based on treatment compliance predictors reported in the literature (from Rossi et al., 2012, modified) 124. Algoritmo decisionale per scegliere un antipsicotico LAI basandosi sui fattori predittivi di compliance al trattamento riportati in letteratura (da Rossi et al., 2012, mod.) 124.
good compliance Poor compliance Late Age at onset Young Long Lenght of illness Short Yes Insight No Mild Positive and negative symptoms Severe No Drug abuse Yes Low Percentage of relapse High Low Frequency of hospitalizations High Oral Ongoing therapy Oral/depot No Previous depot Yes Evaluate patient’s interest in taking depot Evaluate patient’s interest in switching to treatment considering: atypical depot. Considering: • Insight of illness severity • Severity of illness • Educational level • Dosages of ongoing therapy • Therapeutic alliance • Efficacy profile of the depot • Possibility of sharing the therapeutic decision with the physician 186Integrated treatment of schizophrenia A B general open-ended question Probes for adherence, tolerability, and patient response symptoms, and treatment assessment* “What would you like to talk about?” Prescriber-managed Managed mutually by SW/therapist and patient Patients may offer subjective illness narrative Life and living skills Patients may express • Probes on negative symptoms and social outcomes • May check medication adherence treatment preferences • Discuss finances/money management Patient-managed on prescriber invitation • Discuss family life and review practical living skills SW/therapist-managed Treatment planning and laI scheduling (if chosen) (Based on patient status, adherence goal setting and therapy planning and tolerance) “What would you like to work on?” Prescriber-managed Managed mutually by SW/therapist and patient FIgure 5. Observed conversation flow between: A) patients and prescribers (n = 69); B) patients and social workers or therapists (from Potkin et al., 2013, modified) 128.
Flusso di conversazione osservato tra: A) pazienti e prescrittori; B) pazienti e terapisti sociali (da Potkin et al., 2013, mod.) 128. controlled, randomised, double-blind, 8-week study Current uses and guidelines for laI on 404 outpatients with schizophrenia 121. Significant antipsychotics (p < 0.01) improvement was seen with a LAI formula- Current guidelines 53 74 83 92 93 generally recommend LAI tion compared to placebo in the quality of life and in antipsychotics for maintenance therapy, among the other the Short Form Health Survey.
Macfadden et al. 122 as- options for maintenance therapy, and/or when better ad- sessed the efficacy of a LAI formulation on the quality herence is needed. According to the guidelines, LAI can of life and functioning in an observational, prospective even be considered in the acute phase of schizophrenia 24-month study on 532 patients with schizophrenia.
After initiation of therapy with a LAI, patients reported if there is repeated lack of adherence or poor adher- improvement at 3 months that continued throughout the ence 92 124, while the data on the use of new LAI formula- 24-month follow-up period. Improvements were seen in tions in patients with a first episode are considered to be Global Assessment of Functioning, Strauss-Carpenter too limited to allow any specific recommendations (Ta- Levels of Functioning, Personal and Social Performance ble XIV). However, many experts feel that the guidelines and overall health.
The Switch To Risperidone Micro- are too conservative and that the position of LAIs in treat- spheres trial 123 was carried out in patients with schizo- ment of schizophrenia should be reconsidered 96. With phrenia who were switched from an oral antipsychotic the increase in information on the efficacy and tolerabil- or first-generation LAI to a second-generation LAI for ity of atypical LAI antipsychotics, international guidelines lack of efficacy, adverse effects, or poor adherence. Af- should be updated regarding the different phases of dis- ter 6 months, improvements vs baseline were seen with ease in which LAIs can be recommended and on the pa- the second-generation LAI for symptoms, global func- tients who could benefit from their administration.
tioning, quality of life, treatment satisfaction and rate of Other data that has emerged from studies carried out in hospitalisation. several Western countries, including Italy, concerns the 187A.C. Altamura et al.
LAI therapy discussed LAI therapy not discussed Positive Approach: Punitive Approach: • Benefits of LAIs • Address compliance Therapy introduced via: • Success stories of other problems patients • Scare tactics/threats Patient response Favorable Neutral Resistant/Concerned HCP responds to patient resistance Decompose resistance Step may be skipped Emphasize benefits • Uncover severity of Abandon discussion if resistance is not of LAIs resistance expressed • Overcome objections Patient acceptance Prescriber selects the Patient accepts LAI Patient does not accept specific LAI without patient therapy LAI therapy or caregiver input Ideal conversation path LAI initiation barrier FIgure 6. Observed conversation decision tree for prescriber interactions with patients regarding initiation of long-acting injectable antipsychotics (from Potkin et al., 2013, modified) 128. Albero decisionale delle conversazioni osservate nelle interazioni con i pazienti riguardo all’inizio di una terapia con antipsicotici LAI (da Potkin et al., 2013, mod.) 128.
relatively low use of LAIs even in patients who could favourable therapeutic strategy even from an economical clearly benefit from them. This can be explained by a standpoint. number of misunderstandings and prejudices among prescribers, patients and caregivers for LAI formulations, Practical recommendations on the use which are considered older drugs, that are forced upon of atypical laI antipsychotics patients, reserved for those with poor adherence, and as- sociated with adverse events and reduced involvement There is broad consensus among specialists that the op- of healthcare personnel in the care of psychiatric pa- timal use of new LAI formulations requires substantial tients 125.
Some psychiatrists consider LAIs as a ‘last re- changes in the general attitudes towards treatment with source’ of treatment, which should be used only when depot antipsychotics 82 96. LAI antipsychotics should be uti- all other pharmacotherapies have failed, and reserved for lised for any patient undergoing long-term treatment, and patients who have presented with multiple episodes. not only for those with problems in adherence 83 96 126.
Effec- The high cost of LAI antipsychotics is another relevant tive maintenance therapy can be considered as a starting barrier to increased prescribing of these formulations 106. point that leads to successful multimodal treatment pro- However, recent pharmacoeconomic studies have grammes and rehabilitation. Since it is believed that oral shown that atypical LAI antipsychotics can represent a antipsychotics should be initiated in patients with a new 188Integrated treatment of schizophrenia diagnosis of schizophrenia 83, even if data on the efficacy as a speaker on symposia for Angelini, AstraZeneca, Bristol- of LAI antipsychotics are still limited, it can be expected Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, that these formulations will also be favourable compared Lundbeck, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer, Roche.
Silvana Galderisi has received grant/research and/or has with oral antipsychotics in this setting. In patients with collaborated as consultant and/or speaker in symposia for Janssen- acute exacerbations of schizophrenia, in which the guide- Cilag, Roche, Otsuka, Lundbeck, Pierre Fabre e Amgen-Dompé. lines recommend treatment with oral antipsychotics, when Paola Rocca has participated as speaker on symposia for Bristol- the exacerbation is due to repeated non-adherence to poor Myers Squibb, Janssen-Cilag, Otsuka, Roche.
adherence, the use of a LAI antipsychotic is advised 82. Alessandro Rossi has received grant/research and/or has Switching from an oral to LAI formulation requires precise collaborated as consultant and/or speaker in symposia for strategies to maintain or improve therapeutic efficacy and Takeda, Roche, Lundbeck, Janssen-Cilag. minimise rebound cholinergic or histaminergic effects 127.
In conclusion, the recent development of LAI formulations references of atypical antipsychotics has increased the number of treatment options for individualised treatment of schizo- 1 Fleischhacker WW, Arango C, Arteel P, etal. Schizophre- phrenia, which is a fundamental aspect of management of nia: time to commit to policy change. Schizophr Bull patients with mental illness.
Early intervention and conti- 2014;40(Suppl 3):S165-94. nuity of treatment are key factors is achieving long-term re- 2 Remington G, Foussias G, Agid O. Progress in defining mission, which prevents disruptive progression of disease optimal treatment outcome in schizophrenia.
CNS Drugs and reduces the costs of the disease. The availability of 2010;24:9-20. new LAI formulations, with better tolerability in terms of 3 Miyamoto S, Miyake N, Jarskog LF, et al.
Pharmacological EPS than typical depot antipsychotics, allows for the pos- treatment of schizophrenia: a critical review of the pharma- cology and clinical effects of current and future therapeutic sibility to extend treatment with long-acting drugs, tradi- agents. Mol Psychiatry 2012;17:1206-27. tionally reserved for non-adherent patients with multiple episodes, to young patients in the initial phase of schizo- 4 Leucht S, Corves C, Arbter D, et al.
Second-generation ver- sus first- generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: a phrenia, who have a relevant risk of relapse if treatment meta-analysis. Lancet 2009;373:31-41. is discontinued and the consequences of which would be devastating.
Radical change in attitudes is needed among 5 Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al.; Clinical Antip- sychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) Investi- both physicians and patients to realise that long-acting an- gators. Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with tipsychotics can offer a new treatment paradigm: no longer chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1209-23.
‘’last resort’ drugs, but rather a potential first step towards 6 National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Schiz- continuity of treatment and clinical remission. ophrenia: core interventions in the treatment and manage- Two recent studies have confirmed this consideration.
In ment of schizophrenia in adults in primary and secondary the first, Potkin et al. 128 assessed the points of view of care (updated edition). 2010.
http://www.nice.org.uk/nice- the patient and prescriber towards LAI antipsychotics by media/live/11786/43607/43607.pdf. examining the conservations between patients and psy- 7 Lambert M, Naber D, Schacht A, et al. Rates and predic- chiatrists: the study revealed that the lack of information tors of remission and recovery during 3 years in 392 never- and dialog was often the basis for questionable choices, treated patients with schizophrenia.
Acta Psychiatr Scand which excluded the possibility to consider the use of LAI 2008;118:220-9. antipsychotics even in cases for which they are clearly in- 8 Barnes TR, Leeson VC, Mutsatsa SH, et al. Duration of un- dicated (Figs.
5, 6). In the second study 129, negative atti- treated psychosis and social function: 1-year follow-up study tudes and reluctance by many psychiatrists in prescribing of first-episode schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry 2008;193:203-9.
LAI antipsychotics, and not patient resistance, was found 9 Altamura AC, Bassetti R, Sassella F, et al. Duration of un- to be the true cause of underuse of these formulations. treated psychosis as a predictor of outcome in first-epi- In the future, we believe that well-designed long-term sode schizophrenia: a retrospective study.
Schizophr Res studies are needed to confirm the encouraging results ob- 2001;52:29-36. tained with atypical LAI antipsychotics. 10 Leucht S, Tardy M, Komossa K, et al.
Maintenance treat- ment with antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia. Cochrane Conflict of Interests Database Syst Rev 2012;5:CD008016. Carlo Altamura has received grant/research and/or has collaborated as consultant and/or speaker in symposia for 11 Emsley R, Chiliza B, Asmal L, et al.
The nature of relapse in Roche, Lundbeck, Merck, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, schizophrenia. BMC Psychiatry 2013;13:50. Janssen-Cilag, Sanofi, Eli Lilly, Pfizer and Otsuka.
12 Kern RS, Glynn SM, Horan WP, et al. Psychosocial treat- Andrea Fagiolini has received grant/research and/or has collab- ments to promote functional recovery in schizophrenia. orated as consultant and/or chairman and/or has participated Schizophr Bull 2009;35:347-61.
189A.C. Altamura et al. 13 Swanson JW, Swartz MS, Van Dorn RA, et al.
Comparison 29 Jones C, Hacker D, Cormac I, et al. Cognitive behaviour of antipsychotic medication effects on reducing violence in therapy versus other psychosocial treatments for schizo- people with schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry 2008;193:37-43.
phrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;4:CD008712. 14 Meltzer HY, Alphs L, Green AI, et al.; International Suicide 30 Eack SM, Hogarty GE, Cho RY, et al.
Neuroprotective effects Prevention Trial Study Group. Clozapine treatment for sui- of cognitive enhancement therapy against gray matter loss cidality in schizophrenia: International Suicide Prevention in early schizophrenia: results from a 2-year randomized Trial (InterSePT). Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003;60:82-91.
controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010;67:674-82. 15 Galderisi S, Maj M.
Deficit schizophrenia: an overview of 31 Penadés R, Pujol N, Catalán R, et al. Brain effects of cognitive clinical, biological and treatment aspects. Eur Psychiatry remediation therapy in schizophrenia: a structural and func- 2009;24:493-500.
tional neuroimaging study. Biol Psychiatry 2013;73:1015-23. 16 Hofer A, Baumgartner S, Edlinger M, et al.
Patient outcomes 32 Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, et al. A meta-analysis of cog- in schizophrenia I: correlates with sociodemographic vari- nitive remediation for schizophrenia: methodology and ef- ables, psychopathology, and side effects. Eur Psychiatry fect sizes.
Am J Psychiatry 2011;168:472-85. 2005;20:386-94. 33 Sellwood W, Wittkowski A, Tarrier N, et al.
Needs-based cog- 17 Goff DC, Hill M, Barch D. The treatment of cognitive im- nitive-behavioural family intervention for patients suffering from pairment in schizophrenia. Pharmacol Biochem Behav schizophrenia: 5-year follow-up of a randomized controlled ef- 2011;99:245-53.
fectiveness trial. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2007;116:447-52. 18 Davidson M, Galderisi S, Weiser M, et al.
Cognitive effects 34 Fiorillo A, Galderisi S. Family based approaches for schizo- of antipsychotic drugs in first-episode schizophrenia and phrenia patients. In: Fleischhacker W, Stolerman IP, editirs.
schizophreniform disorder: a randomized, open-label clini- Encyclopedia of schizophrenia. Focus on management op- cal trial (EUFEST). Am J Psychiatry 2009;166:675-82.
tions. Springer 2011, pp. 108-13.
19 Barnes TR. Evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacologi- 35 Pitschel-Walz G, Leucht S, Bauml J, et al. The effect of fam- cal treatment of schizophrenia: recommendations from the ily interventions on relapse and rehospitalization in schizo- British Association for Psychopharmacology.
J Psychophar- phrenia – a meta-analysis. Schizophr Bull 2001;27:73-92. macol 2011;25:567-620.
36 Leff J, Berkowitz R, Shavit N, et al. A trial of family therapy 20 Weiden PJ. Understanding and addressing adherence issues versus a relatives’ group for schizophrenia.
Two-year follow- in schizophrenia: from theory to practice. J Clin Psychiatry up. Br J Psychiatry 1990;157:571-7.
2007;68(Suppl 14):14-9. 37 Breitborde NJ, Moreno FA, Mai-Dixon N, et al. Multifamily 21 Morken G, Widen JH, Grawe RW.
Non-adherence to antip- group psychoeducation and cognitive remediation for first- sychotic medication, relapse and rehospitalisation in recent- episode psychosis: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Psy- onset schizophrenia. BMC Psychiatry 2008;8:32.
chiatry 2011;11:9. 22 Kishimoto T, Robenzadeh A, Leucht C, et al. Long-acting 38 McFarlane WR, Lukens E, Link B, et al.
Multiple-family injectable vs oral antipsychotics for relapse prevention in groups and psychoeducation in the treatment of schizo- schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Schizo- phrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1995;52:679-87.
phr Bull 2014;40:192-213. 39 Ucok A, Brohan E, Rose D, et al. Anticipated discrimination 23 Wiersma D, Nienhuis FJ, Slooff CJ, et al.
Natural course of among people with schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatr Scand schizophrenic disorders: a 15-year followup of a Dutch inci- 2012;125:77-83. dence cohort.
Schizophr Bull 1998;24:75-85. 40 Ahmed AO, Doane NJ, Mabe PA et al. Peers and peer-led 24 Chien WT, Leung SF, Yeung FK, et al.
Current approaches to interventions for people with schizophrenia. Psychiatr Clin treatments for schizophrenia spectrum disorders, part II: psy- North Am 2012;35:699-715. chosocial interventions and patient-focused perspectives in 41 The Schizophrenia Commission.
The abandoned illness: psychiatric care. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2013;9:1463-81. a report from the Schizophrenia Commission.
London: 25 Mueser KT, Deavers F, Penn DL, et al. Psychosocial treatments Rethink Mental Illness 2012. Available from: http://www.
for schizophrenia. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2013;9:465-97. schizophreniacommission.org.uk/the-report/ 26 Coldwell CM, Bender WS.
The effectiveness of asser- 42 Burti L, Amaddeo F, Ambrosi M, et al. Does additional care tive community treatment for homeless populations with provided by a consumer self-help group improve psychiatric severe mental illness: a meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry outcome?
A study in an Italian community-based psychiat- 2007;164:393-9. ric service. Community Ment Health J 2005;41:705-20.
27 Nordentoft M, Melau M, Iversen T, et al. From research to 43 Kurtz MM, Mueser KT. A meta-analysis of controlled re- practice: how OPUS treatment was accepted and imple- search on social skills training for schizophrenia.
J Consult mented throughout Denmark. Early Interv Psychiatry 2013 Clin Psychol 2008;76:491-504. Dec 5.
doi: 10.1111/eip.12108. 44 Silverstein SM, Spaulding WD, Menditto AA, et al. Atten- 28 Dixon LB, Dickerson F, Bellack AS, et al.
The 2009 schizo- tion shaping: a reward-based learning method to enhance phrenia PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations skills training outcomes in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull and summary statements. Schizophr Bull 2010;36:48-70.
2009;35:222-32. 190Integrated treatment of schizophrenia 45 Bucci P, Piegari G, Mucci A, et al. Neurocognitive individu- 59 Schennach-Wolff R, Jäger M, Mayr A, et al.
Predictors of re- alized training versus social skills individualized training: a sponse and remission in the acute treatment of first-episode randomized trial in patients with schizophrenia. Schizophr schizophrenia patients - Is it all about early response? Eur Res 2013;150:69-75.
Neuropsychopharmacol 2011;21:370-8. 46 Galderisi S, Piegari G, Mucci A, et al. Social skills and neu- 60 Malla A, Payne J.
First-episode psychosis: psychopathol- rocognitive individualized training in schizophrenia: com- ogy, quality of life, and functional outcome. Schizophr Bull parison with structured leisure activities. Eur Arch Psychiatry 2005;31:650-71.
Clin Neurosci 2010;260:305-15. 61 Green AI, Tohen MF, Hamer RM, et al.; HGDH Research 47 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Group.
First episode schizophrenia-related psychosis and Sick on the job? Myths and realities about mental health and substance use disorders: acute response to olanzapine and work - 2011. Available from: http://www.oecd.org/health/ haloperidol.
Schizophr Res 2004;66:125-35. theoecdmentalhealthandworkproject.htm. 62 Hartling L, Abou-Setta AM, Dursun S, et al.
Antipsychot- 48 Bevan S, Gulliford J, Steadman K, et al. Working with schiz- ics in adults with schizophrenia: comparative effectiveness ophrenia: pathways to employment, recovery & inclusion of first-generation versus second-generation medications: - 2013. Available from: http://www.theworkfoundation.
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. com/Reports/330/ Working-with-Schizophrenia-Pathways- 2012;157:498-511.
to-employment-recovery-and- inclusion. 63 Salokangas RK, Honkonen T, Stengård E, et al. Symptom 49 Bond GR, Drake RE, Becker DR.
Generalizability of the In- dimensions and their association with outcome and treat- dividual Placement and Support (IPS) model of supported ment setting in long-term schizophrenia. Results of the DSP employment outside the US. World Psychiatry 2012;11:32-9.
project. Nord J Psychiatry 2002;56:319-27. 50 Medalia A, Richardson R.
What predicts a good response 64 Robinson DG, Woerner MG, Alvir JM, et al. Predictors of to cognitive remediation interventions? Schizophr Bull treatment response from a first episode of schizophrenia or 2005;31:942-53.
schizoaffective disorder. Am J Psychiatry 1999;156:544-9. 51 Hogarty GE, Goldberg SC, Schooler NR, et al.
Drug and so- 65 Janicak PG, Glick ID, Marder SR, et al. The acute efficacy ciotherapy in the aftercare of schizophrenic patients. II.
Two- of aripiprazole across the symptom spectrum of schizophre- year relapse rates. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1974;31:603-8. nia: a pooled post hoc analysis from 5 short-term studies.
J Clin Psychiatry 2009;70:25-35. 52 Tandon R, Targum SD, Nasrallah HA, et al. Strategies for maximizing clinical effectiveness in the treatment of schizo- 66 Weiss EM, Bilder RM, Fleischhacker WW.
The effects of phrenia. J Psychiatr Pract 2006;12:348-63. second-generation antipsychotics on cognitive functioning and psychosocial outcome in schizophrenia.
Psychophar- 53 Hasan A, Falkai P, Wobrock T, et al.; World Federation of macology (Berl) 2002;162:11-7. Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) Task Force on 67 Bilder RM, Goldman RS, Volavka J, et al. Neurocognitive Treatment Guidelines for Schizophrenia.
World Federation effects of clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, and haloperi- of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines dol in patients with chronic schizophrenia or schizoaffective for biological treatment of schizophrenia, part 1: update disorder. Am J Psychiatry 2002;159:1018-28. 2012 on the acute treatment of schizophrenia and the man- agement of treatment resistance.
World J Biol Psychiatry 68 Goldberg TE, Goldman RS, Burdick KE, et al. Cognitive 2012;13:318-78. improvement after treatment with second-generation antip- sychotic medications in first-episode schizophrenia: is it a 54 Lehman AF, Lieberman JA, Dixon LB, et al.; American Psychi- practice effect?
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:1115-22. atric Association; Steering Committee on Practice Guidelines. Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with schizophre- 69 Mauri MC, Moliterno D, Rossattini M, et al.
Depression in nia, second edition. Am J Psychiatry 2004;161(2 Suppl):1-56. schizophrenia: comparison of first- and second-generation antipsychotic drugs.
Schizophr Res 2008;99:7-12. 55 NICE Guidelines. Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults: treatment and management - 2014.
Disponibile in: http:// 70 Altamura AC, Bassetti R, Bignotti S, et al. Clinical variables www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg178. related to suicide attempts in schizophrenic patients: a ret- rospective study.
Schizophr Res 2003;60:47-55. 56 Bruijnzeel D, Suryadevara U, Tandon R. Antipsychotic treatment of schizophrenia: An update.
Asian J Psychiatr 71 Tandon R, Jibson MD. Extrapyramidal side effects of antip- 2014 Aug 13. pii: S1876-2018(14)00190-7.
sychotic treatment: scope of problem and impact on out- come. Ann Clin Psychiatry 2002;14:123-9. 57 Muscettola G, Rossi A, Scarone S.
Una valutazione ra- gionata delle principali linee guida internazionali sulla 72 Nasrallah HA, Mulvihill T. Iatrogenic disorders associated farmacoterapia della schizofrenia. Giorn Ital Psicopat with conventional vs atypical antipsychotics.
Ann Clin Psy- 2010;16:196-224. chiatry 2001;13:215-27. 58 Altamura AC, Bobo WV, Meltzer HY.
Factors affecting 73 Marder SR, Essock SM, Miller AL, et al. Physical health outcome in schizophrenia and their relevance for psy- monitoring of patients with schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry chopharmacological treatment.
Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2004;161:1334-49. 2007;22:249-67. 74 Hasan A, Falkai P, Wobrock T, et al.; WFSBP Task force on 191A.C.
Altamura et al. Treatment Guidelines for Schizophrenia. World Federation Injection in the treatment of first episode schizophrenia.
of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines for Curr Psychopharmacol 2013;2:29-36. biological treatment of schizophrenia, part 2: update 2012 90 Kim B, Lee SH, Choi TK, et al . Effectiveness of risperidone on the long-term treatment of schizophrenia and manage- long-acting injection in first-episode schizophrenia: in natu- ment of antipsychotic-induced side effects.
World J Biol ralistic setting. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry Psychiatry 2013;14:2-44. 2008;32:1231-5.
75 De Hert M, Detraux J, van Winkel R, et al. Metabolic and 91 Emsley R, Oosthuizen P, Koen L, et al. Remission in patients cardiovascular adverse effects associated with antipsychotic with first-episode schizophrenia receiving assured antipsy- drugs.
Nat Rev Endocrinol 2011;8:114-26. chotic medication: a study with risperidone long-acting in- 76 Yogaratnam J, Biswas N, Vadivel R, et al. Metabolic compli- jection.
Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2008;23:325-31. cations of schizophrenia and antipsychotic medications--an 92 Falkai P, Wobrock T, Lieberman J, et al. World Federation updated review.
East Asian Arch Psychiatry 2013;23:21-8. of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines for 77 Ozomaro U, Wahlestedt C, Nemeroff CB. Personalized biological treatment of schizophrenia, Part 1: acute treatment medicine in psychiatry: problems and promises.
BMC Med of schizophrenia. World J Biol Psychiatry 2005;6:132-91. 2013;11:132.
93 Canadian guidelines. Clinical practice guidelines. Treatment 78 Zhang JP, Malhotra AK.
Pharmacogenetics and antipsychot- of schizophrenia. Can J Psychiatry 2005;50:7S-57S. ics: therapeutic efficacy and side effects prediction.
Expert 94 Ho BC, Andreasen NC, Ziebell S, et al. Long-term antip- Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2011;7:9-37. sychotic treatment and brain volumes: a longitudinal 79 Zhang JP, Malhotra AK.
Pharmacogenetics of antipsychot- study of first-episode schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry ics: recent progress and methodological issues. Expert Opin 2011;68:128-37.
Drug Metab Toxicol 2013; 9:183-191. 95 Bartzokis G, Lu PH, Amar CP, et al. Long acting injection 80 Cacabelos R, Hashimoto R, Takeda M.
Pharmacogenomics versus oral risperidone in first-episode schizophrenia: differ- of antipsychotics efficacy for schizophrenia. Psychiatry Clin ential impact on white matter myelination trajectory. Schiz- Neurosci 2011;65:3-19.
ophr Res 2011;132:35-41. 81 Xu Q, Wu X, Xiong Y, et al. Pharmacogenomics can im- 96 Kane JM, Garcia-Ribera C.
Clinical guideline recommenda- prove antipsychotic treatment in schizophrenia. Front Med tions for antipsychotic long-acting injections. Br J Psychiatry 2013;7:180-90.
2009;52(Suppl):S63-7. 82 Altamura AC, Aguglia E, Bassi M, et al. Rethinking the role 97 Olivares JM, Pinal B, Cinos C.
Comparisons of long-acting of long-acting atypical antipsychotics in the community set- antipsychotics injection and oral antipsychotics in schizo- ting. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2012;27:336-49. phrenia.
Neuropsychiatry 2011;1:275-89. 83 National Institute for Health & Clinical Excellence (NICE). 98 Acosta FJ, Hernández JL, Pereira J, et al.
Medication adher- Schizophrenia. Core interventions in the treatment and ence in schizophrenia. World J Psychiatry 2012;2:74-82.
management of schizophrenia in adults in primary and 99 Kane JM, Kishimoto T, Correll CU. Non-adherence to medi- secondary care (updated edition, 2009). Consultabile su: cation in patients with psychotic disorders: epidemiology, http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg82.
contributing factors and management strategies. World Psy- 84 Haddad PM, Brain C, Scott J. Nonadherence with antipsy- chiatry 2013;12:216-26.
chotic medication in schizophrenia: challenges and manage- ment strategies. Patient Relat Outcome Meas 2014;5:43-62. 100 Leucht S, Heres S.
Epidemiology, clinical consequences, and psycho- social treatment of nonadherence in schizo- 85 Graffino M, Montemagni C, Mingrone C, et al. Long acting phrenia. J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67(Suppl 5):3-8.
injectable antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia: a review of literature. Riv Psichiatr 2014;49:115-23. 101 Kaplan G, Casoy J, Zummo J.
Impact of long-acting inject- able antipsychotics on medication adherence and clinical, 86 Wunderink L, Nienhuis FJ, Sytema S, et al. Guided discon- functional, and economic outcomes of schizophrenia. Pa- tinuation versus maintenance treatment in remitted first- epi- tient Prefer Adherence 2013;7:1171-80.
sode psychosis: relapse rates and functional outcome. J Clin Psychiatry 2007;68:654-61. 102 Leucht S, Cipriani A, Spineli L, et al.
Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 15 antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: a 87 Gaebel W, Riesbeck M, Wölwer W, et al.; German Study multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet 2013;382:951-62. Group on First-Episode Schizophrenia.
Relapse prevention in first-episode schizophrenia-maintenance vs intermittent drug 103 Citrome L. New second-generation long-acting injectable treatment with prodrome-based early intervention: results of a antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia. Expert randomized controlled trial within the German Research Net- Rev Neurother 2013;13:767-83.
work on Schizophrenia. J Clin Psychiatry 2011;72:205-18. 104 Adams CE, Fenton MKP, Quraishi S, et al.
Systematic meta- 88 Emsley R, Chiliza B, Asmal L, et al. Long-acting injectable review of depot antipsychotic drugs for people with schizo- antipsychotics in early psychosis: a literature review. Early phrenia.
Br J Psychiatry 2001;179:290-9. Interv Psychiatry 2013;7:247-54. 105 Haddad PM, Taylor M, Niaz OS.
First-generation antipsy- 89 Rocca P, Sandei L, Bava IM, et al. Risperidone Long-Acting chotic long-acting injections v. oral antipsychotics in schizo- 192Integrated treatment of schizophrenia phrenia: systematic review of randomised controlled trials 118 Fleischhacker WW, Sanchez R, Perry PP, et al.
Aripipra- and observational studies. Br J Psychiatry 2009;195:s20-8. zole once-monthly for treatment of schizophrenia: double- 106 Leucht C, Heres S, Kane JM, et al.
Oral versus depot antipsy- blind, randomised, non-inferiority study. Br J Psychiatry chotic drugs for schizophrenia--a critical systematic review 2014;205:135-44. and meta-analysis of randomised long-term trials.
Schizophr 119 Kane JM, Sanchez R, Perry PP, et al. Aripiprazole intra- Res. 2011;127:83-92.
muscular depot as maintenance treatment in patients 107 Kirson NY, Weiden PJ, Yermakov S, et al. Efficacy and effec- with schizophrenia: a 52-week, multicenter, randomized, tiveness of depot versus oral antipsychotics in schizophre- double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Clin Psychiatry.
nia: synthesizing results across different research designs. J 2012;73:617-24. Clin Psychiatry 2013;74:568-75.
120 Lloyd K, Latif MA, Simpson S, et al. Switching stable pa- 108 Fusar-Poli P, Kempton MJ, Rosenheck RA. Efficacy and safe- tients with schizophrenia from depot and oral antipsychot- ty of second-generation long-acting injections in schizophre- ics to long-acting injectable risperidone: efficacy, qual- nia: a meta-analysis of randomized-controlled trials.
Int Clin ity of life and functional outcome. Hum Psychopharmacol Psychopharmacol 2013;28:57-66. 2010;25:243-52.
109 Kane JM, Kishimoto T, Correll CU. Assessing the compara- 121 Witte MM, Case MG, Schuh KJ, et al. Effects of olanzap- tive effectiveness of long-acting injectable vs oral antipsy- ine long-acting injection on levels of functioning among chotic medications in the prevention of relapse provides a acutely ill patients with schizophrenia.
Curr Med Res Opin case study in comparative effectiveness research in psychia- 2012;28:315-23. try. J Clin Epidemiol 2013;66(8 Suppl):S37-41.
122 Macfadden W, DeSouza C, Crivera C, et al. Assessment of 110 Grimaldi-Bensouda L, Rouillon F, Astruc B, et al. Does long-acting effectiveness measures in patients with schizophrenia initi- injectable risperidone make a difference to the real-life treatment ated on risperidone long-acting therapy: the SOURCE study of schizophrenia?
Results of the Cohort for the General Study of results. BMC Psychiatry 2011;11:167. Schizophrenia (CGS).
Schizophr Res 2012;134:187-94. 123 De Marinis T, Saleem PT, Glue P, et al. Switching to long- 111 Buckley PF, Schooler NR, Goff DC, et al.; the PROACTIVE acting injectable risperidone is beneficial with regard to Study.
Comparison of SGA Oral Medications and a Long- clinical outcomes, regardless of previous conventional med- Acting Injectable SGA: The PROACTIVE Study. Schizophr ication in patients with schizophrenia. Pharmacopsychiatry Bull 2014 May 27.
pii: sbu067. [Epub ahead of print]- 2007;40:257-63. 112 Lauriello J, Lambert T, Andersen S, et al.
An 8-week, double- 124 Rossi G, Frediani S, Rossi R, et al. Long-acting antipsy- blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of olanzapine chotic drugs for the treatment of schizophrenia: use in daily long- acting injection in acutely ill patients with schizophre- practice from naturalistic observations. BMC Psychiatry nia.
J Clin Psychiatry 2008;69:790-9. 2012;12:122. 113 Kane JM, Detke HC, Naber D, et al.
Olanzapine long-acting 125 Besenius C, Clark-Carter D, Nolan P. Health profession- injection: a 24-week, randomized, double- blind trial of als’ attitudes to depot injection antipsychotic medica- maintenance treatment in patients with schizophrenia. Am J tion: a systematic review.
J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs Psychiatry 2010;167:181-9. 2010;17:452-62. 114 McEvoy JP, Byerly M, Hamer RM, et al.
Effectiveness of 126 Achilla E, McCrone P. The cost effectiveness of long-acting/ paliperidone palmitate vs haloperidol decanoate for main- extended-release antipsychotics for the treatment of schizo- tenance treatment of schizophrenia: a randomized clinical phrenia: a systematic review of economic evaluations. Appl trial.
JAMA 2014;311:1978-87. Health Econ Health Policy 2013;11:95-106. 115 Markowitz M, Fu DJ, Levitan B, et al.
Long-acting injectable 127 Manchanda R, Chue P, Malla A, et al. Long-acting inject- paliperidone palmitate versus oral paliperidone extended re- able antipsychotics: evidence of effectiveness and use. Can lease: a comparative analysis from two placebo-controlled J Psychiatry 2013;58(5 Suppl 1):5S-13S.
relapse prevention studies. Ann Gen Psychiatry 2013;12:22. 128 Potkin S, Bera R, Zubek D, et al.
Patient and prescriber per- 116 Gentile S. Adverse effects associated with second-generation spectives on long-acting injectable (LAI) antipsychotics and antipsychotic long-acting injection treatment: a comprehen- analysis of in-office discussion regarding LAI treatment for sive systematic review. Pharmacotherapy 2013;33:1087-106.
schizophrenia. BMC Psychiatry 2013;13:261. 117 Abilify Maintena.
Informazioni sul prodotto. Consultabile 129 Kim SW, Lee YH, Jang JE, et al. Comparison of attitudes su: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/it_IT/document_li- toward long-acting injectable antipsychotics among brary/EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/002755/ psychiatrists and patients.
Int Clin Psychopharmacol WC500156111.pdf. 2013;28:80-6. Editorial Note: Please refer to the SPC (Summary of Product Characteristics) of each molecule for any further consideration and with regard to adverse reactions.
With the non conditioned contribution of Otsuka Pharmaceutical Italy Srl 193
DSM-5 Criteria: Schizophrenia Box 5. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Schizophrenia F Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be delusions, hallucinations or disorganized speech:  Delusions  Hallucinations  Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence)  Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior  Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition) F Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months.
This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet the above criteria (i.e., active phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested only be negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed above present in an attenuated form. F For a significant portion of time since the onset of the disturbance, level of functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self- care is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is a failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
F Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out. F The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition. F If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 40Treatment of Schizophrenia Note: Treatment recommendations are based on levels of evidence and expert opinion. For a description of the criteria for each level, see page 4. Conduct comprehensive assessment and use measurement-based care.
Refer to Principles of Practice on pages 6–11. Most importantly, assess social support system (housing, family, other caregivers) and evaluate threats to continuity of care (access to medication, adherence, etc.). Strongly recommend psychiatric consultation prior to initiation of therapy + psychotherapeutic medication using a multi-disciplinary approach if treated by a non-psychiatrist.
Level 1 Initial Treatment: F Monotherapy with an antipsychotic (SGA) other than clozapine*—either oral, or oral antipsychotic followed by the same SGA-LAI (if tolerable and sufficiently efficacious) F If initial trial of antipsychotic monotherapy unsuccessful, try monotherapy with another SGA antipsychotic (either oral or LAI) with low metabolic adverse effects. *Note: Balance efficacy, side-effects, individual vulnerabilities and preferences. Select a medication with lower metabolic risk, lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS), sedation, and sexual side-effects.
For more detail on LAIs, refer to page 43. Level 2A If non-adherent or refractory to Level 1: F Long-acting injectable antipsychotic medication (LAI) Level 2B If Level 1 is ineffective in at least two antipsychotic trials: F Clozapine Level 3 If Levels 1 and 2 are ineffective and/or not well tolerated: F Diagnostic review and/or consultation F Clozapine if not tried earlier F Antipsychotic, including clozapine + electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) F Augmentation of clozapine with aripiprazole, lamotrigine, topiramate or if partial or incomplete response to clozapine Level 4 If Levels 1, 2, and 3 are ineffective and/or not well tolerated: F Two antipsychotics, ideally with different pharmacological mechanisms* and side-effect profiles (evidence is weak) F First generation antipsychotic use *Full antagonist with partial agonist; loose binding with tight binding floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 41Table 4. Recommended Medications for the Treatment of Schizophrenia: Oral Antipsychotics Chlorpromazine Acute Maintenance Medication Equivalentsa Therapy Therapyb First Generation Antipsychotics (FGAs) Chlorpromazine 100 300–1,000 mg/day 300–800 mg/day Fluphenazine HCl 2 5–20 mg/day 5–15 mg/day Haloperidol 2 5–20 mg/day 6–12 mg/day Loxapine 10 30–100 mg/day 30–60 mg/day Molindone 10 30–100 mg/day 30–60 mg/day Perphenazine 8 16–80 mg/day 16–64 mg/day Thiothixene 5 15–50 mg/day 15–30 mg/day Trifluoperazine 5 15–50 mg/day 15–30 mg/day Second Generation Antipsychotics (SGAs) Aripiprazole N/A 10-30 mg/day 10–30 mg/day Asenapine N/A 10–20 mg/day 10–20 mg/day Brexpiprazole N/A 2–4 mg/day 2–4 mg/day Cariprazine N/A 1.5–6 mg/day 3–6 mg/day Clozapine N/A 150–800 mg/day 150–800 mg/day Iloperidone N/A 12–24 mg/day 12–24 mg/day Lurasidone N/A 40–160 mg/day 40–160 mg/day Olanzapine N/A 10–30 mg/day 10–20 mg/day Paliperidone N/A 3–12 mg/day 3–12 mg/day Quetiapine N/A 300–800 mg/day 300–800 mg/day Risperidone N/A 2–8 mg/day 2–8 mg/day Ziprasidone N/A 80–240 mg/day 80–160 mg/day Notes: Recommendations may be below FDA maximum approved doses but are based on current evidence and expert consensus.
Consider lower doses for first episode due to better response and higher side effects to medications in pharmaceutically naïve patients. Use atypical antipsychotics and avoid haloperidol completely due to well-documented neuronal cell death caused by haloperidol (and also fluphenazine and perphenazine). Thioridazine is not recommended due to concerns about ventricular arrhythmias (Torsades de Pointes).
aApproximate dose equivalent to 100 mg of chlorpromazine (relative potency); it may not be the same at lower versus higher doses. Chlorpromazine equivalent doses are not relevant to the second generation antipsychotics and therefore are not provided for these agents. bDrug-drug interactions (DDIs) can impact dosing.
Maintenance dose should generally be no less than half of the initial clinically effective dose, as that can result in reduced effectiveness of relapse prevention. floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 42Treatment of Schizophrenia with Long-Acting Injectable Antipsychotic Medications (LAIs) Note: Treatment recommendations are based on levels of evidence and expert opinion. For a description of the criteria for each level, see page 4.
Conduct a comprehensive assessment and use measurement-based care as found in the Principles of Practice on pages 6–11. Assess social determinants (housing, family, other caregivers) and evaluate threats to continuity of care (access to medication, adherence, etc.). Strongly recommend psychiatric consultation prior to initiation of therapy + psychotherapeutic medication using a multi-disciplinary approach if treated by a non-psychiatrist.
Level 1 Initial Treatment: F After stabilization or obtaining sufficient evidence for efficacy and tolerability, offer any of the following long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAI). Base the selection on past efficacy and tolerability patterns to specific oral or LAI, expected tolerability advantages*, desired injection intervals, and procedural (oral overlap needed- yes versus no)/logistic/access/cost considerations:  Aripiprazole monohydrate  Aripiprazole lauroxil  Paliperidone palmitate  Risperidone microspheres  Risperidone extended release subcutaneous injectable. F If initial, adequate trial (minimum 3 to 4 months) of LAI is unsuccessful, try monotherapy with another LAI from the above group or address potential reasons for efficacy difficulty on the LAI.
Refer to Figure 1: Management of Breakthrough Psychosis with LAI for options to consider if psychotic symptoms persist despite adequate medication trial. *Note: Balance efficacy, side-effects, individual vulnerabilities and preferences. Select medication with lower propensity for metabolic and extrapyramidal side-effects.
Level 2 If Level 1 is ineffective and/or not well tolerated: F Consider LAI with greater adverse effect risk [olanzapine: post-injection delirium/sedation syndrome (PDSS); FGA-LAIs: EPS, TD]  Olanzapine pamoate  Fluphenazine decanoate  Haloperidol decanoate Level 3 If Levels 1 and 2 are ineffective and/or not well tolerated: F Diagnostic review and/or consultation F Consider switch to an oral antipsychotic not available as an LAI (if adherence can be assured) F Clozapine if not tried earlier F LAI + electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) or oral antipsychotic F Clozapine + ECT Page 43Figure 1.
Management of Breakthrough Psychosis with Long-Acting Injectable Antipsychotics (LAIs) Breakthrough psychotic symptoms Options to consider • R ule out / address medical illness or substance use as a contributing factor • Address stressors and optimize non-pharmacological treatments • Treat comorbidities • E nsure proper LAI administration • A ddress missed LAI doses appropriately • I ncrease LAI dose • S horten LAI injection interval (increase LAI AP dose) * Symptoms persist Symptoms stabilize or Supplement Symptoms Slowly discontinue oral AP abate LAI with low dose of persist Increase oral AP to (≥2 weeks after start of corresponding oral AP optimum effective dose† oral AP coverage) formulation for fast symptom control† Evaluate symptoms Evaluate symptoms initially after 1–2 weeks initially after 1–2 weeks and then as clinically and then as clinically appropriate appropriate Evaluate symptoms Symptoms Symptoms persist initially after 1–2 weeks recur or worsen and then as clinically Options to consider appropriate Options to consider • Rule out or address medical • Rule out or address medical illness or substance use as a illness or substance use as a contributing factor Evaluate symptoms contributing factor • Address stressors and initially after 1–2 weeks • Address stressors and optimize non-pharmacological and then as clinically optimize non-pharmacological treatments appropriate treatments • T reat concomitant medical and • T reat concomitant medical and psychiatric comorbidities psychiatric comorbidities • E nsure proper LAI • E nsure proper LAI administration Improved administration • A ddress missed LAI doses • A ddress missed LAI doses Not improved • I ncrease LAI dose • Increase LAI dose • S horten LAI injection interval • S horten LAI injection interval (LAI dose) * From Correll CU, et al. CNS (LAI AP dose)* • R e-implement oral AP † Spectrums 2018; 27: 1–17.
• C hange the oral AP (if given • Switch LAI adjunctively) • Switch LAI *Off-label strategy; based on expert opinion. †Caution should be exercised with this strategy, because data on the safety of concomitant use of LAI and oral APs are limited, especially over extended periods of time.
Page 44Page 45 :ainerhpozihcS fo tnemtaerT eht rof snoitacideM dednemmoceR .5 elbaT scitohcyspitnA elbatcejnI gnitcA-gnoL egasoD ot emiT larO ecnanetniaM esoD etatS ydaetS esoD gnitratS /shtgnertS noitacideM kaeP noitatnemelppuS esoD lavretnI smroF *scitohcyspitnA elbatcejnI gnitcA-gnoL noitareneG-tsriF shtnom 3 ot 2 syad 4 ot 2 oN ot 5.21 ,seiraV gm 5.21 ,seiraV Lm/gm 001 dna 52 seiraV enizanehpulF gm 001 /slaiv/seluopma etaonaced segnirys shtnom 3 ot 2 syad 7 ot 6 oN gm 003 ,seiraV gm 05 ,seiraV Lm/gm 001 dna 05 skeew 4 lodirepolaH seluopma etaonaced *scitohcyspitnA elbatcejnI gnitcA-gnoL noitareneG-dnoceS :gm 004 syad 7 ot 5 skeew 2 gm 004 gm 004 laiv gm 004 ,003 ylhtnoM elozarpipirA shtnom 8 ot 4 )gm 004 ot 003( dna stik etardyhonom :gm 003 rebmahc-laud )®anetniaM yfilibA( shtnom 4 ot 3 egnirys shtnom 6 ot 4 syad 4 ®oitinI adatsirA fi skeew 3 ot 144 ,seiraV ot gm 144 seiraV ;288 ;266 ;144 rof ylhtnoM elozarpipirA( eht ta deretsinimda ton si gm 288 **gm 460,1 dellfierp gm 460,1 ;esod gm 144 )®adatsirA( lixorual .tnemtaert fo gninnigeb segnirys ylhtnom htiw tnemtaert gnitaitini fI 6 yreve ot laro yad 1 ,®oitinI adatsirA rof skeew htiw noitatnemelppus ;esod gm 288 si telbat gm 03 elozarpipira rof ylhtnomib .deriuqer esod gm 460,1Page 46 :ainerhpozihcS fo tnemtaerT eht rof snoitacideM dednemmoceR .5 elbaT )deunitnoc( scitohcyspitnA elbatcejnI gnitcA-gnoL egasoD ot emiT larO ecnanetniaM esoD etatS ydaetS esoD gnitratS /shtgnertS noitacideM kaeP noitatnemelppuS esoD lavretnI smroF MI elgnis htiW syad 72 gm 03 elozarpipira( yad 1 elbacilppa toN gm 576 gm 576 eht ta ecnO elozarpipirA fo noitcejni slevel cituepareht— )telbat )A/N( gninnigeb adatsirA( lixorual ®oitini adatsirA syad 4 ni etaitini ot )®oitinI laro gm 03 dna elozarpipira emit ta elozarpipira lixorual ®adatsirA tsrfi fo )®adatsirA( elozarpipira ,esod tnemtaert noitartnecnoc cituepareht sehcaer syad 4 nihtiw slevel shtnom 3 syad 4 oN ot pu ,seiraV ot pu ,seiraV gm 504 ,003 ,012 skeew 4 ot 2 enipaznalO yreve gm 003 yreve gm 003 stik laiv ‡etaomap skeew 2 skeew 2 axerpyZ( )®vverpleR shtnom 11 ot 7 syad 31 oN gm 711 + )1 yad( gm 432 432 ,651 ,711 ,87 ,93 ylhtnoM enodirepilaP )gm 432 ot 93( )8 yad( gm 651 dellfierp gm agevnI( etatimlap ylno diotleD segnirys )®annetsuS ydaets seunitnoC 33 ot 03 oN ot 372 ,seiraV no sdnepeD ,645 ,014 ,372 3 yreve ecnO enodirepilaP tnelaviuqe ta etats syad gm 918 ylhtnom-ecno dellfierp gm 918 shtnom agevnI( etatimlap esod enodirepilap segnirys )®aznirT agevnI( etatimlap esod )®annetsuSPage 47 egasoD ot emiT larO ecnanetniaM esoD etatS ydaetS esoD gnitratS /shtgnertS noitacideM kaeP noitatnemelppuS esoD lavretnI smroF etats ydaetS skeew 6-4 skeew 3 ot gm 5.21 ,seiraV ot gm 5.21 ,seiraV gm 05 ,5.73 ,52 ,5.21 owt yreve ecnO enodirepsiR 4 retfa dehcaer gm 05 gm 52 stik laiv skeew serehpsorcim dna snoitcejni )®atsnoC ladrepsiR( 6-4 rof deniatniam tsal retfa skeew noitcejni skeew 6-4 sruoh 84-4 oN gm 021 ,gm 09 gm 021 ,gm 09 gm 021 ,gm 09 ylhtnoM enodirepsiR diuqil dna redwop esaeler dednetxe segnirys dellfi suoenatucbus elbatcejni )®siresreP( nilC J .tnemtaerT ni secnavdA dna aiseniksyD evidraT fo tnemssessA dna ,noitneverP ,ygoloimedipE .LL emortiC ,MJ enaK ,UC llerroC :morf detadpu dna detpadA .7411-6311:)8(87;tcO/peS 7102 .yrtaihcysP :setoN .lmths.ldpmf/areht_mrahp/gurD_debircserP/diacidem/moc.adiroflym.acha//:sptth tisiv ,tsiL gurD derreferP diacideM adirolF detadpu tsom eht roF noitareneg-dnoceS .esab lio na evah )etaonaced lodirepolah dna etaonaced enizanehpufl( snoitacidem citohcyspitna elbatcejni gnitca-gnol noitareneg-tsriF* enodirepilap htnom-3 dna htnom-1 ,etaomap enipaznalo ,lixorual elozarpipira ,etardyhonom elozarpipira( snoitacidem citohcyspitna elbatcejni gnitca-gnol .esab retaw a evah )serehpsorcim enodirepsir dna ,etatimlap fI .ylhtnom ecno gm 144 si esod ®adatsirA laitini ,yad/gm 01 si esod elozarpipira laro fI :swollof sa esod elozarpipira laro tnerruc no desab si esod ®adatsirA laitinI ** fI .shtnom 2 yreve ®adatsirA gm 460,1 ro ,skeew 6 yreve adatsirA gm 288 ,ylhtnom ecno gm 288 rehtie si esod ®adatsirA laitini ,yad/gm 51 si esod elozarpipira laro .ylhtnom ecno gm 288 si esod ®adatsirA laitini ,yad/gm 02≥ si esod elozarpipira laro .margorp )SMER( ygetartS noitagitiM dna noitaulavE ksiR eht htiw tnemllorne tneitap dna noitacfiitrec rebircserp seriuqer )vverpleR axerpyZ( etaomap enipaznalO‡ sah enipaznalO .)SSDP( emordnys noitades/muiriled noitcejni-tsop rof gnirotinom noitcejni-tsop fo sruoh-3 tsael ta seriuqer etaomap enipaznalo fo noitartsinimdA .sAGS rehto naht stceffe edis cilobatem detaler dna niag thgiew erom esuac ot dnuof neebSummary: Treatment of Schizophrenia with LAIs Christoph U.
Correll, M.D. Professor of Psychiatry and Molecular Medicine, Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra / Northwell Investigator, Center for Psychiatric Neuroscience, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research Medical Director, Recognition and Prevention (RAP) Program, The Zucker Hillside Hospital Department of Psychiatry m Q : ain uesTions n 1. Are LAIs more effective than placebo?
Yes. All approved LAIs have demonstrated efficacy for people with schizophrenia. In the USA (Correll et al., 2017), these agents include: F First-generation antipsychotics:  Fluphenazine decanoate  Haloperidol decanoate F Second-generation antipsychotics:  Aripiprazole monohydrate  Aripiprazole lauroxil  Olanzapine pamoate  Paliperidone palmitate  Risperidone microspheres  Risperidone extended release subcutaneous injectable n 2.
Are LAIs more effective than oral antipsychotics? Yes, in many studies and settings, with some non-differential results, but very rare/virtually no data indicating better efficacy for oral antipsychotics. Efficacy of LAIs versus oral antipsychotics depends on the study design and included population (Correll et al., 2016).
In randomized clinical trials (RCTs) that include patients with better illness insight, less severity/complexity of the disease and better/monitored adherence, LAIs were not more efficacious than placebo (Kishimoto et al., 2014). In mirror image studies (Kishimoto et al., 2013) and cohort/database studies (Kishimoto et al., 2018) that enroll more generalizable patients, LAIs were superior to oral antipsychotics regarding relapse, hospitalization, and all-cause discontinuation risk, despite greater illness severity in patients started on LAIs versus oral antipsychotics in real-world studies. Additionally, LAIs have been associated with a 20–30% reduced all-cause mortality versus oral antipsychotics (Taipale et al., 2018).
floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 48Summary: Treatment of Schizophrenia with LAIs (continued) n 3. Are LAIs tolerable? Yes.
Generally, the adverse effects of LAIs are predictable from knowledge of the adverse effect potential of the oral counterpart and can be tested in an individual patient during lead in treatment with the oral antipsychotic. Comparing 119 adverse events in patients randomized to an LAI or the same medication given in an oral formulation, 115 (97%) were not different, including discontinuation due to adverse event or mortality. Regarding 3 adverse effects [akinesia, (stiffness) with first generation antipsychotics (FGAs), increase in low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and anxiety], oral antipsychotics had lower events, while prolactin levels and hyperprolactinemia were lower in LAI treated patients (Misawa et al., 2016).
Injection pain and injection site reactions are generally mild and infrequent (Correll et al., 2016). Based on data with FGA-LAIs, there is no current indication that the outcome of neuroleptic malignant syndrome is worse when it occurs during LAI versus oral antipsychotic treatment, as management is symptomatic (Glazer and Kane, 1992). An exception from the rules above is olanzapine pamoate, which is highly blood soluble and which can, in 1/1,100–1,200 injections, lead to a post-injection somnolence, sedation, and coma syndrome (known as post injection delirium/sedation syndrome, or PDSS).
Therefore, at least 3 hours of post-injection observation for the duration of treatment with olanzapine pamoate is required. n 4. Are there special populations in whom LAIs should especially be considered or not considered?
While prior guidelines relegated LAI use to a third-tier treatment step, unless patients were non-adherent, had multiple relapses or preferred LAIs, recent evidence and guidance includes offering LAIs to potentially all patients as a treatment option and also considering them for prevention of future non-adherence and relapse/deterioration (Llorca et al., 2013; Malla et al., 2013; Correll et al., 2016; Brugnoli et al., 2016; Galletly et al., 2016; Howes et al., 2017; Sajatovic et al., 2018). F Populations and clinical scenarios in which first-line use of LAIs should be considered include:  Past or current nonadherence leading to deterioration  Low illness insight  Poor cognition  Dangerousness  Homelessness  Poor support system  Suicidality floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 49Summary: Treatment of Schizophrenia with LAIs (continued) F Emerging areas of first-line use of LAIs include:  High level of insight  High functioning (to prevent loss of function)  Anticipated nonadherence over time  Stabilized first episode and early phase patients (high future non-adherence risk, most to lose from future potential relapse)  Treatment-refractory patients who may be “pseudo-resistant” due to covert levels of non-adherence The only contraindication for deep intramuscular injectable LAIs is significant anticoagulation, presenting a risk for internal bleeding/large hematomas. Needle phobia should be addressed with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).
n 5. How should break-through symptoms during LAI treatment be addressed? Review and address non-pharmacologic reasons for exacerbation, such as substance use, other comorbid psychiatric or medical illness, psychosocial stressors, etc.
Rule out drug- drug interactions and inappropriate injection (insufficient mixing prior to injection, lack of deep intramuscular injection, accumulation of late injection visits, etc.) (Correll et al., 2018). If the above does not resolve the issue or immediate action is needed, add the same antipsychotic in oral formulation in an attempt to increase the dose. Generally, try to avoid polypharmacy with different antipsychotics, as the evidence for efficacy and safety is lacking (Galling et al., 2017; Correll et al., 2017).
If efficacy is reestablished and the higher dose is tolerated, at the next injection interval, use a higher LAI dose that corresponds to that combined LAI + oral dose. If already at the highest dose, consider changing injection site (deltoid injections lead to higher peak levels but shorter half-life, gluteal injection leads to lower peak levels but longer half-life), change to shortest FDA-approved injection interval (if not already done), or consider off-label strategy of shortening the injection interval (Correll et al., 2016; Correll et al., 2018). n 6.
How should LAIs best be offered in clinical care? LAIs need to be destigmatized and presented not as a last resort or in a punitive or mistrustful way, but rather as a highly effective treatment option that offers for many patients a greater likelihood of stability and improved ability to focus on recovery. Data suggest that motivational interviewing and shared decision making, which do not pass the decision simply back to the patient, but that present the evidence and advantages in a respectful and authoritative (yet not authoritarian) way, may yield best results (Correll et al., 2016; Weiden et al., 2017).
Inclusion of caregivers/significant others and/or peer counselors should also be considered (Correll et al., 2016). Furthermore, buy-in by and training of all team members can yield very high acceptance of LAIs, with such training, including role play, having been show to result in at least one LAI injection within 3 months of service engagement in >75% of first-episode and early-phase patients with schizophrenia (Kane et al., 2019). floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 50Summary: Treatment of Schizophrenia with LAIs (continued) r : eferenCes Brugnoli R, Rapinesi C, Kotzalidis GD, Marcellusi A, Mennini FS, De Filippis S, Carrus D, Ballerini A, Francomano A, Ducci G, Del Casale A, Girardi P.
Model of Management (Mo. Ma) for the patient with schizophrenia: crisis control, maintenance, relapse prevention, and recovery with long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIs). Riv Psichiatr.
2016 Mar-Apr;51(2):47-59. Correll CU, Citrome L, Haddad PM, Lauriello J, Olfson M, Calloway SM, Kane JM. The Use of Long- Acting Injectable Antipsychotics in Schizophrenia: Evaluating the Evidence.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2016;77(suppl 3):1-24. Correll CU, Rubio JM, Inczedy-Farkas G, Birnbaum ML, Kane JM, Leucht S.
Efficacy of 42 Pharmacologic Cotreatment Strategies Added to Antipsychotic Monotherapy in Schizophrenia: Systematic Overview and Quality Appraisal of the Meta-analytic Evidence. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017 Jul 1;74(7):675-684.
Correll CU, Sliwa JK, Najarian DM, Saklad SR. Practical considerations for managing breakthrough psychosis and symptomatic worsening in patients with schizophrenia on long-acting injectable antipsychotics. CNS Spectr.
2018 Dec 27:1-17. Galletly C, Castle D, Dark F, Humberstone V, Jablensky A, Killackey E, Kulkarni J, McGorry P, Nielssen O, Tran N. Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists clinical practice guidelines for the management of schizophrenia and related disorders.
Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2016 May;50(5):410-72. Galling B, Roldán A, Hagi K, Rietschel L, Walyzada F, Zheng W, Cao XL, Xiang YT, Zink M, Kane JM, Nielsen J, Leucht S, Correll CU.
Antipsychotic augmentation vs. monotherapy in schizophrenia: systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis. World Psychiatry.
2017 Feb;16(1):77-89. Glazer WM, Kane JM. Depot neuroleptic therapy: an underutilized treatment option.
J Clin Psychiatry. 1992 Dec;53(12):426-33. Kishimoto T, Hagi K, Nitta M, Leucht S, Olfson M, Kane JM, Correll CU.
Effectiveness of Long-Acting Injectable vs Oral Antipsychotics in Patients with Schizophrenia: A Metaanalysis of Prospective and Retrospective Cohort Studies. Schizophr Bull. 2018 Apr 6;44(3):603-619.
Howes OD, McCutcheon R, Agid O, de Bartolomeis A, van Beveren NJ, Birnbaum ML, Bloomfield MA, Bressan RA, Buchanan RW, Carpenter WT, Castle DJ, Citrome L, Daskalakis ZJ, Davidson M, Drake RJ, Dursun S, Ebdrup BH, Elkis H, Falkai P, Fleischacker WW, Gadelha A, Gaughran F, Glenthøj BY, Graff-Guerrero A, Hallak JE, Honer WG, Kennedy J, Kinon BJ, Lawrie SM, Lee J, Leweke FM, MacCabe JH, McNabb CB, Meltzer H, Möller HJ, Nakajima S, Pantelis C, Reis Marques T, Remington G, Rossell SL, Russell BR, Siu CO, Suzuki T, Sommer IE, Taylor D, Thomas N, Üçok A, Umbricht D, Walters JT, Kane J, Correll CU. Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia: Treatment Response and Resistance in Psychosis (TRRIP) Working Group Consensus Guidelines on Diagnosis and Terminology. Am J Psychiatry.
2017 Mar 1;174(3):216-229. Kane JM, Schooler NR, Marcy P, Achtyes ED, Correll CU, Robinson DG. Patients With Early- Phase Schizophrenia Will Accept Treatment With Sustained-Release Medication (Long-Acting Injectable Antipsychotics): Results From the Recruitment Phase of the PRELAPSE Trial.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2019 Apr 23;80(3). pii: 18m12546.
Kishimoto T, Nitta M, Borenstein M, Kane JM, Correll CU. Long-acting injectable vs. oral antipsychotics in schizophrenia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of mirror-image studies.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;74(10):957-65. floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 51Summary: Treatment of Schizophrenia with LAIs (continued) Kishimoto T, Robenzadeh A, Leucht C, Leucht S, Watanabe K, Mimura M, Borenstein M, Kane JM, Correll CU.
Long-Acting Injectable vs Oral Antipsychotics for Relapse Prevention in Schizophrenia: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Trials. Schizophr Bull. 2014 Jan;40(1):192-213.
Llorca PM, Abbar M, Courtet P, Guillaume S, Lancrenon S, Samalin L. Guidelines for the use and management of long-acting injectable antipsychotics in serious mental illness. BMC Psychiatry.
2013 Dec 20;13:340. Malla A, Tibbo P, Chue P, Levy E, Manchanda R, Teehan M, Williams R, Iyer S, Roy MA. Long-acting injectable antipsychotics: recommendations for clinicians.
Can J Psychiatry. 2013 May;58(5 Suppl 1):30S-5S. Misawa F, Kishimoto T, Hagi K, Kane JM, Correll CU.
Safety and tolerability of long-acting injectable versus oral antipsychotics: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies comparing the same antipsychotics. Schizophr Res. 2016 Oct;176(2-3):220-30.
Sajatovic M, Ross R, Legacy SN, Correll CU, Kane JM, DiBiasi F, Fitzgerald H, Byerly M. Identifying patients and clinical scenarios for use of long-acting injectable antipsychotics - expert consensus survey part 1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat.
2018 Jun 8;14:1463-1474. Taipale H, Mittendorfer-Rutz E, Alexanderson K, Majak M, Mehtälä J, Hoti F, Jedenius E, Enkusson D, Leval A, Sermon J, Tanskanen A, Tiihonen J. Antipsychotics and mortality in a nationwide cohort of 29,823 patients with schizophrenia.
Schizophr Res. 2018 Jul;197:274-280. Weiden PJ, Roma RS, Velligan DI, Alphs L, DiChiara M, Davidson B.
The challenge of offering long-acting antipsychotic therapies: a preliminary discourse analysis of psychiatrist recommendations for injectable therapy to patients with schizophrenia. J Clin Psychiatry. 2015 Jun;76(6):684-90.
floridamedicaidmentalhealth.org Page 52
Principles of Social Psychology - 1st International H5P EditionPrinciples of Social Psychology - 1st International H5P Edition Dr. Rajiv Jhangiani and Dr. Hammond Tarry Dr.
Rajiv Jhangiani and Dr. Hammond Tarry BCCAMPUS VICTORIA, B.C.Principles of Social Psychology - 1st International H5P Edition by Dr. Rajiv Jhangiani and Dr.
Hammond Tarry is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted. © 2022 Rajiv Jhangiani and Hammond Tarry Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International Edition was adapted by Rajiv Jhangiani and Hammond Tarry from Principles of Social Psychology © 2011 by a publisher who has requested that it and the original author not receive attribution. Content that was adapted from the original textbook are licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 licence, except for the following additions, which are © 2014 Rajiv Jhangiani and Hammond Tarry and are licensed under a CC BY 4.0 licence: • Inclusion of new research and theoretical developments.
• Updated the chapter opening anecdotes and real world examples to make them more relevant for contemporary students. • Changed examples, references, and statistics to reflect a more international context. • Added overviews of some concepts, theories, and key studies not included in the original edition.
• Added a list of learning objectives at the start of each chapter. • Added a glossary of key terms at the end of the textbook as a quick-reference for students. In addition, the following changes were made but retain the original CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 licence: • Merging the separate chapters on “Social Learning” and “Social Affect” to create a single “Social Cognition” chapter.
In 2022, Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International H5P Edition was published when 25 interactive H5P activities © Hammond Tarry were added throughout the text. The Creative Commons licence permits you to retain, reuse, copy, redistribute, and revise this book for non-commercial purposes—in whole or in part—for free providing the author is attributed as follows and any shared content retains the same licence: Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International H5P Edition by Rajiv Jhangiani and Hammond Tarry is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 licence. If you redistribute all or part of this book, it is recommended the following statement be added to the copyright page so readers can access the original book at no cost:Download for free from the B.C.
Open Collection. Sample APA-style citation (7th Edition): Jhangiani, R., & Tarry, H. (2022).
Principles of social psychology (1st international H5P edition). BCcampus. https://opentextbc.ca/socialpsychology/ Cover image attribution: “Street crowd reflecting in the polyhedral mirrors of the station Tokyu Plaza Omotesando, Harajuku, Tokyo, Japan” by Basile Morin is licensed under a CC BY-SA 4.0 licence.
Visit BCcampus Open Education to learn about open education in British Columbia. Ebook ISBN: 978-1-77420-193-0 Print ISBN: 978-1-77420-192-3 This book was produced with Pressbooks (https://pressbooks.com) and rendered with Prince.Contents Accessibility Statement xi For Students: How to Access and Use this Textbook xv About BCcampus Open Education xvii Acknowledgments xix Preface xxi Adapting Authors' Notes xxv Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology 1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 5 1.2 Affect, Behavior, and Cognition 21 1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 29 1.4 Chapter Summary 53 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition 2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 61 2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 79 2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 109 2.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Social Cognition 125 2.5 Chapter Summary 127 Chapter 3. The Self 3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 135 3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 157 3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 173 3.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about the Self 197 3.5 Chapter Summary 199 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion 4.1 Exploring Attitudes 207 4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 2214.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 237 4.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion 255 4.5 Chapter Summary 257 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others 5.1 Initial Impression Formation 263 5.2 Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution 285 5.3 Biases in Attribution 295 5.4 Individual Differences in Person Perception 311 5.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Person Perception 321 5.6 Chapter Summary 323 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming 6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 331 6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 349 6.3 Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity 373 6.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Social Influence 383 6.5 Chapter Summary 385 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving 7.1 Initial Attraction 391 7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 411 7.3 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Liking and Loving 431 7.4 Chapter Summary 433 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism 8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 439 8.2 The Role of Affect: Moods and Emotions 453 8.3 How the Social Context Influences Helping 461 8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 469 8.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Altruism 485 8.6 Chapter Summary 487Chapter 9. Aggression 9.1 Defining Aggression 493 9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 501 9.3 The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression 519 9.4 Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression 529 9.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Aggression 539 9.6 Chapter Summary 541 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making 10.1 Understanding Social Groups 549 10.2 Group Performance 559 10.3 Group Decision Making 575 10.4 Improving Group Performance and Decision Making 595 10.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Social Groups 605 10.6 Chapter Summary 607 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination 11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 617 11.2 Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice 633 11.3 Reducing Discrimination 643 11.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Stereotyping, Prejudice, and 657 Discrimination 11.5 Chapter Summary 659 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds 12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 667 12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 681 12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation 695 12.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Cooperation and Competition 707 12.5 Chapter Summary 709 About the Authors 713 Glossary 717 Versioning History 735Accessibility Statement BCcampus Open Education believes that education must be available to everyone. This means supporting the creation of free, open, and accessible educational resources.
We are actively committed to increasing the accessibility and usability of the resources we produce. Accessibility of This Resource The web version of Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International H5P Edition has been designed to meet Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, level AA. In addition, it follows all guidelines in Appendix A: Checklist for Accessibility of the Accessibility Toolkit – 2nd Edition.
It includes: • Easy navigation. This resource has a linked table of contents and uses headings in each chapter to make navigation easy. • Accessible videos.
All videos in this resource have captions. • Accessible images. All images in this resource that convey information have alternative text.
Images that are decorative have empty alternative text. • Accessible links. All links use descriptive link text.
xixii Dr. Hammond Tarry Accessibility Checklist Element Requirements Pass? Headings Content is organized under headings and subheadings that are used sequentially.
Yes Images that convey information include alternative text descriptions. These descriptions are Images Yes provided in the alt text field, in the surrounding text, or linked to as a long description. Images Images and text do not rely on colour to convey information.
Yes Images that are purely decorative or are already described in the surrounding text contain Images empty alternative text descriptions. (Descriptive text is unnecessary if the image doesn’t Yes convey contextual content information.) Tables Tables include row and/or column headers that have the correct scope assigned. Yes Tables Tables include a title or caption.
Yes Tables Tables do not have merged or split cells. No Tables Tables have adequate cell padding. Yes Links The link text describes the destination of the link.
Yes Links do not open new windows or tabs. If they do, a textual reference is included in the Links Yes link text. Links Links to files include the file type in the link text.
Yes All videos include high-quality (i.e., not machine generated) captions of all speech content Video No and relevant non-speech content. Video All videos with contextual visuals (graphs, charts, etc.) are described audibly in the video. Yes All H5P activities have been tested for accessibility by the H5P team and have passed their H5P Yes testing.
All H5P activities that include images, videos, and/or audio content meet the accessibility H5P Yes requirements for those media types. Font Font size is 12 point or higher for body text. Yes Font Font size is 9 point for footnotes or endnotes.
Yes Font Font size can be zoomed to 200% in the webbook or eBook formats. Yes Known Accessibility Issues and Areas for Improvement • Tables use merged cells but they have been structured to work properly with screen readers. • These videos do not have edited captions ◦ Video 2.1 Funny Commercials uploaded by kin100.
◦ Video 2.2 Bandura Discussing Clips From His Modeling Studies uploaded by Heath Kaplan.Principles of Social Psychology xiii Let Us Know if You are Having Problems Accessing This Book We are always looking for ways to make our resources more accessible. If you have problems accessing this resource, please contact us to let us know so we can fix the issue. Please include the following information: • The name of the resource • The location of the problem by providing a web address or page description.
• A description of the problem • The computer, software, browser, and any assistive technology you are using that can help us diagnose and solve your issue (e.g., Windows 10, Google Chrome (Version 65.0.3325.181), NVDA screen reader) You can contact us one of the following ways: • Web form: BCcampus Open Ed Help • Web form: Report an Error This statement was last updated on October 27, 2022. The Accessibility Checklist table was adapted from one originally created by the Rebus Community and shared under a CC BY 4.0 License.For Students: How to Access and Use this Textbook This textbook is available in the following formats: • Online webbook. You can read this textbook online on a computer or mobile device in one of the following browsers: Chrome, Firefox, Edge, and Safari.
• PDF. You can download this book as a PDF to read on a computer (Digital PDF) or print it out (Print PDF). • Mobile.
If you want to read this textbook on your phone or tablet, you can use the EPUB (eReader) file. • HTML. An HTML file can be opened in a browser.
It has very little style so it doesn’t look very nice, but some people might find it useful. For more information about the accessibility of this textbook, see the Accessibility Statement. You can access the online webbook and download any of the formats for free here: Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International H5P Edition.
To download the book in a different format, look for the “Download this book” drop-down menu and select the file type you want. How can I use the different formats? Screen Internet Format Device Required apps Accessibility Features reader required?
compatible Computer, An Internet browser WCAG 2.0 AA compliant, option to Online Yes tablet, (Chrome, Firefox, enlarge text, and compatible with Yes webbook phone Edge, or Safari) browser text-to-speech tools Adobe Reader (for Ability to highlight and annotate the Computer, reading on a PDF No text. If reading on the computer, you Unsure print copy computer) or a can zoom in. printer Computer, Option to enlarge text, change font EPUB No tablet, An eReader app Unsure style, size, and colour.
phone Computer, An Internet browser WCAG 2.0 AA compliant and HTML No tablet, (Chrome, Firefox, compatible with browser Yes phone Edge, or Safari) text-to-speech tools. Tips for Using This Textbook • Search the textbook. xvxvi Dr.
Hammond Tarry ◦ If using the online webbook, you can use the search bar in the top right corner to search the entire book for a key word or phrase. To search a specific chapter, open that chapter and use your browser’s search feature by hitting [Cntr] + [f] on your keyboard if using a Windows computer or [Command] + [f] if using a Mac computer. ◦ The [Cntr] + [f] and [Command] + [f] keys will also allow you to search a PDF, HTML, and EPUB files if you are reading them on a computer.
◦ If using an eBook app to read this textbook, the app should have a built-in search tool. • Navigate the textbook. ◦ This textbook has a table of contents to help you navigate through the book easier.
If using the online webbook, you can find the full table of contents on the book’s homepage or by selecting “Contents” from the top menu when you are in a chapter. • Annotate the textbook. ◦ If you like to highlight or write on your textbooks, you can do that by getting a print copy, using the Digital PDF in Adobe Reader, or using the highlighting tools in eReader apps.
Webbook vs. All Other Formats The webbook includes 25 interactive H5P activities. If you are not using the webbook to access this textbook, you will see a non-interactive version of the activity instead.
To access the interactive version, open the webbook in your browser and find the chapter that the activity appears in: Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International H5P Edition. If you decide to use a PDF or a print copy to access the textbook, you can access the webbook and download any other formats at any time.About BCcampus Open Education Principles of Social Psychology – 1st International H5P Edition by was funded by BCcampus Open Education. BCcampus Open Education began in 2012 as the B.C.
Open Textbook Project with the goal of making post-secondary education in British Columbia more accessible by reducing students’ costs through the use of open textbooks and other OER. BCcampus supports the post-secondary institutions of British Columbia as they adapt and evolve their teaching and learning practices to enable powerful learning opportunities for the students of B.C. BCcampus Open Education is funded by the Ministry of Post- Secondary Education and Future Skills and the Hewlett Foundation.
Open educational resources (OER) are teaching, learning, and research resources that, through permissions granted by the copyright holder, allow others to use, distribute, keep, or make changes to them. Our open textbooks are openly licensed using a Creative Commons licence and are offered in various eBook formats free of charge, or as printed books that are available at cost. For more information about open education in British Columbia, please visit the BCcampus Open Education website.
If you are an instructor who is using this book for a course, please fill out our Adoption of an Open Textbook form. xviiAcknowledgments From the Adapting Authors First, we owe a great debt to the original author, Dr. Charles Stangor, for writing the textbook and making it available to all.
We both enjoyed adding to such a readable and engaging resource. We are also grateful to the entire Open Education team at BCcampus, including Mary Burgess and Clint Lalonde, but especially Amanda Coolidge, who shepherded this project from start to finish. Thanks also to our editors for spotting the formatting and referencing errors that escaped our attention, to Brad Payne for his incredible work on the Pressbooks platform that facilitated our work, and to Chris Montoya (Thompson Rivers University), Dawn-Louise McLeod (Thompson Rivers University—Open Learning), and Jennifer Walinga (Royal Roads University) for their useful and detailed reviews of the original edition.
Rajiv Jhangiani would also like to thank Surita Jhangiani (Capilano University & Justice Institute of British Columbia) for her helpful suggestions and constant support, as well as Kabir and Aahaan Jhangiani, for providing great inspiration and endless joy during the entire process. Hammond Tarry would also like to thank his family for their love, support, and inspiration. From the Original Author This book is the result of many years of interacting with many students, and it would never have been written without them.
So thanks, first, to my many excellent students. Also a particular thanks to Michael Boezi, Pam Hersperger, and Becky Knauer for their help and support. I would also like to thank the following reviewers whose comprehensive feedback and suggestions for improving the material helped make this a better text: • Mark Agars, California State University, San Bernadino • Sarah Allgood, Virginia Tech University • Lara Ault, Tennessee State University • Sarah Butler, DePaul University • Jamonn Campbell, Shippensburg University • Donna Crawley, Ramapo College • Alexander Czopp, Western Washington University • Marcia Finkelstein, University of South Florida • Dana Greene, North Carolina Central University xixxx Dr.
Hammond Tarry • Melissa Lea, Millsaps College • Dana Litt, University of Washington • Nick Marsing, Snow College • Kevin McKillop, Washington College • Adam Meade, North Carolina State University • Paul Miceli, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill • Marcie Miller, South Plains College • Meg Milligan, Troy University • Dean Morier, Mills College • Darren Petronella, Adelphi University • Lisa Poole, Northeast State Technical Community College • Michael Rader, Northern Arizona University • Diana Rice, Geneva College • David Simpson, Carroll UniversityPreface Preface from Original Author When I first started teaching social psychology, I had trouble figuring out how the various topics in this expansive field fit together. I felt like I was presenting a laundry list of ideas, research studies, and phenomena, rather than an integrated set of principles and knowledge. Of course, what was difficult for me was harder still for my students.
How could they be expected to understand and remember all of the many topics that we social psychologists study? And how could they tell what was most important? Something was needed to structure and integrate their learning.
It took me some time, but eventually, I realized that the missing piece in my lectures was a consistent focus on the basic principles of social psychology. Once I started thinking and talking about principles, then it all fell into place. I knew that when I got to my lecture on altruism, most of my students already knew what I was about to tell them.
They understood that, although there were always some tweaks to keep things interesting, altruism was going to be understood using the same ideas that conformity and person perception had been in earlier lectures—in terms of the underlying fundamentals—they were truly thinking like social psychologists! I wrote this book to help students organize their thinking about social psychology at a conceptual level. Five or ten years from now, I do not expect my students to remember the details of a study published in 2011, or even to remember most of the definitions in this book.
I do hope, however, that they will remember some basic ideas, for it is these principles that will allow them to critically analyze new situations and really put their knowledge to use. My text is therefore based on a critical thinking approach—its aim is to get students thinking actively and conceptually—with more of a focus on the forest than on the trees. Although there are right and wrong answers, the answers are not the only thing.
What is perhaps even more important is how we get to those answers—the thinking process itself. My efforts are successful when my students have that “aha” moment, in which they find new ideas fitting snugly into the basic concepts of social psychology. To help students better grasp the big picture of social psychology and to provide you with a theme that you can use to organize your lectures, my text has a consistent pedagogy across the chapters.
I organize my presentation around two underlying principles that are essential to social psychology: 1. Person and situation (the classic treatment) 2. The ABCs of social psychology (affect, behavior, and cognition) I also frame much of my discussion around the two human motivations of self-concern and other- concern.
I use these fundamental motivations to frame discussions on a variety of dimensions including altruism, aggression, prejudice, gender differences, and cultural differences. You can incorporate these dimensions into your teaching as you see fit. xxixxii Dr.
Hammond Tarry My years of teaching have convinced me that these dimensions are fundamental, that they are extremely heuristic, and that they are what I hope my students will learn and remember. I think that you may find that this organization represents a more explicit representation of what you’re already doing in your lectures. Although my pedagogy is consistent, it is not constraining.
You will use these dimensions more in some lectures than in others, and you will find them more useful for some topics than others. But they will always work for you when you are ready for them. Use them to reinforce your presentation as you see fit.
Perhaps most important, a focus on these dimensions helps us bridge the gap between the textbook, the real-life experiences of our students, and our class presentations. We can’t cover every phenomenon in our lectures—we naturally let the textbook fill in the details. The goal of my book is to allow you to rest assured that the text has provided your students with the foundations—the fundamental language of social psychology—from which you can build as you see fit.
And when you turn to ask students to apply their learning to real life, you can know that they will be doing this as social psychologists do—using a basic underlying framework. Organization The text moves systematically from lower to higher levels of analysis—a method that I have found makes sense to students. On the other hand, the chapter order should not constrain you—choose a different order if you wish.
Chapter 1 “Introducing Social Psychology” presents an introduction to social psychology and the research methods in social psychology, Chapter 2 “Social Cognition” presents the fundamental principles of social cognition. The remainder of the text is organized around three levels of analysis, moving systematically from the individual level (Chapter 3 “The Self” through Chapter 5 “Perceiving Others”), to the level of social interaction (Chapter 6 “Influencing and Conforming” through Chapter 9 “Aggression”), to the group and cultural level (Chapter 10 “Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making” through Chapter 12 “Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds”). Rather than relying on “modules” or “appendices” of applied materials, my text integrates applied concepts into the text itself.
This approach is consistent with my underlying belief that if students learn to think like social psychologists they will easily and naturally apply that knowledge to any and all applications. The following applications are woven throughout the text: • Business and consumer behavior (see, for instance, Chapter 4 “Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion” on marketing and persuasion and Chapter 10 “Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making” on group decision making) • Health and Behavior (see, for instance, Chapter 5 “Perceiving Others” on attributional styles) • Law (see, for instance, Chapter 2 “Social Cognition” on eyewitness testimony and Chapter 9 “Aggression” on Terrorism) Pedagogy Principles of Social Psychology contains a number of pedagogical features designed to help studentsPrinciples of Social Psychology xxiii develop an active, integrative understanding of the many topics of social psychology and to think like social psychologists. Research Foci Research is of course the heart of social psychology, and the research foci provide detailed information about a study or research program.
I’ve chosen a mix of classic and contemporary research, with a focus on both what’s interesting and what’s pedagogical. The findings are part of the running text—simply highlighted with a heading and light shading. Social Psychology in the Public Interest Social psychological findings interest students in large part because they relate so directly to everyday experience.
The Social Psychology in the Public Interest Feature reinforces these links. Topics include Does High Self-Esteem Cause Happiness or Other Positive Outcomes? (Chapter 3 “Self”), Detecting Deception (Chapter 5 “Perceiving Others”), Terrorism as Instrumental Aggression (Chapter 9 “Aggression”), and Stereotype Threat in Schools (Chapter 11 “Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination”).
The goal here is to include these applied topics within the relevant conceptual discussions to provide students with a richer understanding within the context of the presentation. Thinking Like a Social Psychologist Each chapter ends with a section that summarizes how the material presented in the chapter can help the student think about contemporary issues using social psychological principles. This section is designed to work with the chapter summary to allow a better integration of fundamental concepts.Adapting Authors' Notes Although the original edition of this textbook was favourably reviewed by B.C.
faculty, the reviewers noted several areas and issues that needed to be addressed before it was ready for adoption. These included incorporating new research and theoretical developments, updating the chapter opening anecdotes and real world examples to make them more relevant for contemporary students, changing examples, references, and statistics to reflect a more international context, and merging the separate chapters on “Social Learning” and “Social Affect” to create a single “Social Cognition” chapter. Over the course of our adaptation we attempted to address all of these issues (with the exception of American spelling, which was retained in order to focus on more substantive issues), while making other changes and additions we thought necessary, such as writing overviews of some concepts, theories, and key studies not included in the original edition.
Finally, we added a list of learning objectives at the start of each chapter and a glossary of key terms at the end of the textbook as a quick- reference for students. We hope that our work enables more instructors to adopt this open textbook for their Social Psychology or related courses and we further invite you to build upon our work by modifying this textbook to suit your course and pedagogical goals. Rajiv Jhangiani and Hammond Tarry August 2014 xxvChapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles • Define social psychology. • Review the history of the field of social psychology and the topics that social psychologists study.
• Summarize the principles of evolutionary psychology. • Describe and provide examples of the person-situation interaction. • Review the concepts of (a) social norms and (b) cultures.
2. Affect, Behavior, and Cognition • Define and differentiate affect, behavior, and cognition as considered by social psychologists. • Summarize the principles of social cognition.
3. Conducting Research in Social Psychology • Explain why social psychologists rely on empirical methods to study social behavior. • Provide examples of how social psychologists measure the variables they are interested in.
• Review the three types of research designs, and evaluate the strengths and limitations of each type. • Consider the role of validity in research, and describe how research programs should be evaluated. The Story of Raoul Wallenberg Born into a prominent and wealthy family in Sweden, Raoul Wallenberg grew up especially close to his mother and grandfather (his father had earlier died from cancer).
Early in life he demonstrated a flair for languages and became fluent in English, French, German, and Russian. Raoul pursued a college education in the United States, where he distinguished himself academically en route to completing a B.A. in architecture from the University of Michigan in 1935.
Following a period during which he lived and worked in South Africa and then Palestine, he returned to his native Sweden, 12 Dr. Hammond Tarry where he became increasingly concerned about the treatment of the Jews in Nazi Germany. His work in the import-export business took him to Budapest, Hungary, where by 1944 the Nazis were sending between 10,000 and 12,000 Jews to their deaths in the gas chambers every day.
It was around this time that Wallenberg accepted a position with the Swedish embassy in Budapest. Figure 1.1 Raoul Wallenberg. Raoul Wallenberg sculpture, Great Cumberland Place, London What took place over the next six months is an extraordinary and miraculous story of courage and caring.
Deciding that he had to do everything in his power to help save the Jews of Hungary, Wallenberg began by establishing an office and “hired” 400 Jewish volunteers to run it so that they could receive diplomatic protection. Next, without his government’s authorization, he invented an official-looking Swedish passport, the “Schutzpass,” that he distributed to as many Jews as he could. This fake passport alone helped save the lives of approximately 20,000 Jews.
He even set up 32 “safe houses” that became attached to the Swedish embassy and used them to protect 35,000 Jews. He worked long hours, sleeping barely four hours each night. He bribed, manipulated, confronted, and harassed officials in order to achieve his goal of saving the Jews of Hungary.
As the Soviet army invaded from the east, the Nazis began to escalate their annihilation of the Hungarian Jewish population. Wallenberg promptly threatened the Nazi commander, indicating that he would personally see the commander hanged for crimes against humanity. The commander backed down and called off the assault, thereby saving the lives of another 70,000 Jews.
Unfortunately, Wallenberg was arrested by the Soviets and never heard from again. Some reports indicate that he remained in a Soviet prison for years and eventually died there. Raoul Wallenberg has been made an honorary citizen of Australia, Canada, Hungary, Israel, and the United States, and there are memorials and awards in his name around the world.
In 1985, speaking on the 40th anniversary of his arrest, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations said that Wallenberg “has become more than a man, more even than a hero. He symbolizes a central conflict of our age,Principles of Social Psychology 3 which is the determination to remain human and caring and free in the face of tyranny.
What Raoul Wallenberg represented in Budapest was nothing less than the conscience of the civilized world.” Schreiber, P. (2014). The Story of Raoul Wallenberg.
Retrieved from http://www.wallenberg.umich.edu/story.html. Social psychology is the scientific study of how we feel about, think about, and behave toward the people around us and how our feelings, thoughts, and behaviors are influenced by those people. As this definition suggests, the subject matter of social psychology is very broad and can be found in just about everything that we do every day.
Social psychologists study why we are often helpful to other people and why we may at other times be unfriendly or aggressive. Social psychologists study both the benefits of having good relationships with other people and the costs of being lonely. Social psychologists study what factors lead people to purchase one product rather than another, how men and women behave differently in social settings, how juries work together to make important group decisions, and what makes some people more likely to recycle and engage in other environmentally friendly behaviors than others.
And social psychologists also study more unusual events, such as how someone might choose to risk their life to save that of a complete stranger. The goal of this book is to help you learn to think about social behaviors in the same way that social psychologists do. We believe you will find this approach useful because it will allow you to think about human behavior more critically and more objectively and to gain insight into your own relationships with other people.
Social psychologists study everyday behavior scientifically, and their research creates a useful body of knowledge about our everyday social interactions. Media Attributions • “Raoul Wallenberg. Raoul Wallenberg sculpture, Great Cumberland Place, London” by Mira 66 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence.1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles Learning Objectives 1.
Define social psychology. 2. Review the history of the field of social psychology and the topics that social psychologists study.
3. Summarize the principles of evolutionary psychology. 4.
Describe and provide examples of the person-situation interaction. 5. Review the concepts of (a) social norms and (b) cultures.
The field of social psychology is growing rapidly and is having an increasingly important influence on how we think about human behavior. Newspapers, magazines, websites, and other media frequently report the findings of social psychologists, and the results of social psychological research are influencing decisions in a wide variety of areas. Let’s begin with a short history of the field of social psychology and then turn to a review of the basic principles of the science of social psychology.
The History of Social Psychology The science of social psychology began when scientists first started to systematically and formally measure the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of human beings (Kruglanski & Stroebe, 2011). The earliest social psychology experiments on group behavior were conducted before 1900 (Triplett, 1898), and the first social psychology textbooks were published in 1908 (McDougall, 1908/2003; Ross, 1908/ 1974). During the 1940s and 1950s, the social psychologists Kurt Lewin and Leon Festinger refined the experimental approach to studying behavior, creating social psychology as a rigorous scientific discipline.
Lewin is sometimes known as “the father of social psychology” because he initially developed many of the important ideas of the discipline, including a focus on the dynamic interactions among people. In 1954, Festinger edited an influential book called Research Methods in the Behavioral Sciences, in which he and other social psychologists stressed the need to measure variables and to use laboratory experiments to systematically test research hypotheses about social behavior. He also noted that it might be necessary in these experiments to deceive the participants about the true nature of the research.
Social psychology was energized by researchers who attempted to understand how the German dictator Adolf Hitler could have produced such extreme obedience and horrendous behaviors in his followers during the World War II. The studies on conformity conducted by Muzafir Sherif (1936) and Solomon Asch (1952), as well as those on obedience by Stanley Milgram (1974), showed the importance of conformity pressures in social groups and how people in authority could create obedience, even to the 56 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology extent of leading people to cause severe harm to others.
Philip Zimbardo, in his well-known “prison study” (Haney, Banks, & Zimbardo, 1973), found that the interactions of male college students who were recruited to play the roles of guards and prisoners in a simulated prison became so violent that the study had to be terminated early. Social psychology quickly expanded to study other topics. John Darley and Bibb Latané (1968) developed a model that helped explain when people do and do not help others in need, and Leonard Berkowitz (1974) pioneered the study of human aggression.
Meanwhile, other social psychologists, including Irving Janis (1972), focused on group behavior, studying why intelligent people sometimes made decisions that led to disastrous results when they worked together. Still other social psychologists, including Gordon Allport and Muzafir Sherif, focused on intergroup relations, with the goal of understanding and potentially reducing the occurrence of stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. Social psychologists gave their opinions in the 1954 Brown v.
Board of Education U.S. Supreme Court case that helped end racial segregation in American public schools, and social psychologists still frequently serve as expert witnesses on these and other topics (Fiske, Bersoff, Borgida, Deaux, & Heilman, 1991). In recent years insights from social psychology have even been used to design anti-violence programs in societies that have experienced genocide (Staub, Pearlman, & Bilali, 2010).
The latter part of the 20th century saw an expansion of social psychology into the field of attitudes, with a particular emphasis on cognitive processes. During this time, social psychologists developed the first formal models of persuasion, with the goal of understanding how advertisers and other people could present their messages to make them most effective (Eagly & Chaiken, 1993; Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1963). These approaches to attitudes focused on the cognitive processes that people use when evaluating messages and on the relationship between attitudes and behavior.
Leon Festinger’s important cognitive dissonance theory was developed during this time and became a model for later research (Festinger, 1957). In the 1970s and 1980s, social psychology became even more cognitive in orientation as social psychologists used advances in cognitive psychology, which were themselves based largely on advances in computer technology, to inform the field (Fiske & Taylor, 2008). The focus of these researchers, including Alice Eagly, Susan Fiske, E.
Tory Higgins, Richard Nisbett, Lee Ross, Shelley Taylor, and many others, was on social cognition—an understanding of how our knowledge about our social worlds develops through experience and the influence of these knowledge structures on memory, information processing, attitudes, and judgment. Furthermore, the extent to which humans’ decision making could be flawed due to both cognitive and motivational processes was documented (Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). In the 21st century, the field of social psychology has been expanding into still other areas.
Examples that we consider in this book include an interest in how social situations influence our health and happiness, the important roles of evolutionary experiences and cultures on our behavior, and the field of social neuroscience—the study of how our social behavior both influences and is influenced by the activities of our brain (Lieberman, 2010). Social psychologists continue to seek new ways to measure1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 7 and understand social behavior, and the field continues to evolve. We cannot predict where social psychology will be directed in the future, but we have no doubt that it will still be alive and vibrant.
The Person and the Social Situation Social psychology is the study of the dynamic relationship between individuals and the people around them. Each of us is different, and our individual characteristics, including our personality traits, desires, motivations, and emotions, have an important impact on our social behavior. But our behavior is also profoundly influenced by the social situation—the people with whom we interact every day.
These people include our friends and family, our classmates, our religious groups, the people we see on TV or read about or interact with online, as well as people we think about, remember, or even imagine. Social psychologists believe that human behavior is determined by both a person’s characteristics and the social situation. They also believe that the social situation is frequently a stronger influence on behavior than are a person’s characteristics.
Social psychology is largely the study of the social situation. Our social situations create social influence—the process through which other people change our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and through which we change theirs. Maybe you can already see how social influence affected Raoul Wallenberg’s choices and how he in turn influenced others around him.
Kurt Lewin formalized the joint influence of person variables and situational variables, which is known as the person-situation interaction, in an important equation: Behavior = f (person, social situation). Lewin’s equation indicates that the behavior of a given person at any given time is a function of (depends on) both the characteristics of the person and the influence of the social situation. Evolutionary Adaptation and Human Characteristics In Lewin’s equation, person refers to the characteristics of the individual human being.
People are born with skills that allow them to successfully interact with others in their social world. Newborns are able to recognize faces and to respond to human voices, young children learn language and develop friendships with other children, adolescents become interested in sex and are destined to fall in love, most adults marry and have children, and most people usually get along with others. People have these particular characteristics because we have all been similarly shaped through human evolution.
The genetic code that defines human beings has provided us with specialized social skills that are important to survival. Just as keen eyesight, physical strength, and resistance to disease helped our ancestors survive, so too did the tendency to engage in social behaviors. We quickly make judgments about other people, help other people who are in need, and enjoy working together in social groups because these behaviors helped our ancestors to adapt and were passed along on their genes to the next generation (Ackerman & Kenrick, 2008; Barrett & Kurzban, 2006; Pinker, 2002).
Our extraordinary social skills are primarily due to our large brains and the social intelligence that they provide us with (Herrmann, Call, Hernández-Lloreda, Hare, & Tomasello, 2007).8 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology The assumption that human nature, including much of our social behavior, is determined largely by our evolutionary past is known as evolutionary adaptation (Buss & Kenrick, 1998; Workman & Reader, 2008). In evolutionary theory, fitness refers to the extent to which having a given characteristic helps the individual organism to survive and to reproduce at a higher rate than do other members of the species who do not have the characteristic.
Fitter organisms pass on their genes more successfully to later generations, making the characteristics that produce fitness more likely to become part of the organisms’ nature than are characteristics that do not produce fitness. For example, it has been argued that the emotion of jealousy has survived over time in men because men who experience jealousy are more fit than men who do not. According to this idea, the experience of jealousy leads men to protect their mates and guard against rivals, which increases their reproductive success (Buss, 2000).
Although our biological makeup prepares us to be human beings, it is important to remember that our genes do not really determine who we are. Rather, genes provide us with our human characteristics, and these characteristics give us the tendency to behave in a “human” way. And yet each human being is different from every other human being.
Evolutionary adaption has provided us with two fundamental motivations that guide us and help us lead productive and effective lives. One of these motivations relates to the self—the motivation to protect and enhance the self and the people who are psychologically close to us; the other relates to the social situation—the motivation to affiliate with, accept, and be accepted by others. We will refer to these two motivations as self-concern and other-concern, respectively.
Self-Concern The most basic tendency of all living organisms, and the focus of the first human motivation, is the desire to protect and enhance our own life and the lives of the people who are close to us. Humans are motivated to find food and water, to obtain adequate shelter, and to protect themselves from danger. Doing so is necessary because we can survive only if we are able to meet these fundamental goals.
The desire to maintain and enhance the self also leads us to do the same for our relatives—those people who are genetically related to us. Human beings, like other animals, exhibit kin selection—strategies that favor the reproductive success of one’s relatives, sometimes even at a cost to the individual’s own survival. According to evolutionary principles, kin selection occurs because behaviors that enhance the fitness of relatives, even if they lower the fitness of the individual himself or herself, may nevertheless increase the survival of the group as a whole.1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 9 Figure 1.2 The evolutionary principle of kin selection leads us to be particularly caring of and helpful to those who share our genes.
In addition to our kin, we desire to protect, improve, and enhance the well-being of our ingroup— those we view as being similar and important to us and with whom we share close social connections, even if those people do not actually share our genes. Perhaps you remember a time when you helped friends move all their furniture into a new home, even though you would have preferred to be doing something more beneficial for yourself, such as studying or relaxing. You wouldn’t have helped strangers in this way, but you did it for your friends because you felt close to and cared about them.
The tendency to help the people we feel close to, even if they are not related to us, is probably due in part to our evolutionary past: the people we were closest to were usually those we were related to. Other-Concern Although we are primarily concerned with the survival of ourselves, our kin, and those who we feel are similar and important to us, we also desire to connect with and be accepted by other people more generally—the goal of other-concern. We live together in communities, we work together in work groups, we may worship together in religious groups, and we may play together on sports teams and through clubs.
Affiliating with other people—even strangers—helps us meet a fundamental goal: that of finding a romantic partner with whom we can have children. Our connections with others also provide us with opportunities that we would not have on our own. We can go to the grocery store to buy milk or eggs, and we can hire a carpenter to build a house for us.
And we ourselves do work that provides goods and services for others. This mutual cooperation is beneficial both for us and for the people around us. We also affiliate because we enjoy being with others, being part of social groups, and contributing to social discourse (Leary & Cox, 2008).
What the other-concern motive means is that we do not always put ourselves first. Being human also10 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology involves caring about, helping, and cooperating with other people.
Although our genes are themselves “selfish” (Dawkins, 2006), this does not mean that individuals always are. The survival of our own genes may be improved by helping others, even those who are not related to us (Krebs, 2008; Park, Schaller, & Van Vugt, 2008). Just as birds and other animals may give out alarm calls to other animals to indicate that a predator is nearby, humans engage in altruistic behaviors in which they help others, sometimes at a potential cost to themselves.
In short, human beings behave morally toward others—they understand that it is wrong to harm other people without a strong reason for doing so, and they display compassion and even altruism toward others (Goetz, Keltner, & Simon-Thomas, 2010; Turiel, 1983). As a result, negative behaviors toward others, such as bullying, cheating, stealing, and aggression, are unusual, unexpected, and socially disapproved. Of course this does not mean that people are always friendly, helpful, and nice to each other—powerful social situations can and do create negative behaviors.
But the fundamental human motivation of other-concern does mean that hostility and violence are the exception rather than the rule of human behavior. Sometimes the goals of self-concern and other-concern go hand in hand. When we fall in love with another person, it is in part about a concern for connecting with someone else but is also about self- concern—falling in love makes us feel good about ourselves.
And when we volunteer to help others who are in need, it is in part for their benefit but also for us. We feel good when we help others. At other times, however, the goals of self-concern and other-concern conflict.
Imagine that you are walking across campus and you see a man with a knife threatening another person. Do you intervene, or do you turn away? In this case, your desire to help the other person (other-concern) is in direct conflict with your desire to protect yourself from the danger posed by the situation (self-concern), and you must decide which goal to put first.
We will see many more examples of the motives of self- concern and other-concern, both working together and working against each other, throughout this book.1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 11 Figure 1.3 Other-concern is a fundamental part of the behavior of humans and many animals. The Social Situation Creates Powerful Social Influence When people are asked to indicate the things they value the most, they usually mention their social situation—that is, their relationships with other people (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Fiske & Haslam, 1996). When we work together on a class project, volunteer at a homeless shelter, or serve on a jury in a courtroom trial, we count on others to work with us to get the job done.
We develop social bonds with those people, and we expect that they will come through to help us meet our goals. The importance of others shows up in every aspect of our lives—other people teach us what we should and shouldn’t do, what we should and shouldn’t think, and even what we should and shouldn’t like and dislike. In addition to the people with whom we are currently interacting, we are influenced by people who are not physically present but who are nevertheless part of our thoughts and feelings.
Imagine that you are driving home on a deserted country road late at night. No cars are visible in any direction, and you can see for miles. You come to a stop sign.
What do you do? Most likely, you stop at the sign, or at least slow down. You do so because the behavior has been internalized: even though no one is there to watch you, others are still influencing you—you’ve learned about the rules and laws of society, what’s right and what’s wrong, and you tend to obey them.
We carry our own personal social situations—our experiences with our parents, teachers, leaders, authorities, and friends—around with us every day.12 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology An important principle of social psychology, one that will be with us throughout this book, is that although individuals’ characteristics do matter, the social situation is often a stronger determinant of behavior than is personality. When social psychologists analyze an event such as the Holocaust, they are likely to focus more on the characteristics of the situation (e.g., the strong leader and the group pressure provided by the other group members) than on the characteristics of the perpetrators themselves.
As an example, we will see that even ordinary people who are neither bad nor evil in any way can nevertheless be placed in situations in which an authority figure is able to lead them to engage in evil behaviors, such as applying potentially lethal levels of electrical shock (Milgram, 1974). In addition to discovering the remarkable extent to which our behavior is influenced by our social situation, social psychologists have discovered that we often do not recognize how important the social situation is in determining behavior. We often wrongly think that we and others act entirely on our own accord, without any external influences.
It is tempting to assume that the people who commit extreme acts, such as terrorists or members of suicide cults, are unusual or extreme people. And yet much research suggests that these behaviors are caused more by the social situation than they are by the characteristics of the individuals and that it is wrong to focus so strongly on explanations of individuals’ characteristics (Gilbert & Malone, 1995). There is perhaps no clearer example of the powerful influence of the social situation than that found in research showing the enormous role that others play in our physical and mental health.
ƒC (Diener, Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; Diener, Tamir, & Scollon, 2006). Social Psychology in the Public Interest How the Social Situation Influences Our Mental and Physical Health In comparison with those who do not feel that they have a network of others they can rely on, people who feel that they have adequate social support report being happier and have also been found to have fewer psychological problems, including eating disorders and mental illness (Diener, Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; Diener, Tamir, & Scollon, 2006). People with social support are less depressed overall, recover faster from negative events, and are less likely to commit suicide (Au, Lau, & Lee, 2009; Bertera, 2007; Compton, Thompson, & Kaslow, 2005; Skärsäter, Langius, Ågren, Häagström, & Dencker, 2005).
Married people report being happier than unmarried people (Pew, 2006), and overall, a happy marriage is an excellent form of social support. One of the goals of effective psychotherapy is to help people generate better social support networks because such relationships have such a positive effect on mental health. In addition to having better mental health, people who have adequate social support are more physically healthy.
They have fewer diseases (such as tuberculosis, heart attacks, and cancer), live longer, have lower blood pressure, and have fewer deaths at all ages (Cohen & Wills, 1985; Stroebe & Stroebe, 1996). Sports psychologists have even found that individuals with higher levels of social support are less likely to be injured playing sports and recover more quickly from injuries they do receive (Hardy, Richman, & Rosenfeld, 1991). These differences appear to be due to the positive effects of social support on physiological functioning, including the immune system.
The opposite of social support is the feeling of being excluded or ostracized. Feeling that others are1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 13 excluding us is painful, and the pain of rejection may linger even longer than physical pain. People who were asked to recall an event that caused them social pain (e.g., betrayal by a person very close to them) rated the pain as more intense than they rated their memories of intense physical pain (Chen, Williams, Fitness, & Newton, 2008).
When people are threatened with social exclusion, they subsequently express greater interest in making new friends, increase their desire to work cooperatively with others, form more positive first impressions of new potential interaction partners, and even become more able to discriminate between real smiles and fake smiles (Bernstein, Young, Brown, Sacco, & Claypool, 2008; Maner, DeWall, Baumeister, & Schaller, 2007). Because connecting with others is such an important part of human experience, we may sometimes withhold affiliation from or ostracize other people in order to attempt to force them to conform to our wishes. When individuals of the Amish religion violate the rulings of an elder, they are placed under a Meidung.
During this time, and until they make amends, they are not spoken to by community members. And people frequently use the “silent treatment” to express their disapproval of a friend’s or partner’s behavior. The pain of ostracism is particularly strong in adolescents (Sebastian, Viding, Williams, & Blakemore, 2010).
The use of ostracism has also been observed in parents and children, and even in Internet games and chat rooms (Williams, Cheung, & Choi, 2000).The silent treatment and other forms of ostracism are popular because they work. Withholding social communication and interaction is a powerful weapon for punishing individuals and forcing them to change their behaviors. Individuals who are ostracized report feeling alone, frustrated, sad, and unworthy and having lower self-esteem (Bastian & Haslam, 2010).
Taken together, then, social psychological research results suggest that one of the most important things you can do for yourself is to develop a stable support network. Reaching out to other people benefits those who become your friends (because you are in their support network) and has substantial benefits for you. Social Influence Creates Social Norms In some cases, social influence occurs rather passively, without any obvious intent of one person to influence another, such as when we learn about and adopt the beliefs and behaviors of the people around us, often without really being aware that we are doing so.
Social influence occurs when a young child adopts the beliefs and values of his or her parents, or when someone starts to like jazz music, without really being aware of it, because a roommate plays a lot of it. In other cases, social influence is anything but subtle; it involves one or more individuals actively attempting to change the beliefs or behaviors of others, as is evident in the attempts of the members of a jury to get a dissenting member to change his or her opinion, the use of a popular sports figure to encourage children to buy certain products, or the messages that cult leaders give to their followers to encourage them to engage in the behaviors required of the group. One outcome of social influence is the development of social norms—the ways of thinking, feeling, or behaving that are shared by group members and perceived by them as appropriate (Asch, 1955; Cialdini, 1993).
Norms include customs, traditions, standards, and rules, as well as the general values of the group. Through norms, we learn what people actually do (“people in the United States are more likely to eat scrambled eggs in the morning and spaghetti in the evening, rather than vice versa”) and14 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology also what we should do (“do unto others as you would have them do unto you”) and shouldn’t do (“do not make racist jokes”).
There are norms about almost every possible social behavior, and these norms have a big influence on our actions. Different Cultures Have Different Norms The social norms that guide our everyday behaviors and that create social influence derive in large part from our culture. A culture represents a group of people, normally living within a given geographical region, who share a common set of social norms, including religious and family values and moral beliefs (Fiske, Kitayama, Markus, & Nisbett, 1998; Matsumoto, 2001).
The culture in which we live affects our thoughts, feelings, and behavior through teaching, imitation, and other forms of social transmission (Mesoudi, 2009). It is not inappropriate to say that our culture defines our lives just as much as our evolutionary experience does. Cultures differ in terms of the particular norms that they find important and that guide the behavior of the group members.
Social psychologists have found that there is a fundamental difference in social norms between Western cultures (including the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand) and East Asian cultures (including China, Japan, Taiwan, Korea, India, and Southeast Asia). Norms in Western cultures are primarily oriented toward individualism—cultural norms, common in Western societies, that focus primarily on self-enhancement and independence. Children in Western cultures are taught to develop and value a sense of their personal self and to see themselves as largely separate from the people around them.
Children in Western cultures feel special about themselves—they enjoy getting gold stars on their projects and the best grade in the class (Markus, Mullally, & Kitayama, 1997). Adults in Western cultures are oriented toward promoting their own individual success, frequently in comparison with (or even at the expense of) others. When asked to describe themselves, individuals in Western cultures generally tend to indicate that they like to “do their own thing,” prefer to live their lives independently, and base their happiness and self-worth on their own personal achievements.
In short, in Western cultures the emphasis is on self-concern. Norms in the East Asian cultures, on the other hand, are more focused on other-concern. These norms indicate that people should be more fundamentally connected with others and thus are more oriented toward interdependence, or collectivism.
In East Asian cultures, children are taught to focus on developing harmonious social relationships with others, and the predominant norms relate to group togetherness, connectedness, and duty and responsibility to their family. The members of East Asian cultures, when asked to describe themselves, indicate that they are particularly concerned about the interests of others, including their close friends and their colleagues. As one example of these cultural differences, research conducted by Shinobu Kitayama and his colleagues (Uchida, Norasakkunkit, & Kitayama, 2004) found that East Asians were more likely than Westerners to experience happiness as a result of their connections with other people, whereas Westerners were more likely to experience happiness as a result of their own personal accomplishments.1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 15 Figure 1.4 People from Western cultures are, on average, more individualistic than people from Eastern cultures, who are, on average, more collectivistic.
Other researchers have studied other cultural differences, such as variations in orientations toward time. Some cultures are more concerned with arriving and departing according to a fixed schedule, whereas others consider time in a more flexible manner (Levine & Norenzayan, 1999). Levine and colleagues (1999) found that “the pace of life,” as assessed by average walking speed in downtown locations and the speed with which postal clerks completed a simple request, was fastest in Western countries (but also in Japan) and slowest in economically undeveloped countries.
It has also been argued that there are differences in the extent to which people in different cultures are bound by social norms and customs, rather than being free to express their own individuality without regard to considering social norms (Gelfand et al., 1996). And there are also cultural differences regarding personal space, such as how close individuals stand to each other when talking, as well as differences in the communication styles individuals employ. It is important to be aware of cultures and cultural differences, at least in part because people with different cultural backgrounds are increasingly coming into contact with each other as a result of increased travel and immigration, and the development of the Internet and other forms of communication.
In Canada, for instance, there are many different ethnic groups, and the proportion of the population that comes from minority (non-White) groups is increasing from year to year. Minorities will account for a much larger proportion of the total new entries into the Canadian workforce over the next decades. Roughly 21% of the Canadian population is foreign-born, which is easily the highest among G8 countries.
By 2031, visible minorities are projected to make up 63% of the population of Toronto and 59% of Vancouver (Statistics Canada, 2011). Although these changes create the potential for greater cultural understanding and productive interaction, they may also produce unwanted social conflict. Being aware of cultural differences and considering their influence on how we behave toward others is an important part of a basic understanding of social psychology and a topic that we will return to frequently in this book.16 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology Key Takeaways • The history of social psychology includes the study of attitudes, group behavior, altruism and aggression, culture, prejudice, and many other topics. • Social psychologists study real-world problems using a scientific approach. • Thinking about your own interpersonal interactions from the point of view of social psychology can help you better understand and respond to them.
• Social psychologists study the person-situation interaction: how characteristics of the person and characteristics of the social situation interact to determine behavior. • Many human social behaviors have been selected by evolutionary adaptation. • The social situation creates social norms—shared ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving.
• Cultural differences—for instance, in individualistic versus collectivistic orientations—guide our everyday behavior. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Go to the website Social Psychology Network and click on two of the “psychology headlines from around the world” presented on the right-hand side of the page.
Read through the two articles and write a short (120 words) summary of each. 2. Consider a recent situation from your personal experience in which you focused on an individual and a cause of his or her behaviour.
Could you reinterpret their behavior using a situational explanation? 3. Go to the website Historic Figures in Social Psychology and choose one of the important figures in social psychology listed there.
Prepare a brief (250 word) report about how this person contributed to the field of social psychology. References Ackerman, J. M., & Kenrick, D.
T. (2008). The costs of benefits: Help-refusals highlight key trade- offs of social life.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 12(2), 118–140. Asch, S. (1955).
Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 11, 32. Asch, S.
E. (1952). Social psychology.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 17 Au, A., Lau, S., & Lee, M. (2009). Suicide ideation and depression: The moderation effects of family cohesion and social self-concept.
Adolescence, 44(176), 851–868. Retrieved from Academic Search Premier Database. Barrett, H.
C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modularity in cognition: Framing the debate.
Psychological Review, 113(3), 628–647. Bastian, B., & Haslam, N. (2010).
Excluded from humanity: The dehumanizing effects of social ostracism. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46(1), 107–113. Baumeister, R., & Leary, M.
(1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Berkowitz, L. (1974). Aggression: A social psychological analysis.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Bernstein, M. J., Young, S.
G., Brown, C. M., Sacco, D. F., & Claypool, H.
M. (2008). Adaptive responses to social exclusion: Social rejection improves detection of real and fake smiles.
Psychological Science, 19(10), 981–983. Bertera, E. (2007).
The role of positive and negative social exchanges between adolescents, their peers and family as predictors of suicide ideation. Child & Adolescent Social Work Journal, 24(6), 523–538. doi:10.1007/s10560-007-0104-y.
Buss, D. M. (2000).
The dangerous passion: Why jealousy is as necessary as love and sex. New York, NY: Free Press. Buss, D., & Kenrick, D.
(1998). Evolutionary social psychology. In D.
T. Gilbert, S. T.
Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 2, pp.
982–1026). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill. Chen, Z., Williams, K.
D., Fitness, J., & Newton, N. C. (2008).
When hurt will not heal: Exploring the capacity to relive social and physical pain. Psychological Science, 19(8), 789–795. Cialdini, R.
B. (1993). Influence: Science and practice (3rd ed.).
New York, NY: HarperCollins College Publishers. Cohen, S., & Wills, T. (1985).
Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310–357. Compton, M., Thompson, N., & Kaslow, N.
(2005). Social environment factors associated with suicide attempt among low-income African Americans: The protective role of family relationships and social support. Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 40(3), 175–185.
doi:10.1007/ s00127-005-0865-6. Darley, J. M., & Latané, B.
(1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8(4, Pt.
1), 377–383. Dawkins, R. (2006).
The selfish gene. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. Diener, E., Suh, E.
M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L.
(1999). Subjective well-being: Three decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125(2), 276–302.
Diener, E., Tamir, M., & Scollon, C. N. (2006).
Happiness, life satisfaction, and fulfillment: The social psychology of subjective well-being. In P. A.
M. Van Lange (Ed.), Bridging social psychology: Benefits of transdisciplinary approaches. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.18 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993).
The psychology of attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Festinger, L.
(1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fiske, A. P., & Haslam, N. (1996).
Social cognition is thinking about relationships. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5(5), 137–142. Fiske, A., Kitayama, S., Markus, H., & Nisbett, R.
(1998). The cultural matrix of social psychology. In D.
Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp.
915–981). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Fiske, S.
T., & Taylor, S. E. (2008).
Social cognition: From brains to culture. Boston, MA: McGraw- Hill. Fiske, S.
T., Bersoff, D. N., Borgida, E., Deaux, K., & Heilman, M. E.
(1991). Social science research on trial: The use of sex stereotyping research in Price Waterhouse vs. Hopkins.
American Psychologist, 46, 1049–1060. Gelfand, M. J., Raver, J.
L., Nishii, L., Leslie, L. M., Lun, J., Lim, B. C.,…Yamagushi, S.
(2011). Differences between tight and loose cultures: A 33-nation study. Science, 332(6033), 1100–1104.
Gilbert, D., & Malone, P. (1995). The correspondence bias.
Psychological Review, 117, 21–38. Goetz, J. L., Keltner, D., & Simon-Thomas, E.
(2010). Compassion: An evolutionary analysis and empirical review. Psychological Bulletin, 136(3), 351–374.
Haney, C., Banks, C., & Zimbardo, P. (1973). Interpersonal dynamics in a simulated prison.
International Journal of Criminology and Penology, 1, 69–87. Hardy, C. J., Richman, J.
M., & Rosenfeld, L. B. (1991).
The role of social support in the life stress/ injury relationship. The Sports Psychologist, 5, 128–139. Herrmann, E., Call, J., Hernández-Lloreda, M.
V., Hare, B., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: The cultural intelligence hypothesis.
Science, 317(5843), 1360–1366. Hovland, C. I., Janis, I.
L., & Kelley, H. H. (1963).
Communication and persuasion. Oxford, England: Yale University Press. Janis, I.
L. (1972). Victims of groupthink: A psychological study of foreign policy decisions and fiascos.
Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin. Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Krebs, D.
L. (2008). Morality: An evolutionary account.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(3), 149–172. Kruglanski, A., & Stroebe, W. (2011).
Handbook of the history of social psychology. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press. Leary, M.
R., & Cox, C. B. (Eds.).
(2008). Belongingness motivation: A mainspring of social action. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Levine, R. V., & Norenzayan, A. (1999).
The pace of life in 31 countries. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 30(2), 178–205.1.1 Defining Social Psychology: History and Principles 19 Lieberman, M. D.
(2010). Social cognitive neuroscience. In S.
T. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp.
143–193). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Maner, J.
K., DeWall, C. N., Baumeister, R. F., & Schaller, M.
(2007). Does social exclusion motivate interpersonal reconnection? Resolving the “porcupine problem.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(1), 42–55.
Markus, H. R., Mullally, P., & Kitayama, S. (1997).
Selfways: Diversity in modes of cultural participation. In U. Neisser & D.
A. Jopling (Eds.), The conceptual self in context: Culture, experience, self-understanding (pp. 13–61).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Matsumoto, D. (Ed.).
(2001). The handbook of culture and psychology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
McDougall, W. (2003. original published 1908).
An introduction to social psychology. Mineola, NY: Dover. Mesoudi, A.
(2009) How cultural evolutionary theory can inform social psychology, and vice versa. Psychological Review, 116, 929–952. Milgram, S.
(1974). Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Park, J. H., Schaller, M., & Van Vugt, M. (2008).
Psychology of human kin recognition: Heuristic cues, erroneous inferences, and their implications. Review of General Psychology, 12(3), 215–235. Pew Research Center.
(2006, February 13). Are we happy yet? Retrieved from http://pewresearch.org/ pubs/301/are-we-happy-yet Pinker, S.
(2002). The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. New York, NY: Penguin Putnam.
Ross, E. A. (1974; original published 1908).
Social psychology. New York, NY: Arno Press. Sebastian, C., Viding, E., Williams, K.
D., & Blakemore, S.-J. (2010). Social brain development and the affective consequences of ostracism in adolescence.
Brain and Cognition, 72(1), 134–145. Sherif, M. (1936).
The psychology of social norms. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Skärsäter, I., Langius, A., Ågren, H., Häggström, L., & Dencker, K.
(2005). Sense of coherence and social support in relation to recovery in first-episode patients with major depression: A one-year prospective study. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, 14(4), 258–264.
doi:10.1111/ j.1440-0979.2005.00390 Statistics Canada. (2011). Ethnic diversity and immigration.
Retrieved from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/ pub/11-402-x/2011000/chap/imm/imm-eng.htm Staub, E., Pearlman, L. A., & Bilali, R. (2010).
Understanding the roots and impact of violence and psychological recovery as avenues to reconciliation after mass violence and intractable conflict: Applications to national leaders, journalists, community groups, public education through radio, and children. In G. Salomon & E.
Cairns (Eds.), Handbook of Peace Education. New York: Psychology Press. Stroebe, W., & Stroebe, M.
(1996). The social psychology of social support. In E.
T. Higgins & A. W.
Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 597–621). New York, NY: Guilford Press.20 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology Triplett, N. (1898). The dynamogenic factors in pacemaking and competition.
American Journal of Psychology, 9(4), 507–533. Turiel, E. (1983).
The development of social knowledge: Morality and convention. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Uchida, Y., Norasakkunkit, V., & Kitayama, S.
(2004). Cultural constructions of happiness: Theory and empirical evidence. Journal of Happiness Studies, 5(3), 223–239.
Williams, K. D., Cheung, C. K.
T., & Choi, W. (2000). Cyberostracism: Effects of being ignored over the Internet.
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 79(5), 748–762. Workman, L., & Reader, W. (2008).
Evolutionary psychology: An introduction (2nd ed.).. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Media Attributions • “Happy family (1)” by cscott2006 is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence.
• “Formosan macaque” by KaurJmeb is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “Old couple in a busy street” by Geir Halvorsen is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “Piggy Back” by Tricia J is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.
• “Elderly Care 2” by Mark-Adkins is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “Family playing a board game (3)” by Bill Branson is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence. • “West Wittering Wonderful As Always” by Gareth Williams is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.1.2 Affect, Behavior, and Cognition Learning Objectives 1.
Define and differentiate affect, behavior, and cognition as considered by social psychologists. 2. Summarize the principles of social cognition.
Social psychology is based on the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition. In order to effectively maintain and enhance our own lives through successful interaction with others, we rely on these three basic and interrelated human capacities: 1. Affect (feelings) 2.
Behavior (interactions) 3. Cognition (thought) 2122 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology Figure 1.5 Human beings rely on the three capacities of affect, behavior, and cognition, which work together to help them create successful social interactions.
You can see that these three aspects directly reflect the idea in our definition of social psychology—the study of the feelings, behaviors, and thoughts of individuals in the social situation. Although we will frequently discuss each of the capacities separately, keep in mind that all three work together to produce human experience. Now let’s consider separately the roles of cognition, affect, and behavior.
Social Cognition: Thinking and Learning about Others The human brain contains about 86 billion neurons, each of which can make contact with tens of thousands of other neurons. The distinguishing brain feature in mammals, including humans, is the more recently evolved cerebral cortex—the part of the brain that is involved in thinking. Humans are highly intelligent, and they use cognition in every part of their social lives.
Psychologists refer to cognition as the mental activity of processing information and using that information in judgment. Social cognition is cognition that relates to social activities and that helps us understand and predict the behavior of ourselves and others.1.2 Affect, Behavior, and Cognition 23 Figure 1.6 The cerebral cortex is the part of the brain that is involved in thinking. A big part of its job is social cognition—thinking about and understanding other people.
Over time, people develop a set of social knowledge that contains information about the self, other people, social relationships, and social groups. Two types of knowledge are particularly important in social psychology: schemas and attitudes. A schema is a knowledge representation that includes information about a person or group (e.g., our knowledge that Joe is a friendly guy or that Italians are romantic).
An attitude is a knowledge representation that includes primarily our liking or disliking of a person, thing, or group (“I really like Julie”; “I dislike my new apartment”). Once we have formed them, both schemas and attitudes allow us to judge quickly and without much thought whether someone or something we encounter is good or bad, helpful or hurtful, to be sought out or avoided. Thus schemas and attitudes have an important influence on our social information processing and social behavior.
Social cognition involves the active interpretation of events. As a result, different people may draw different conclusions about the same events. When Indira smiles at Robert, he might think that she is romantically attracted to him, whereas she might think that she’s just being friendly.
When Mike tells a joke about Polish people, he might think it’s funny, but Wanda might think he is being prejudiced. The 12 members of a jury who are deliberating about the outcome in a trial have all heard the same evidence, but each juror’s own schemas and attitudes may lead him or her to interpret the evidence differently. The fact that different people interpret the same events differently makes life interesting, but it can sometimes lead to disagreement and conflict.
Social psychologists study how people interpret24 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology and understand their worlds and, particularly, how they make judgments about the causes of other people’s behavior. Social Affect: Feelings about Ourselves and Others Affect refers to the feelings we experience as part of our everyday lives.
As our day progresses, we may find ourselves feeling happy or sad, jealous or grateful, proud or embarrassed. Although affect can be harmful if it is unregulated or unchecked, our affective experiences normally help us to function efficiently and in a way that increases our chances of survival. Affect signals us that things are going all right (e.g., because we are in a good mood or are experiencing joy or serenity) or that things are not going so well (we are in a bad mood, anxious, upset, or angry).
Affect can also lead us to engage in behaviors that are appropriate to our perceptions of a given situation. When we are happy, we may seek out and socialize with others; when we are angry, we may attack; when we are fearful, we may run away. We experience affect in the form of mood and emotions.
Mood refers to the positive or negative feelings that are in the background of our everyday experiences. Most of the time, we are in a relatively good mood, and positive mood has some positive consequences—it encourages us to do what needs to be done and to make the most of the situations we are in (Isen, 2003). When we are in a good mood, our thought processes open up and we are more likely to approach others.
We are more friendly and helpful to others when we are in a good mood than when we are in a bad mood, and we may think more creatively (De Dreu, Baas, & Nijstad, 2008). On the other hand, when we are in a bad mood, we are more likely to prefer to remain by ourselves rather than interact with others, and our creativity suffers. Emotions are brief, but often intense, mental and physiological feeling states.
In comparison with moods, emotions are shorter lived, stronger, and more specific forms of affect. Emotions are caused by specific events (things that make us, for instance, jealous or angry), and they are accompanied by high levels of arousal. Whereas we experience moods in normal, everyday situations, we experience emotions only when things are out of the ordinary or unusual.
Emotions serve an adaptive role in helping us guide our social behaviors. Just as we run from a snake because the snake elicits fear, we may try to make amends with other people when we feel guilty. Social Behavior: Interacting with Others Because we interact with and influence each other every day, we have developed the ability to make these interactions proceed efficiently and effectively.
We cooperate with other people to gain outcomes that we could not obtain on our own, and we exchange goods, services, and other benefits with other people. These behaviors are essential for survival in any society (Kameda, Takezawa, & Hastie, 2003; Kameda, Takezawa, Tindale, & Smith, 2002). The sharing of goods, services, emotions, and other social outcomes is known as social exchange.
Social rewards (the positive outcomes that we give and receive when we interact with others) include such benefits as attention, praise, affection, love, and financial support. Social costs (the negative outcomes that we give and receive when we interact with others), on the other hand, include, for instance, the frustrations that accrue when disagreements with others develop, the guilt that results if1.2 Affect, Behavior, and Cognition 25 we perceive that we have acted inappropriately, and the effort involved in developing and maintaining harmonious interpersonal relationships. Imagine a first-year student at college or university who is trying to decide whether or not to join a student club.
Joining the club has costs, in terms of the dues that have to be paid, the need to make friends with each of the other club members and to attend club meetings, and so forth. On the other hand, there are the potential benefits of group membership, including having a group of friends with similar interests and a social network to help find activities to participate in. To determine whether or not to join, the student has to weigh both the social and the material costs and benefits before coming to a conclusion (Moreland & Levine, 2006).
People generally prefer to maximize their own outcomes by attempting to gain as many social rewards as possible and by attempting to minimize their social costs. Such behavior is consistent with the goal of protecting and enhancing the self. But although people do behave according to the goals of self- concern, these goals are tempered by other-concern: the goals of respecting, accepting, and cooperating with others.
As a result, social exchange is generally fair and equitable, at least in the long run. Imagine, for example, that someone asks you to do a favor for them, and you do it. If they were only concerned about their own self-enhancement, they might simply accept the favor without any thought of paying you back.
Yet both you and they would realize that you would most certainly expect them to be willing to do the same type of favor for you, should you ask them at some later time. One of the outcomes of humans living together in small groups over thousands of years is that people have learned to cooperate by giving benefits to those who are in need, with the expectation of a return of benefits at a future time. This mutual, and generally equitable, exchange of benefits is known as reciprocal altruism.
An individual who is temporarily sick or injured will benefit from the help that he or she might get from others during this time. And according to the principle of reciprocal altruism, other group members will be willing to give that help to the needy individual because they expect that similar help will be given to them should they need it. However, in order for reciprocal altruism to work, people have to keep track of how benefits are exchanged, to be sure that everyone plays by the rules.
If one person starts to take benefits without paying them back, this violates the principle of reciprocity and should not be allowed to continue for very long. In fact, research has shown that people seem to be particularly good at detecting “cheaters”—those who do not live up to their obligations in reciprocal altruism—and that these individuals are judged extremely negatively (Mealey, Daood, & Krage, 1996; Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). Key Takeaways • We use affect, behavior, and cognition to help us successfully interact with others.
• Social cognition refers to our thoughts about and interpretations of ourselves and other people. Over time, we develop schemas and attitudes to help us better understand and more successfully interact with others. • Affect refers to the feelings that we experience as part of life and includes both moods and emotions.26 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology • Social behavior is influenced by principles of reciprocal altruism and social exchange. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Consider a time when you had an important social interaction or made an important decision.
Analyze your responses to the situation in terms of affect, behaviour, and cognition. 2. Think about when you last engaged in a case of reciprocal altruism and describe what took place.
References De Dreu, C. K. W., Baas, M., & Nijstad, B.
A. (2008). Hedonic tone and activation level in the mood- creativity link: Toward a dual pathway to creativity model.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(5), 739–756. Isen, A. M.
(2003). Positive affect as a source of human strength. In A psychology of human strengths: Fundamental questions and future directions for a positive psychology (pp.
179–195). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Kameda, T., Takezawa, M., & Hastie, R.
(2003). The logic of social sharing: An evolutionary game analysis of adaptive norm development. Personality & Social Psychology Review, 7(1), 2–19..
Kameda, T., Takezawa, M., Tindale, R. S., & Smith, C. M.
(2002). Social sharing and risk reduction: Exploring a computational algorithm for the psychology of windfall gains. Evolution & Human Behavior, 23(1), 11–33.
Mealey, L., Daood, C., & Krage, M. (1996). Enhanced memory for faces of cheaters.
Ethology & Sociobiology, 7(2), 119–128. Moreland, R. L., & Levine, J.
M. (Eds.). (2006).
Socialization in organizations and work groups. New York, NY: Psychology Press. Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L.
(1992). The psychological foundations of culture. In J.
H. Barkow & L. Cosmides (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (p.
666). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Media Attributions • “icy*kiss” by smcgee is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence.
• “Work man-sitting” by Pilatesball is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “Weight lifting black and white” by imagesbywestfall is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.1.2 Affect, Behavior, and Cognition 27 • “A husband and wife reunite after a six-month war deployment in the Middle East as pilots and air crewmen from Helicopter Anti Submarine Squadron Light Five One return to their home at Naval Air Facility Atsugi 030725-N-HX866-002” by PHC(SW/NAC) SPIKE CALL is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence. • “Panel Discussion Close-up, Science, Faith, and Technology” by David Bruce is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence.
• “laughing mom friends” by Lori is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “thoughts speech bubbles idea dreaming talking” by Clker-Free-Vector-Images is licensed under a Simplified Pixabay License.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology Learning Objectives 1. Explain why social psychologists rely on empirical methods to study social behavior.
2. Provide examples of how social psychologists measure the variables they are interested in. 3.
Review the three types of research designs, and evaluate the strengths and limitations of each type. 4. Consider the role of validity in research, and describe how research programs should be evaluated.
Social psychologists are not the only people interested in understanding and predicting social behavior or the only people who study it. Social behavior is also considered by religious leaders, philosophers, politicians, novelists, and others, and it is a common topic on TV shows. But the social psychological approach to understanding social behavior goes beyond the mere observation of human actions.
Social psychologists believe that a true understanding of the causes of social behavior can only be obtained through a systematic scientific approach, and that is why they conduct scientific research. Social psychologists believe that the study of social behavior should be empirical—that is, based on the collection and systematic analysis of observable data. The Importance of Scientific Research Because social psychology concerns the relationships among people, and because we can frequently find answers to questions about human behavior by using our own common sense or intuition, many people think that it is not necessary to study it empirically (Lilienfeld, 2011).
But although we do learn about people by observing others and therefore social psychology is in fact partly common sense, social psychology is not entirely common sense. Is social psychology just common sense? To test for yourself whether or not social psychology is just common sense, try doing this activity.
Based on your past observations of people’s behavior, along with your own common sense, you will likely have answers to each of the questions on the activity. But how sure are you? Would you be willing to bet that all, or 2930 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology even most, of your answers have been shown to be correct by scientific research? If you are like most people, you will get at least some of these answers wrong. Read through each finding, and decide if you think the research evidence shows that it is either mainly true or mainly false.
When you have figured out the answers, think about why each finding is either mainly true or mainly false. You may also find some other ideas on this as you work your way through the textbook chapters! • Opposites attract.
• An athlete who wins the bronze medal (third place) in an event is happier about his or her performance than the athlete who won the silver medal (second place). • Having good friends you can count on can keep you from catching colds. • Subliminal advertising (i.e., persuasive messages that are presented out of our awareness on TV or movie screens) is very effective in getting us to buy products.
• The greater the reward promised for an activity, the more one will come to enjoy engaging in that activity. • Physically attractive people are seen as less intelligent than less attractive people. • Punching a pillow or screaming out loud is a good way to reduce frustration and aggressive tendencies.
• People pull harder in a tug-of-war when they’re pulling alone than when pulling in a group. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 1 DRAG THE WORDS – CLASSIC FINDINGS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY Read through each finding, taken from Table 1.5 in the chapter summary, and decide if you think the research evidence shows that it is either mainly true or mainly false by dragging the correct word into each box. Pay attention to the number of “trues” and “falses” available!
When you have figured out the answers, think about why each finding is either mainly true or mainly false. You may also find some other ideas on this as you work your way through the textbook chapters! • Opposites attract.
• An athlete who wins the bronze medal (third place) in an event is happier about his or her performance than the athlete who wins the silver medal (second place). • Having good friends you can count on can keep you from catching colds. • Subliminal advertising (i.e., persuasive messages that are displayed out of our awareness on TV or movie screens) is very effective in getting us to buy products.
• The greater the reward promised for an activity, the more one will come to enjoy engaging in that activity. • Physically attractive people are seen as less intelligent than less attractive people. • Punching a pillow or screaming out loud is a good way to reduce frustration and aggressive tendencies.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 31 • People pull harder in a tug-of-war when they’re pulling alone than when pulling in a group.
See Table 1.5 in the chapter summary for answers and explanations. One of the reasons we might think that social psychology is common sense is that once we learn about the outcome of a given event (e.g., when we read about the results of a research project), we frequently believe that we would have been able to predict the outcome ahead of time. For instance, if half of a class of students is told that research concerning attraction between people has demonstrated that “opposites attract,” and if the other half is told that research has demonstrated that “birds of a feather flock together,” most of the students in both groups will report believing that the outcome is true and that they would have predicted the outcome before they had heard about it.
Of course, both of these contradictory outcomes cannot be true. The problem is that just reading a description of research findings leads us to think of the many cases that we know that support the findings and thus makes them seem believable. The tendency to think that we could have predicted something that we probably would not have been able to predict is called the hindsight bias.
Our common sense also leads us to believe that we know why we engage in the behaviors that we engage in, when in fact we may not. Social psychologist Daniel Wegner and his colleagues have conducted a variety of studies showing that we do not always understand the causes of our own actions. When we think about a behavior before we engage in it, we believe that the thinking guided our behavior, even when it did not (Morewedge, Gray, & Wegner, 2010).
People also report that they contribute more to solving a problem when they are led to believe that they have been working harder on it, even though the effort did not increase their contribution to the outcome (Preston & Wegner, 2007). These findings, and many others like them, demonstrate that our beliefs about the causes of social events, and even of our own actions, do not always match the true causes of those events. Social psychologists conduct research because it often uncovers results that could not have been predicted ahead of time.
Putting our hunches to the test exposes our ideas to scrutiny. The scientific approach brings a lot of surprises, but it also helps us test our explanations about behavior in a rigorous manner. It is important for you to understand the research methods used in psychology so that you can evaluate the validity of the research that you read about here, in other courses, and in your everyday life.
Social psychologists publish their research in scientific journals, and your instructor may require you to read some of these research articles. The most important social psychology journals are listed in “Social Psychology Journals.” If you are asked to do a literature search on research in social psychology, you should look for articles from these journals. Social Psychology Journals: • Journal of Personality and Social Psychology32 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology • Journal of Experimental Social Psychology • Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin • Social Psychology and Personality Science • Social Cognition • European Journal of Social Psychology • Social Psychology Quarterly • Basic and Applied Social Psychology • Journal of Applied Social Psychology Note. The research articles in these journals are likely to be available in your college or university library. We’ll discuss the empirical approach and review the findings of many research projects throughout this book, but for now let’s take a look at the basics of how scientists use research to draw overall conclusions about social behavior.
Keep in mind as you read this book, however, that although social psychologists are pretty good at understanding the causes of behavior, our predictions are a long way from perfect. We are not able to control the minds or the behaviors of others or to predict exactly what they will do in any given situation. Human behavior is complicated because people are complicated and because the social situations that they find themselves in every day are also complex.
It is this complexity—at least for me—that makes studying people so interesting and fun. Measuring Affect, Behavior, and Cognition One important aspect of using an empirical approach to understand social behavior is that the concepts of interest must be measured (Figure 1.7, “The Operational Definition”). If we are interested in learning how much Sarah likes Robert, then we need to have a measure of her liking for him.
But how, exactly, should we measure the broad idea of “liking”? In scientific terms, the characteristics that we are trying to measure are known as conceptual variables, and the particular method that we use to measure a variable of interest is called an operational definition. For anything that we might wish to measure, there are many different operational definitions, and which one we use depends on the goal of the research and the type of situation we are studying.
To better understand this, let’s look at an example of how we might operationally define “Sarah likes Robert.”1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 33 Figure 1.7 The Operational Definition. An idea or conceptual variable (such as “how much Sarah likes Robert”) is turned into a measure through an operational definition. One approach to measurement involves directly asking people about their perceptions using self-report measures.
Self-report measures are measures in which individuals are asked to respond to questions posed by an interviewer or on a questionnaire. Generally, because any one question might be misunderstood or answered incorrectly, in order to provide a better measure, more than one question is asked and the responses to the questions are averaged together. For example, an operational definition of Sarah’s liking for Robert might involve asking her to complete the following measure: 1.
I enjoy being around Robert. Strongly disagree 1 2 3 4 5 6 Strongly agree 2. I get along well with Robert.
Strongly disagree 1 2 3 4 5 6 Strongly agree 3. I like Robert. Strongly disagree 1 2 3 4 5 6 Strongly agree The operational definition would be the average of her responses across the three questions.
Because each question assesses the attitude differently, and yet each question should nevertheless measure Sarah’s attitude toward Robert in some way, the average of the three questions will generally be a better measure than would any one question on its own. Although it is easy to ask many questions on self-report measures, these measures have a potential34 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology disadvantage.
As we have seen, people’s insights into their own opinions and their own behaviors may not be perfect, and they might also not want to tell the truth—perhaps Sarah really likes Robert, but she is unwilling or unable to tell us so. Therefore, an alternative to self-report that can sometimes provide a more valid measure is to measure behavior itself. Behavioral measures are measures designed to directly assess what people do.
Instead of asking Sarah how much she likes Robert, we might instead measure her liking by assessing how much time she spends with Robert or by coding how much she smiles at him when she talks to him. Some examples of behavioral measures that have been used in social psychological research are shown in Table 1.3, “Examples of Operational Definitions of Conceptual Variables That Have Been Used in Social Psychological Research.” Table 1.3 Examples of Operational Definitions of Conceptual Variables that have been used in Sociological Research. Conceptual variable Operational definitions • Number of seconds taken to honk the horn at the car ahead after a Aggression stoplight turns green • Number of presses of a button that administers shock to another student • Number of millimeters of pupil dilation when one person looks at another Interpersonal attraction • Number of times that a person looks at another person • Number of hours of volunteering per week that a person engages in Altruism • Number of pieces of paper a person helps another pick up Group-decision making • Number of seconds in which a group correctly solves a problem skills • Number of groups able to correctly solve a group performance task • Number of groups able to correctly solve a group performance task Prejudice • Number of negative words used in a creative story about another person Social Neuroscience: Measuring Social Responses in the Brain Still another approach to measuring thoughts and feelings is to measure brain activity, and recent advances in brain science have created a wide variety of new techniques for doing so.
One approach, known as electroencephalography (EEG), is a technique that records the electrical activity produced by the brain’s neurons through the use of electrodes that are placed around the research participant’s head. An electroencephalogram (EEG) can show if a person is asleep, awake, or anesthetized because the brain wave patterns are known to differ during each state. An EEG can also track the waves that are produced when a person is reading, writing, and speaking with others.
A particular advantage of the1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 35 technique is that the participant can move around while the recordings are being taken, which is useful when measuring brain activity in children who often have difficulty keeping still. Furthermore, by following electrical impulses across the surface of the brain, researchers can observe changes over very fast time periods. Figure 1.8 Although EEGs can provide information about the general patterns of electrical activity within the brain, and although they allow the researcher to see these changes quickly as they occur in real time, the electrodes must be placed on the surface of the skull, and each electrode measures brain waves from large areas of the brain.
As a result, EEGs do not provide a very clear picture of the structure of the brain. But techniques exist to provide more specific brain images. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a neuroimaging technique that uses a magnetic field to create images of brain structure and function.
In research studies that use the fMRI, the research participant lies on a bed within a large cylindrical structure containing a very strong magnet. Nerve cells in the brain that are active use more oxygen, and the need for oxygen increases blood flow to the area. The fMRI detects the amount of blood flow in each brain region and thus is an indicator of which parts of the brain are active.
Very clear and detailed pictures of brain structures (see Figure 1.9, “MRI BOLD activation in an emotional Stroop task”) can be produced via fMRI. Often, the images take the form of cross-sectional “slices” that are obtained as the magnetic field is passed across the brain. The images of these slices are taken repeatedly and are superimposed on images of the brain structure itself to show how activity changes in different brain structures over time.
Normally, the research participant is asked to engage in36 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology tasks while in the scanner, for instance, to make judgments about pictures of people, to solve problems, or to make decisions about appropriate behaviors. The fMRI images show which parts of the brain are associated with which types of tasks.
Another advantage of the fMRI is that is it noninvasive. The research participant simply enters the machine and the scans begin. Figure 1.9 MRI BOLD activation in an emotional Stroop task [click to see image full size] Although the scanners themselves are expensive, the advantages of fMRIs are substantial, and scanners are now available in many university and hospital settings.
The fMRI is now the most commonly used method of learning about brain structure, and it has been employed by social psychologists to study social cognition, attitudes, morality, emotions, responses to being rejected by others, and racial prejudice, to name just a few topics (Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003; Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & Cohen, 2001; Lieberman, Hariri, Jarcho, Eisenberger, & Bookheimer, 2005; Ochsner, Bunge, Gross, & Gabrieli, 2002; Richeson et al., 2003). Observational Research Once we have decided how to measure our variables, we can begin the process of research itself. As you can see in Table 1.4, “Three Major Research Designs Used by Social Psychologists,” there are three major approaches to conducting research that are used by social psychologists—the observational approach, the correlational approach, and the experimental approach.
Each approach has some advantages and disadvantages.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 37 Table 1.4 Three Major Research Designs Used by Social Psychologists Research Goal Advantages Disadvantages Design Provides a relatively complete picture To create a snapshot of Does not assess of what is occurring at a given time. Observational the current state of relationships between Allows the development of questions affairs variables. for further study.
Allows the testing of expected Cannot be used to draw To assess the relationships between variables and inferences about the causal Correlational relationships between the making of predictions. Can assess relationships between the two or more variables these relationships in everyday life variables. events.
To assess the causal Cannot experimentally impact of one or more Allows the drawing of conclusions manipulate many important Experimental experimental about the causal relationships among variables. May be expensive manipulations on a variables. and take much time to dependent variable conduct.
The most basic research design, observational research, is research that involves making observations of behavior and recording those observations in an objective manner. Although it is possible in some cases to use observational data to draw conclusions about the relationships between variables (e.g., by comparing the behaviors of older versus younger children on a playground), in many cases the observational approach is used only to get a picture of what is happening to a given set of people at a given time and how they are responding to the social situation. In these cases, the observational approach involves creating a type of “snapshot” of the current state of affairs.
One advantage of observational research is that in many cases it is the only possible approach to collecting data about the topic of interest. A researcher who is interested in studying the impact of an earthquake on the residents of Tokyo, the reactions of Israelis to a terrorist attack, or the activities of the members of a religious cult cannot create such situations in a laboratory but must be ready to make observations in a systematic way when such events occur on their own. Thus observational research allows the study of unique situations that could not be created by the researcher.
Another advantage of observational research is that the people whose behavior is being measured are doing the things they do every day, and in some cases they may not even know that their behavior is being recorded. One early observational study that made an important contribution to understanding human behavior was reported in a book by Leon Festinger and his colleagues (Festinger, Riecken, & Schachter, 1956). The book, called When Prophecy Fails, reported an observational study of the members of a “doomsday” cult.
The cult members believed that they had received information, supposedly sent through “automatic writing” from a planet called “Clarion,” that the world was going to end. More specifically, the group members were convinced that Earth would be destroyed as the result of a gigantic flood sometime before dawn on December 21, 1954. When Festinger learned about the cult, he thought that it would be an interesting way to study how individuals in groups communicate with each other to reinforce their extreme beliefs.
He and his colleagues observed the members of the cult over a period of several months, beginning in July of the year in which the flood was expected. The researchers collected a variety of behavioral and self-report38 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology measures by observing the cult, recording the conversations among the group members, and conducting detailed interviews with them.
Festinger and his colleagues also recorded the reactions of the cult members, beginning on December 21, when the world did not end as they had predicted. This observational research provided a wealth of information about the indoctrination patterns of cult members and their reactions to disconfirmed predictions. This research also helped Festinger develop his important theory of cognitive dissonance.
Despite their advantages, observational research designs also have some limitations. Most importantly, because the data that are collected in observational studies are only a description of the events that are occurring, they do not tell us anything about the relationship between different variables. However, it is exactly this question that correlational research and experimental research are designed to answer.
The Research Hypothesis Because social psychologists are generally interested in looking at relationships among variables, they begin by stating their predictions in the form of a precise statement known as a research hypothesis. A research hypothesis is a specific prediction about the relationship between the variables of interest and about the specific direction of that relationship. For instance, the research hypothesis “People who are more similar to each other will be more attracted to each other” predicts that there is a relationship between a variable called similarity and another variable called attraction.
In the research hypothesis “The attitudes of cult members become more extreme when their beliefs are challenged,” the variables that are expected to be related are extremity of beliefs and the degree to which the cult’s beliefs are challenged. Because the research hypothesis states both that there is a relationship between the variables and the direction of that relationship, it is said to be falsifiable, which means that the outcome of the research can demonstrate empirically either that there is support for the hypothesis (i.e., the relationship between the variables was correctly specified) or that there is actually no relationship between the variables or that the actual relationship is not in the direction that was predicted. Thus the research hypothesis that “People will be more attracted to others who are similar to them” is falsifiable because the research could show either that there was no relationship between similarity and attraction or that people we see as similar to us are seen as less attractive than those who are dissimilar.
Correlational Research Correlational researchis designed to search for and test hypotheses about the relationships between two or more variables. In the simplest case, the correlation is between only two variables, such as that between similarity and liking, or between gender (male versus female) and helping. In a correlational design, the research hypothesis is that there is an association (i.e., a correlation) between the variables that are being measured.
For instance, many researchers have tested the research hypothesis that a positive correlation exists between the use of violent video games and the incidence of aggressive behavior, such that people who play violent video games more frequently would also display more aggressive behavior.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 39 Figure 1.10 Correlational Design. The research hypothesis that a positive correlation exists between the use of violent video games and the incidence of aggressive behavior A statistic known as the Pearson correlation coefficient (symbolized by the letter r) is normally used to summarize the association, or correlation, between two variables. The Pearson correlation coefficient can range from −1 (indicating a very strong negative relationship between the variables) to +1 (indicating a very strong positive relationship between the variables).
Recent research has found that there is a positive correlation between the use of violent video games and the incidence of aggressive behavior and that the size of the correlation is about r = .30 (Bushman & Huesmann, 2010). One advantage of correlational research designs is that, like observational research (and in comparison with experimental research designs in which the researcher frequently creates relatively artificial situations in a laboratory setting), they are often used to study people doing the things that they do every day. Correlational research designs also have the advantage of allowing prediction.
When two or more variables are correlated, we can use our knowledge of a person’s score on one of the variables to predict his or her likely score on another variable. Because high-school grades are correlated with university grades, if we know a person’s high-school grades, we can predict his or her likely university grades. Similarly, if we know how many violent video games a child plays, we can predict how aggressively he or she will behave.
These predictions will not be perfect, but they will allow us to make a better guess than we would have been able to if we had not known the person’s score on the first variable ahead of time. Despite their advantages, correlational designs have a very important limitation. This limitation is that they cannot be used to draw conclusions about the causal relationships among the variables that have been measured.
An observed correlation between two variables does not necessarily indicate that either one of the variables caused the other. Although many studies have found a correlation between the number of violent video games that people play and the amount of aggressive behaviors they engage in, this does not mean that viewing the video games necessarily caused the aggression. Although one possibility is that playing violent games increases aggression, Figure 1.11 Playing violent video games leads to aggressive behavior.
another possibility is that the causal direction is exactly opposite to what has been hypothesized. Perhaps increased aggressiveness causes more interest in, and thus increased viewing of, violent games.40 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology Although this causal relationship might not seem as logical, there is no way to rule out the possibility of such reverse causation on the basis of the observed correlation.
Figure 1.12 Increased aggressiveness causes more interest in, and thus increased viewing of, violent games. Still another possible explanation for the observed correlation is that it has been produced by the presence of another variable that was not measured in the research. Common-causal variables (also known as third variables) are variables that are not part of the research hypothesis but that cause both the predictor and the outcome variable and thus produce the observed correlation between them (Figure 1.13, “Correlation and Causality”).
It has been observed that students who sit in the front of a large class get better grades than those who sit in the back of the class. Although this could be because sitting in the front causes the student to take better notes or to understand the material better, the relationship could also be due to a common-causal variable, such as the interest or motivation of the students to do well in the class. Because a student’s interest in the class leads him or her to both get better grades and sit nearer to the teacher, seating position and class grade are correlated, even though neither one caused the other.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 41 Figure 1.13 Correlation and Causality.
The correlation between where students sit in a large class and their grade in the class is likely caused by the influence of one or more common-causal variables. The possibility of common-causal variables must always be taken into account when considering correlational research designs. For instance, in a study that finds a correlation between playing violent video games and aggression, it is possible that a common-causal variable is producing the relationship.
Some possibilities include the family background, diet, and hormone levels of the children. Any or all of these potential common-causal variables might be creating the observed correlation between playing violent video games and aggression. Higher levels of the male sex hormone testosterone, for instance, may cause children to both watch more violent TV and behave more aggressively.
You may think of common-causal variables in correlational research designs as “mystery” variables, since their presence and identity is usually unknown to the researcher because they have not been measured. Because it is not possible to measure every variable that could possibly cause both variables, it is always possible that there is an unknown common-causal variable. For this reason, we are left with the basic limitation of correlational research: correlation does not imply causation.42 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology Experimental Research The goal of much research in social psychology is to understand the causal relationships among variables, and for this we use experiments. Experimental research designs are research designs that include the manipulation of a given situation or experience for two or more groups of individuals who are initially created to be equivalent, followed by a measurement of the effect of that experience. In an experimental research design, the variables of interest are called the independent variables and the dependent variables.
The independent variable refers to the situation that is created by the experimenter through the experimental manipulations, and the dependent variable refers to the variable that is measured after the manipulations have occurred. In an experimental research design, the research hypothesis is that the manipulated independent variable (or variables) causes changes in the measured dependent variable (or variables). We can diagram the prediction like this, using an arrow that points in one direction to demonstrate the expected direction of causality: viewing violence (independent variable) → aggressive behavior (dependent variable) Consider an experiment conducted by Anderson and Dill (2000), which was designed to directly test the hypothesis that viewing violent video games would cause increased aggressive behavior.
In this research, male and female undergraduates from Iowa State University were given a chance to play either a violent video game (Wolfenstein 3D) or a nonviolent video game (Myst). During the experimental session, the participants played the video game that they had been given for 15 minutes. Then, after the play, they participated in a competitive task with another student in which they had a chance to deliver blasts of white noise through the earphones of their opponent.
The operational definition of the dependent variable (aggressive behavior) was the level and duration of noise delivered to the opponent. The design and the results of the experiment are shown in Figure 1.14, “An Experimental Research Design (After Anderson & Dill, 2000).”1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 43 Figure 1.14 An Experimental Research Design (After Anderson & Dill, 2000). Two advantages of the experimental research design are (a) an assurance that the independent variable (also known as the experimental manipulation) occurs prior to the measured dependent variable and (b) the creation of initial equivalence between the conditions of the experiment (in this case, by using random assignment to conditions).
Experimental designs have two very nice features. For one, they guarantee that the independent variable occurs prior to measuring the dependent variable. This eliminates the possibility of reverse causation.
Second, the experimental manipulation allows ruling out the possibility of common-causal variables that cause both the independent variable and the dependent variable. In experimental designs, the influence of common-causal variables is controlled, and thus eliminated, by creating equivalence among the participants in each of the experimental conditions before the manipulation occurs. The most common method of creating equivalence among the experimental conditions is through random assignment to conditionsbefore the experiment begins, which involves determining separately for each participant which condition he or she will experience through a random process, such as drawing numbers out of an envelope or using a website such as randomizer.org.
Anderson and Dill first randomly assigned about 100 participants to each of their two groups. Let’s call them Group A and Group B. Because they used random assignment to conditions, they could be confident that before the experimental manipulation occurred, the students in Group A were, on average, equivalent to the students in Group B on every possible variable, including variables that are likely to be related to aggression, such as family, peers, hormone levels, and diet—and, in fact, everything else.
Then, after they had created initial equivalence, Anderson and Dill created the experimental manipulation—they had the participants in Group A play the violent video game and the participants in Group B play the nonviolent video game. Then they compared the dependent variable (the white noise blasts) between the two groups and found that the students who had viewed the violent video game gave significantly longer noise blasts than did the students who had played the nonviolent game. When the researchers observed differences in the duration of white noise blasts between the two groups after the experimental manipulation, they could draw the conclusion that it was the independent variable (and not some other variable) that caused these differences because they had created initial equivalence between the groups.
The idea is that the only thing that was different between the students in the two groups was which video game they had played.44 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology When we create a situation in which the groups of participants are expected to be equivalent before the experiment begins, when we manipulate the independent variable before we measure the dependent variable, and when we change only the nature of independent variables between the conditions, then we can be confident that it is the independent variable that caused the differences in the dependent variable. Such experiments are said to have high internal validity, where internal validity is the extent to which changes in the dependent variable in an experiment can confidently be attributed to changes in the independent variable.
Despite the advantage of determining causation, experimental research designs do have limitations. One is that the experiments are usually conducted in laboratory situations rather than in the everyday lives of people. Therefore, we do not know whether results that we find in a laboratory setting will necessarily hold up in everyday life.
To counter this, researchers sometimes conduct field experiments, which are experimental research studies that are conducted in a natural environment, such as a school or a factory. However, they are difficult to conduct because they require a means of creating random assignment to conditions, and this is frequently not possible in natural settings. A second and perhaps more important limitation of experimental research designs is that some of the most interesting and important social variables cannot be experimentally manipulated.
If we want to study the influence of the size of a mob on the destructiveness of its behavior, or to compare the personality characteristics of people who join suicide cults with those of people who do not join suicide cults, these relationships must be assessed using correlational designs because it is simply not possible to manipulate mob size or cult membership. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 1 DRAG THE WORDS – INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT VARIABLES Read through the following descriptions of experimental studies, and identify the independent and dependent variables in each scenario. 1.
A social psychologist wants to conduct a study to see if playing a violent versus a non- violent video game influences peoples’ aggressiveness. ◦ Amount of aggression: ◦ Type of video game: 2. A researcher is investigating whether the speed of a helping response is affected by the size of a group of onlookers to an emergency situation.
◦ Size of group of onlookers ◦ Speed of helping response 3. A social psychologist is interested in determining if people show greater attitude change after being exposed to a one-sided versus a two-sided argument. ◦ Amount of attitude change1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 45 ◦ Type of message 4.
People are assigned to viewing either aggression-related or neutral words, and then their level of hostile intention bias is measured using a questionnaire. ◦ Hostile intention bias score ◦ Type of word 5. A team of researchers assess whether people make more external attributions when they are asked to evaluate their own rather than someone else’s behaviour.
◦ Target of attribution ◦ Type of attribution Factorial Research Designs Social psychological experiments are frequently designed to simultaneously study the effects of more than one independent variable on a dependent variable. Factorial research designs are experimental designs that have two or more independent variables. By using a factorial design, the scientist can study the influence of each variable on the dependent variable (known as the main effects of the variables) as well as how the variables work together to influence the dependent variable (known as the interaction between the variables).
Factorial designs sometimes demonstrate the person by situation interaction. In one such study, Brian Meier and his colleagues (Meier, Robinson, & Wilkowski, 2006) tested the hypothesis that exposure to aggression-related words would increase aggressive responses toward others. Although they did not directly manipulate the social context, they used a technique common in social psychology in which they primed (i.e., activated) thoughts relating to social settings.
In their research, half of their participants were randomly assigned to see words relating to aggression and the other half were assigned to view neutral words that did not relate to aggression. The participants in the study also completed a measure of individual differences in agreeableness—a personality variable that assesses the extent to which people see themselves as compassionate, cooperative, and high on other- concern. Then the research participants completed a task in which they thought they were competing with another student.
Participants were told that they should press the space bar on the computer keyboard as soon as they heard a tone over their headphones, and the person who pressed the space bar the fastest would be the winner of the trial. Before the first trial, participants set the intensity of a blast of white noise that would be delivered to the loser of the trial. The participants could choose an intensity ranging from 0 (no noise) to the most aggressive response (10, or 105 decibels).
In essence, participants controlled a “weapon” that could be used to blast the opponent with aversive noise, and this setting became the dependent variable. At this point, the experiment ended.46 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology Figure 1.15 A Person-Situation Interaction.
In this experiment by Meier, Robinson, and Wilkowski (2006) the independent variables are a type of priming (aggression or neutral) and participant agreeableness (high or low). The dependent variable is the white noise level selected (a measure of aggression). The participants who were low in agreeableness became significantly more aggressive after seeing aggressive words, but those high in agreeableness did not.
As you can see in Figure 1.15, “A Person-Situation Interaction,” there was a person-by-situation interaction. Priming with aggression-related words (the situational variable) increased the noise levels selected by participants who were low on agreeableness, but priming did not increase aggression (in fact, it decreased it a bit) for students who were high on agreeableness. In this study, the social situation was important in creating aggression, but it had different effects for different people.
Deception in Social Psychology Experiments You may have wondered whether the participants in the video game study that we just discussed were told about the research hypothesis ahead of time. In fact, these experiments both used a cover story—a false statement of what the research was really about. The students in the video game study were not told that the study was about the effects of violent video games on aggression, but rather that it was an investigation of how people learn and develop skills at motor tasks like video games and how these skills affect other tasks, such as competitive games.
The participants in the task performance study were not told that the research was about task performance. In some experiments, the researcher also makes use of an experimental confederate—a person who is actually part of the experimental team but who pretends to be another participant in the study. The confederate helps create the right “feel” of the study, making the cover story seem more real.
In many cases, it is not possible in social psychology experiments to tell the research participants about the real hypotheses in the study, and so cover stories or other types of deception may be used. You can imagine, for instance, that if a researcher wanted to study racial prejudice, he or she could not simply tell the participants that this was the topic of the research because people may not want to admit that they are prejudiced, even if they really are. Although the participants are always told—through the process of informed consent—as much as is possible about the study before the study begins, they may nevertheless sometimes be deceived to some extent.
At the end of every research project, however, participants should always receive a complete debriefing in which all relevant information is given, including the real hypothesis, the nature of any deception used, and how the data are going to be used.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 47 H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 1 DRAG THE WORDS – TYPES OF RESEARCH DESIGN Now that you have reviewed the three main types of research design used in social psychology, read each brief summary of empirical findings below and identify which type of design the results were derived from – experimental, observational or correlational. Table 1.4 contains some helpful information here. 1.
There is a positive relationship between level of academic self-concept and self-esteem scores in university students. 2. People are more persuaded if given a two-sided versus a one-sided message.
3. People assigned to a group of four are more likely to conform to the dominant response in a perceptual task than people tasked with performing the task alone. 4.
People in individualistic cultures make predominantly internal attributions about the causes of social behavior. 5. The more hours per month individuals spend doing voluntary work with people who are socially marginalized, the less they tend to believe in the just world hypothesis.
6. 13 year-olds engage in more acts of relational aggression towards their peers than 8 year- olds. Interpreting Research No matter how carefully it is conducted or what type of design is used, all research has limitations.
Any given research project is conducted in only one setting and assesses only one or a few dependent variables. And any one study uses only one set of research participants. Social psychology research is sometimes criticized because it frequently uses university students from Western cultures as participants (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010).
But relationships between variables are only really important if they can be expected to be found again when tested using other research designs, other operational definitions of the variables, other participants, and other experimenters, and in other times and settings. External validity refers to the extent to which relationships can be expected to hold up when they are tested again in different ways and for different people. Science relies primarily upon replication—that is, the repeating of research—to study the external validity of research findings.
Sometimes the original research is replicated exactly, but more often, replications involve using new operational definitions of the independent or dependent variables, or designs in which new conditions or variables are added to the original design. And to test whether a finding is limited to the particular participants used in a given research project, scientists may test the same hypotheses using people from different ages, backgrounds, or cultures. Replication allows scientists to test the external validity as well as the limitations of research findings.
In some cases, researchers may test their hypotheses, not by conducting their own study, but rather by48 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology looking at the results of many existing studies, using a meta-analysis—a statistical procedure in which the results of existing studies are combined to determine what conclusions can be drawn on the basis of all the studies considered together. For instance, in one meta-analysis, Anderson and Bushman (2001) found that across all the studies they could locate that included both children and adults, college students and people who were not in college, and people from a variety of different cultures, there was a clear positive correlation (about r = .30) between playing violent video games and acting aggressively.
The summary information gained through a meta-analysis allows researchers to draw even clearer conclusions about the external validity of a research finding. Figure 1.16 Some Important Aspects of the Scientific Approach Scientists generate research hypotheses, which are tested using an observational, correlational, or experimental research design. The variables of interest are measured using self-report or behavioral measures.
Data is interpreted according to its validity (including internal validity and external validity). The results of many studies may be combined and summarized using meta-analysis. It is important to realize that the understanding of social behavior that we gain by conducting research is a slow, gradual, and cumulative process.
The research findings of one scientist or one experiment do not stand alone—no one study proves a theory or a research hypothesis. Rather, research is designed to build on, add to, and expand the existing research that has been conducted by other scientists. That is why whenever a scientist decides to conduct research, he or she first reads journal articles and book chapters describing existing research in the domain and then designs his or her research on the basis of the prior findings.
The result of this cumulative process is that over time, research findings are used to create a systematic set of knowledge about social psychology (Figure 1.16, “Some Important Aspects of the Scientific Approach”). H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 1 True or False Quiz Try these true/false questions, to see how well you have retained some key ideas from this chapter! 1.
Social psychology is a scientific discipline. 2. Cultural differences are rarely studied nowadays in social psychology because it has been established that all of its important concepts are universal.
3. In social psychology, the primary focus in on the behavior of groups, not individuals. 4.
Factorial designs are a type of correlational research. 5. Nonrandom assignments of participants to conditions in experimental social psychological1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 49 research ensures that everyone has an equal chance of being in any of the conditions.
Key Takeaways • Social psychologists study social behavior using an empirical approach. This allows them to discover results that could not have been reliably predicted ahead of time and that may violate our common sense and intuition. • The variables that form the research hypothesis, known as conceptual variables, are assessed by using measured variables such as self-report, behavioral, or neuroimaging measures.
• Observational research is research that involves making observations of behavior and recording those observations in an objective manner. In some cases, it may be the only approach to studying behavior. • Correlational and experimental research designs are based on developing falsifiable research hypotheses.
• Correlational research designs allow prediction but cannot be used to make statements about causality. Experimental research designs in which the independent variable is manipulated can be used to make statements about causality. • Social psychological experiments are frequently factorial research designs in which the effects of more than one independent variable on a dependent variable are studied.
• All research has limitations, which is why scientists attempt to replicate their results using different measures, populations, and settings and to summarize those results using meta-analyses. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Using Google Scholar find journal articles that report observational, correlational, and experimental research designs.
Specify the research design, the research hypothesis, and the conceptual and measured variables in each design. 2. For each of the following variables, (a) propose a research hypothesis in which the variable serves as an independent variable and (b) propose a research hypothesis in which the variable serves as a dependent variable.
◦ Helping ◦ Aggression50 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology ◦ Prejudice ◦ Liking another person ◦ Life satisfaction 3. Visit the website Online Social Psychology Studies and take part in one of the online studies listed there.
References Anderson, C. A., & Dill, K. E.
(2000). Video games and aggressive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in the laboratory and in life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(4), 772–790.
Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. R.
(2010). Aggression. In S.
T. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 2, pp.
833–863). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Eisenberger, N.
I., Lieberman, M. D., & Williams, K. D.
(2003). Does rejection hurt? An fMRI study of social exclusion.
Science, 302(5643), 290–292. Festinger, L., Riecken, H. W., & Schachter, S.
(1956). When prophecy fails: A social and psychological study of a modern group that predicted the destruction of the world. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L.
E., Darley, J. M., & Cohen, J. D.
(2001). An fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293(5537), 2105–2108.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010).
The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(2–3), 61–83. Lieberman, M.
D., Hariri, A., Jarcho, J. M., Eisenberger, N. I., & Bookheimer, S.
Y. (2005). An fMRI investigation of race-related amygdala activity in African-American and Caucasian-American individuals.
Nature Neuroscience, 8(6), 720–722. Lilienfeld, S. O.
(2011, June 13). Public skepticism of psychology: Why many people perceive the study of human behavior as unscientific. American Psychologist.
doi: 10.1037/a0023963 Meier, B. P., Robinson, M. D., & Wilkowski, B.
M. (2006). Turning the other cheek: Agreeableness and the regulation of aggression-related crimes.
Psychological Science, 17(2), 136–142. Morewedge, C. K., Gray, K., & Wegner, D.
M. (2010). Perish the forethought: Premeditation engenders misperceptions of personal control.
In R. R. Hassin, K.
N. Ochsner, & Y. Trope (Eds.), Self-control in society, mind, and brain (pp.
260–278). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Ochsner, K.
N., Bunge, S. A., Gross, J. J., & Gabrieli, J.
D. E. (2002).
Rethinking feelings: An fMRI study of the cognitive regulation of emotion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14(8), 1215–1229 Preston, J., & Wegner, D. M.
(2007). The eureka error: Inadvertent plagiarism by misattributions of effort. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(4), 575–584.1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology 51 Richeson, J.
A., Baird, A. A., Gordon, H. L., Heatherton, T.
F., Wyland, C. L., Trawalter, S., Richeson, J. A., Baird, A.
A., Gordon, H. L., Heatherton, T. F., Wyland, C.
L., Trawalter, S., et al.#8230;Shelton, J. N. (2003).
An fMRI investigation of the impact of interracial contact on executive function. Nature Neuroscience, 6(12), 1323–1328. Media Attributions • “EEG cap” by Thuglas is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence.
• “FMRI BOLD activation in an emotional Stroop task” by Shima Ovaysikia, Khalid A. Tahir, Jason L. Chan and Joseph F.
X. DeSouza is licensed under a CC BY 2.5 licence. • “Varian4T” by A314268 is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence.1.4 Chapter Summary The science of social psychology began when scientists first started to systematically and formally measure the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of human beings.
Social psychology was energized by a number of researchers who sought to better understand how the Nazis perpetrated the Holocaust against the Jews of Europe. The 1950s and 1960s saw an expansion of social psychology into the field of attitudes and group processes. In the 1970s and 1980s, the discipline became more cognitive in orientation.
Today, the field of social psychology is expanding into still other areas, such as evolutionary psychology, the study of culture, and social neuroscience. Social psychology is the scientific study of how we think about, feel about, and behave toward the people in our lives and how our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by those people. The goal of this book is to help you learn to think like a social psychologist to enable you to use social psychological principles to better understand social relationships.
Social psychology concerns the interplay between the individual person and the social situation. The social situation refers to the other people we interact with every day. The key aspect of the social situation is that the people around us produce social influence, or the processes through which other people change our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and through which we change theirs.
Social influence operates largely through social norms. The most basic tendency of all living organisms is the desire to protect and enhance their own life and the lives of important others—self-concern. People also desire to affiliate with others, a motive known as other-concern, and doing so is an important part of human behavior.
An important source of our common human experiences is our culture—a group of people, normally living within a given geographical region, who share a common set of social norms. Norms in Western cultures are primarily oriented toward individualism and self-concern, whereas norms in East Asian cultures are more focused on collectivism and other-concern. Three fundamental capacities of human beings are affect, behavior, and cognition—the ABCs of social psychology.
Affect refers to the feelings we experience as part of our everyday lives. The basic component of affect is mood—the positive or negative feelings that are in the background of our everyday experiences. Emotions are mental states like moods, but they are shorter-lived, stronger, more intense, and more specific forms of affect.
Human beings exchange goods, services, and other benefits with other people in the process of social exchange. The mutual, and generally equitable, exchange of benefits is known as reciprocal altruism. Social cognition relates to social activities and helps us understand and predict the behavior of ourselves and others.
Two types of knowledge particularly important in social psychology are schemas and attitudes. Although common sense is useful for getting ideas, and although our intuitions are sometimes correct, 5354 Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology they are not perfect.
Thus social psychologists conduct empirical research to test their ideas. The concepts of interest must be measured using operational definitions. Both self-report and behavioral measures can be used.
One approach to learning about social psychology involves using observational research to make observations of behavior. In some cases, this approach is the only way to learn about and study social events. Because social psychologists are generally interested in looking at relationships between variables, they begin by stating their predictions in the form of a precise statement known as a research hypothesis.
The goal of correlational research is to search for and test hypotheses about the relationships between two or more variables. In these studies, a statistic known as the Pearson correlation coefficient is used to summarize the association, or correlation, between the variables. Because scientists are interested in determining the causal relationships among variables, they frequently use experimental research designs.
In experiments, the variables of interest are called the independent variable and the dependent variable. The most common method of creating equivalence among the experimental conditions, and thus increasing internal validity, is through random assignment to conditions. External validity refers to the extent to which relationships can be expected to hold up when they are tested again in different ways and for different people.
Meta-analyses can be used to assess the observed relationships among variables across many studies. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 1 MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUIZ Now that you’ve reviewed the chapter, try this multiple-choice quiz to see what you know! You can check your answers as you go, or wait until after the last question for feedback.
Good luck! 1. Which field of psychology is most focused on the nature and causes of individual behavior and thought in social situations?
a. social psychology b. organizational psychology c.
developmental psychology d. personality psychology 2. A researcher wants to know whether writing people are more persuaded by a one-sided or a two-sided message about a social issue.
First, she randomly assigns participants to read either a one-sided or a two-sided message. She then administers a questionnaire measuring attitudes about that social issue. In this experiment, the independent variable (IV) is _____.
a. the two-sided message1.4 Chapter Summary 55 b. the attitude score c.
the one-sided message d. the type of message 3. Why do social psychologists primarily study individuals?
a. because our behavior is affected by the actions of other individuals b. because there are too many variables to study the behavior of groups in laboratory conditions c.
because some individuals are more strongly affected by groups, whereas some are never affected by them d. because cultural differences only show up at the group, and not the individual level 4. Researchers find a significant correlation between peoples’ self-esteem and their conformity to fashion norms.
What does this mean? a. that changes in self-esteem cause changes in conformity to fashion norms b.
that changes in conformity to fashion norms cause changes in self-esteem c. that changes in self-esteem have no effect on conformity to fashion norms d. that changes in self-esteem and conformity to fashion norms are related to each other 5.
The shifting patterns of behavior around mask-wearing during the COVID-19 best represent a change in which phenomenon? a. affiliation b.
schemas c. social norms d. social cognition56 Chapter 1.
Introducing Social Psychology Is social psychology just common sense? Answers and explanations Table 1.5 Is social psychology just common sense? Answers and explanations Statement Answer and Explanation False.The opposite is more the case.
Similarity, particularly in values Opposites attract. and beliefs, is an important determinant of liking. An athlete who wins the bronze medal (third True.
We frequently compare our actual outcomes with what “might place) in an event is happier about his or her have been.” This leads the silver medalist to compare the possibility of performance than the athlete who won the having won the gold, whereas the bronze medalist compares the silver medal (second place). possibility of having won no medal at all. True.
Social support—the perception that we have people we can Having good friends you can count on can count on and talk to—provides many positive benefits to our mental keep you from catching colds. and physical health. Subliminal advertising (i.e., persuasive False.
Although there is evidence that events that occur out of our messages that are presented out of our awareness can influence our behavior, there is little evidence that awareness on TV or movie screens) is very subliminal advertising is effective. effective in getting us to buy products. The greater the reward promised for an False.
In fact, providing a reward for an activity that is already enjoyed activity, the more one will come to enjoy (such as paying a child to get good grades) can undermine a person’s engaging in that activity. enjoyment of the activity. Physically attractive people are seen as less False.
You of course know that this must be false. Why else would you intelligent than less attractive people. look your very best when you go for a job interview?
Punching a pillow or screaming out loud is a False. There is no evidence that engaging in violent behavior can ever good way to reduce frustration and reduce the desire to be aggressive. The opposite is much more aggressive tendencies.
common. Engaging in aggression leads to more aggression. People pull harder in a tug-of-war when True.
Social loafing (reducing our effort because we think that others they’re pulling alone than when pulling in a in the group will make up for us) is more likely group.Chapter 2. Social Cognition Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Sources of Social Knowledge • Review the principles of operant, associational, and observational learning, and explain the similarities and differences between them.
• Explain how and when schemas and attitudes do and do not change as a result of the operation of accommodation and assimilation. • Outline the ways that schemas are likely to be maintained through processes that create assimilation. 2.
How We Use Our Expectations • Provide examples of how salience and accessibility influence information processing. • Review, differentiate, and give examples of some important cognitive heuristics that influence social judgment. • Summarize and give examples of the importance of social cognition in everyday life.
3. Social Cognition and Affect • Describe important ways in which our affective states can influence our social cognition, both directly and indirectly, for example, through the operation of the affect heuristic. • Outline mechanisms through which our social cognition can alter our affective states, for instance, through the mechanism of misattribution of arousal.
• Review the role that strategies, including cognitive reappraisal, can play in successful self- regulation. • Explore the relationship between positive cognition, affect, and behaviors. • Outline important findings in relation to our affective forecasting abilities.
In this chapter, our focus will be on social cognition—cognition that relates to social activities and that helps us understand and predict the behavior of ourselves and others (Fiske & Taylor, 2007; Macrae & Quadflieg, 2010). A fundamental part of social cognition involves learning, the relatively permanent change in knowledge that is acquired through experience. We will see that a good part of our learning and our judgment of other people operates out of our awareness—we are profoundly affected by things that we do not know are influencing us.
However, we also consciously think about and analyze our lives and our relationships with others, seeking out the best ways to fulfill our goals and aspirations. 5758 Dr. Hammond Tarry As we investigate the role of cognition in everyday life, we will consider the ways that people use their cognitive abilities to make good decisions and to inform their behavior in a useful and accurate way.
We will also consider the potential for mistakes and biases in human judgment. We will see that although we are generally pretty good at sizing up other people and creating effective social interactions, we are not perfect. And we will further see that the errors we make frequently occur because of our reliance on our schemas and and a general tendency to take shortcuts through the use of cognitive heuristics, information-processing rules of thumb that enable us to think in ways that are quick and easy but that may sometimes lead to error.
In short, although our cognitive abilities are often “good enough,” there is definitely room for improvement in our social cognition. Huge Fall in Global Markets Causes Fear and Panic for Investors September 16, 2008, as a result of the failure of over a dozen large banks in the United States, was the beginning of a global stock market crisis. On October 11, 2008, the head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) warned that the world financial system was teetering on “the brink of systemic meltdown.” Over the next year, the crash erased $8.3 trillion in shareholder wealth.
Since these calamitous financial events, the repercussions of which are still being felt in many regions of the world, much ink has been spilled about the reasons for this global economic meltdown. How could so many highly educated, intelligent people in so many important positions make so many judgments that now seem, albeit with the benefit of hindsight, to have incurred such high risks? Why didn’t enough people in key positions see the collapse coming?
The study of social cognition can perhaps provide some clues. Through studying the factors that affect our social judgments, social psychologists have helped to shed some important light on why we often have difficulty making sound decisions about an uncertain world. Figure 2.1 Stock traders are expected to make rational decisions about their investments, but their emotions can influence their decisions.Principles of Social Psychology 59 References Fiske, S.
T., & Taylor, S. E. (2007).
Social cognition, from brains to culture. New York, NY: McGraw- Hill. Macrae, C.
N., & Quadflieg, S. (2010). Perceiving people.
In S. T. Fiske, D.
T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol.
1, pp. 428–463). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Wells, G. L., Memon, A., & Penrod, S. D.
(2006). Eyewitness evidence: Improving its probative value. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(2), 45–75.
Media Attributions • “Sao Paulo Stock Exchange” by Rafael Matsunaga is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge Learning Objectives 1. Review the principles of operant, associational, and observational learning, and explain the similarities and differences between them. 2.
Explain how and when schemas and attitudes do and do not change as a result of the operation of accommodation and assimilation. 3. Outline the ways that schemas are likely to be maintained through processes that create assimilation.
Human beings have proportionately very large brains and highly developed cognitive capacities in comparison with other species. Thus it should come as no surprise that we meet the challenges of everyday life largely by thinking about them and then planning what to do. Over time, we develop a huge amount of knowledge about ourselves, other people, social relationships, and social groups.
This knowledge guides our responses to the people we interact with every day. But where does this social knowledge come from? Our Knowledge Accumulates as a Result of Learning People have many memories about their experiences with other people, and they use this information to make predictions about what people will do in the future.
This knowledge is gained through learning. The study of learning is closely associated with the behaviorist school of psychology, which includes the psychologists John B. Watson and B.
F. Skinner. For behaviorists, the fundamental aspect of learning is the process of conditioning, the ability to connect stimuli (things or events in the environment) with responses (behaviors or other actions).
The behaviorists described two types of conditioning that are particularly important: operant conditioning (also known as instrumental conditioning) and classical conditioning (also known as respondent conditioning). When applied to human behavior, these two processes are frequently called, respectively, operant learning and associational learning. Operant Learning If a child touches a hot radiator, he or she quickly learns that the radiator is dangerous and is not likely to touch it again.
Through stimulus generalization, the child will also learn that radiators in general are not to be touched. If we have unpleasant experiences with people from a certain city, region, or country, or a positive relationship with a person who has blond hair or green eyes, we may develop negative or 6162 Chapter 2. Social Cognition positive attitudes about people with these particular characteristics and attempt to reduce or increase our interactions with them.
These changes in our understanding of our environments represent operant learning, the principle that experiences that are followed by positive emotions (reinforcements or rewards) are likely to be repeated, whereas experiences that are followed by negative emotions (punishments) are less likely to be repeated. In operant learning, the person thus learns from the consequences of his or her own actions. Although its principles are very simple, operant learning is probably the most important form of human learning.
For example, operant learning occurs when a schoolroom bully threatens his classmates because doing so allows him to get his way, or when a child gets good grades because her parents threaten to punish her if she doesn’t, or when we begin to like someone who smiles at us frequently, and in hundreds of other cases every day. Operant learning can also be used to help explain how people learn complex behaviors, such as how to read, and to understand complex social behaviors, such as the development of social norms and culture. The application of operant learning to social psychology can help us to explain how we know which behaviors are most appropriate in a social situation.
We learn, in part, because we have been reinforced for engaging in the appropriate ones and punished for engaging in the inappropriate ones. It does not take us long to learn that Margette is more likely to give us the kiss we have been hoping for if we are nice to her or that our children are more likely to share their toys with others if we reward them for doing it. Operant learning has even been used to explain why some people choose to engage in antisocial and criminal behavior.
According to this approach, criminal behavior is determined by the reinforcements and punishments that the individual experiences (e.g., with peers and with parents) as a result of his or her behavior (Akers, 1998). Associational Learning Associational learning occurs when an object or event comes to be associated with a natural response, such as an automatic behavior or a positive or negative emotion. If you have ever become hungry when you drive by one of your favorite pizza stores, it is probably because the sight of the pizzeria has become associated with your experiences of enjoying the pizzas.
We may enjoy smoking cigarettes, drinking coffee, and eating not only because they give us pleasure themselves but also because they have been associated with pleasant social experiences in the past. Associational learning also influences our knowledge and judgment about other people. For instance, research has shown that people more favorably view men and women who are seen alongside other people who are attractive, or who are said to have attractive girlfriends or boyfriends, than they do the same people who are seen alongside more average-looking others (Sigall & Landy, 1973).
This liking is due to associational learning: we have positive feelings toward the people simply because those people are associated with the positive features of the attractive others. Associational learning has long been, and continues to be, an effective tool in marketing and advertising (Hawkins, Best, & Coney, 1998). The general idea is to create an advertisement that has positive features so that it creates enjoyment in the person exposed to it.
Because the product being advertised is mentioned in the ad, it becomes associated with the positive feelings that the ad creates. In the end, if everything has gone well, seeing the product online or in a store will then create a positive response in the buyer, leading him or her to be more likely to purchase the product.2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 63 One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://opentextbc.ca/ socialpsychology/?p=3157#oembed-1 Video 2.1 Funny Commercials uploaded by kin100.
Can you determine how associational learning is being used in these ads? A similar strategy is used by corporations that sponsor teams or events. For instance, if people enjoy watching a particular sports team, and if that team is sponsored by a product, such as Pepsi, then people may end up experiencing the positive feelings they have for their team when they view a can of Pepsi.
Advertisers use a variety of techniques to create positive advertisements, including enjoyable music, cute babies, attractive models, and funny spokespeople. In one study, Gorn (1982) showed research participants pictures of different colored writing pens, but paired one of the pens with pleasant music and another with unpleasant music. When given a choice as a free gift, more people chose the pen that had been associated with the pleasant music.
In another study, Schemer, Matthes, Wirth, and Textor (2008) found that people were more interested in products that had been embedded in music videos of artists that they liked and less likely to be interested when the products were in videos featuring artists that they did not like. Another type of ad that is based on principles of classical conditioning is one that associates fear with the use of a product or behavior, such as those that show pictures of deadly automobile accidents to encourage seatbelt use or images of lung cancer surgery to discourage smoking. Indeed, many governments around the world have recently created negative and graphic images to place on cigarette packs in order to increase an association between negative responses and cigarettes.
The idea is that when we see a cigarette and the fear of dying is associated with it, we will be less likely to light up. These ads have also been found to be effective largely because of conditioning (Das, de Wit, & Stroebe, 2003; Perloff, 2003; Witte & Allen, 2000).64 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Figure 2.2 The goal of these images is to associate the fear of dying with cigarette smoking.
Taken together then, research studies provide ample evidence of the utility of associational learning in advertising. This does not mean, however, that we are always influenced by these ads. The likelihood that associational learning will be successful is greater when we do not know much about the products, where the differences between products are relatively minor, and when we do not think too carefully about the choices (Schemer, Matthes, Wirth, & Textor, 2008).
Associational learning has also been implicated in the development of unfair and unjustified racial prejudices. We may dislike people from certain racial or ethnic groups because we frequently see them portrayed in the media as associated with violence, drug use, or terrorism. And we may avoid people with certain physical characteristics simply because they remind us of other people we do not like.
For example, Lewicki (1985) conducted an experiment where high school students first had a brief interaction with a female experimenter who had short hair and wore glasses. The study was set up so that the students had to ask the experimenter a question, and (according to random assignment) the experimenter responded in either a negative way or a neutral way toward the participants. Then the students were told to go into a second room in which two experimenters were present and to approach either one of them.
The researchers arranged it so that one of the two experimenters looked a lot like the original experimenter and the other one did not (she had longer hair and did not wear glasses). The students were significantly more likely to avoid the experimenter who looked like the original experimenter when that experimenter had been negative to them than when she had treated them neutrally. As a result of associational learning, the negative behavior of the first experimenter unfairly “rubbed off” onto the second.2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 65 Figure 2.3 Are your beliefs about people from different social groups influenced by associational learning?
Donal Carlston and his colleagues discovered still another way that associational learning can occur: when we say good or bad things about another person in public, the people who hear us say these things associate those characteristics with us, such that they like people who say positive things and dislike people who say negative things (Mae & Carlston, 2005; Skowronski, Carlston, Mae, & Crawford, 1998). The moral is clear—associational learning is powerful, so be careful what you do and say. Observational Learning In addition to operant and associational learning, people learn by observing the behavior of others.
This is known as observational learning. To demonstrate the importance of observational learning in children, Bandura and Walters (1959) made a film of a young woman beating up a bobo doll—an inflatable balloon with a weight in the bottom that makes it bob back up when you knock it down. The woman violently hit the doll, shouting “Sockeroo!” She also kicked it, sat on it, and hit it with a hammer.
Bandura showed his film to groups of nursery school children and then let them play in a room in which there were some really fun toys. To create some frustration in the children, Bandura let the children play with the fun toys for only a couple of minutes before taking them away. Then Bandura gave the children a chance to play with the bobo doll.
You probably won’t be surprised to hear that many of the children imitated the young woman in the film. They punched the bobo doll, shouted “Sockeroo!” and hit the doll with a hammer. One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text.
You can view them online here: https://opentextbc.ca/socialpsychology/?p=3157#oembed-266 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Video 2.2 Bandura Discussing Clips From His Modeling Studies uploaded by Heath Kaplan. Take a moment to see how Albert Bandura explains his research into the modeling of aggression in children.
For some of the children, the female model was shown being rewarded for engaging in the behavior, and for other children, she was punished. In support of the principles of operant learning, Bandura’s study found that the children were more likely to be aggressive when the model had been rewarded for the behavior and were less likely to be so when the model had been punished. But even the children who did not see the model receive any reward nevertheless imitated the behavior to some extent.
One of the major contributions of this study is the demonstration that children learned new types of aggressive behaviors simply by observing and imitating others. Bandura’s seminal research has inspired a generation of inquiry into the role of social learning in aggressive behavior, including studies of the relationship between exposure to violent media and violent conduct. Observational learning is involved in much of our learning about our social worlds.
For example, it teaches us that Ravi is friendly, that Joanna is selfish, and that Frankie has a crush on Malik. In other cases, our knowledge comes more indirectly, from what we read in books or see on TV, or from what our friends tell us, for instance. Observational learning is useful because it allows people to learn without having to actually engage in what might be a risky behavior.
As Bandura put it: the prospects for [human] survival would be slim indeed if one could learn only by suffering the consequences of trial and error. For this reason, one does not teach children to swim, adolescents to drive automobiles, and novice medical students to perform surgery by having them discover the appropriate behavior through the consequences of their successes and failures. The more costly and hazardous the possible mistakes, the heavier is the reliance on observational learning from competent learners.
(1977, p. 12). Bandura considered observational learning to be a fundamental determinant of all social behavior, particularly when people pay attention to the behavior of models and are highly motivated to imitate them.
Schemas as Social Knowledge The outcome of learning is knowledge, and this knowledge is stored in the form of schemas, which are knowledge representations that include information about a person, group, or situation. In the brain, our schemas reside primarily in the prefrontal cortex the part of the brain that lies in front of the motor areas of the cortex and that helps us remember the characteristics and actions of other people, plan complex social behaviors, and coordinate our behaviors with those of others (Mitchell, Mason, Macrae, & Banaji, 2006). The prefrontal cortex is the “social” part of the brain.
It is also the newest part of the brain, evolutionarily speaking, and has enlarged as the social relationships among humans have become more frequent, important, and complex. Demonstrating its importance in social2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 67 behaviors, people with damage to the prefrontal cortex are likely to experience changes in social behaviors, including memory, personality, planning, and morality (Koenigs et al., 2007). Figure 2.4 The prefrontal cortex is the area of the brain that stores information about people and our interactions with them.
How Schemas Develop: Accommodation and Assimilation Because they represent our past experience, and because past experience is useful for prediction, our schemas influence our expectations about future events. For instance, if you have watched Italian movies or if you have visited Italy, you might have come to the conclusion that Italians frequently gesture a lot with their hands when they talk—that they are quite nonverbally expressive. If so, this knowledge will be contained in your group schema about Italians.
Therefore, when you meet someone who is Italian, or even when you meet someone who reminds you of an Italian person, you may well expect that he or she will gesture when talking.68 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Having a database of social knowledge to draw on is obviously extremely useful. If we didn’t know or couldn’t remember anything about anyone or about anything that we had encountered in the past, our life would be very difficult because we would continually have to start our learning over again.
Our schemas allow us to better understand people and help us make sense of information, particularly when the information is unclear or ambiguous. They also allow us to “fill in the blanks” by making guesses about what other people are probably like or probably going to do in cases where things are uncertain. Furthermore, the fact that different people have different past experiences—and thus that their schemas and attitudes are different—helps explain why different people draw different conclusions about the same events.
Once they have developed, schemas influence our subsequent learning, such that the new people and situations we encounter are interpreted and understood in terms of our existing knowledge (Piaget & Inhelder, 1962; Taylor & Crocker, 1981). Imagine, for instance, that you have a schema—and thus an expectation—that Italians are very expressive, and you now meet Bianca, who has arrived at your school directly from Rome. You immediately expect her to be outgoing and expressive.
However, as you get to know Bianca, you discover that she is not at all expressive and does not “talk with her hands.” In fact, she is quite shy and reserved. How does existing information influence how you react to the new information you receive? One possibility is that the new information simply updates existing expectations.
You might decide, for instance, that there is more variation among Italians in terms of expressiveness than you had previously realized, and you might resolve that Italians can sometimes be very shy and thoughtful. Or perhaps you note that although Bianca is Italian, she is also a woman. This might lead you to change your schema to believe that although Italian men are expressive, Italian women are not.
When existing schemas change on the basis of new information, we call the process accommodation. In other cases, however, we engage in assimilation, a process in which our existing knowledge influences new conflicting information to better fit with our existing knowledge, thus reducing the likelihood of schema change. In the scenario above, if you used assimilation, instead of changing your expectations about Italians, you might try to reinterpret Bianca’s unexpected behavior to make it more consistent with your expectations.
For instance, you might decide that Bianca’s behavior is actually more expressive than you thought it was at first, or that she is acting in a more shy and reserved manner because she is trying to impress you with her thoughtfulness or because she is not yet comfortable at the new school. Or you might assume that she is expressive at home with her family but not around you. In these cases, the process of assimilation has led you to process the new information about Bianca in a way that allows you to keep your existing expectations about Italians more generally intact.
How Schemas Maintain Themselves: The Power of Assimilation As we have seen in our earlier discussion, accommodation (i.e., the changing of beliefs on the basis of new information) does occur; indeed it is the process of learning itself. For example, your belief about Italians may well change through your encounters with Bianca. However, there are many factors that lead us to assimilate information into our expectations rather than to accommodate our expectations to fit new information.
In fact, we can say that in most cases, once a schema is developed, it will be difficult to change it because the expectation leads us to process new information in ways that serve to strengthen it rather than to weaken it.2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 69 The tendency toward assimilation is so strong that it has substantial effects on our everyday social cognition. One outcome of assimilation is the confirmation bias, the tendency for people to seek out and favor information that confirms their expectations and beliefs, which in turn can further help to explain the often self-fulfilling nature of our schemas. The confirmation bias has been shown to occur in many contexts and groups, although there is some evidence of cultural differences in its extent and prevalence.
Kastenmuller and colleagues (2010), for instance, found that the bias was stronger among people with individualist versus collectivist cultural backgrounds, and argued that this partly stemmed from collectivist cultures putting greater importance in being self-critical, which is less compatible with seeking out confirming as opposed to disconfirming evidence. Research Focus The Confirmation Bias Consider the results of a research study conducted by Ross, Lepper, and Hubbard (1975) that demonstrated the confirmation bias. In this research, high school students were asked to read a set of 25 pairs of cards, in which each pair supposedly contained one real and one fake suicide note.
The students’ task was to examine both cards and to decide which of the two notes was written by an actual suicide victim. After the participants read each card and made their decision, the experimenter told them whether their decision was correct or incorrect. However, the feedback was not at all based on the participants’ responses.
Rather, the experimenters arranged the feedback so that, on the basis of random assignment, different participants were told either that they were successful at the task (they got 24 out of 25 correct), average at the task (they got 17 out of 25 correct), or poor at the task (they got 10 out of 25 correct), regardless of their actual choices. At this point, the experimenters stopped the experiment and explained to the participants what had happened, including how the feedback they had received was predetermined so that they would learn that they were either successful, average, or poor at the task. They were even shown the schedule that the experimenters had used to give them the feedback.
Then the participants were asked, as a check on their reactions to the experiment, to indicate how many answers they thought they would get correct on a subsequent—and real—series of 25 card pairs. As you can see in Figure 2.5, the results of this experiment showed a clear tendency for expectations to be maintained even in the face of information that should have discredited them. Students who had been told that they were successful at the task indicated that they thought they would get more responses correct in a real test of their ability than those who thought they were average at the task, and students who thought they were average thought they would do better than those told they were poor at the task.
In short, once students had been convinced that they were either good or bad at the task, they really believed it. It then became very difficult to remove their beliefs, even by providing information that should have effectively done so.70 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Figure 2.5 In this demonstration of the power of assimilation, participants were given initial feedback that they were good, average, or poor at a task but then told that the feedback was entirely false.
The feedback, which should have been discounted, nevertheless continued to influence participants’ estimates of how well they would do on a future task. Data are from Ross, Lepper, and Hubbard (1975). Why do we tend to hold onto our beliefs rather than change them?
One reason that our beliefs often outlive the evidence on which they are supposed to be based is that people come up with reasons to support their beliefs. People who learned that they were good at detecting real suicide notes probably thought of a lot of reasons why this might be the case—“I predicted that Suzy would break up with Billy,” or “I knew that my mother was going to be sad after I left for university”—whereas the people who learned that they were not good at the task probably thought of the opposite types of reasons—“I had no idea that Jean was going to drop out of high school.” You can see that these tendencies will produce assimilation—the interpretation of our experiences in ways that support our existing beliefs. Indeed, research has found that perhaps the only way to reduce our tendencies to assimilate information into our existing belief is to explicitly force people to think about exactly the opposite belief (Anderson & Sechler, 1986).
In some cases, our existing knowledge acts to direct our attention toward information that matches our expectations and prevents us from attempting to attend to or acknowledge conflicting information (Fiske & Neuberg, 1990). To return to our example of Bianca from Rome, when you first meet her, you may immediately begin to look for signs of expressiveness in her behavior and personality. Because we expect people to confirm our expectations, we frequently respond to new people as if we already know what they are going to be like.
For example, Trope and Thompson (1997) found in their research that individuals addressed fewer questions to people about whom they already had strong expectations and that the questions they did ask were likely to confirm the expectations they already had. If you believe that Italians are expressive, you would expect to see that behavior in Bianca, you would preferentially attend to information that confirms those beliefs, and you would tend to ignore any disconfirming information. The outcome is that expectations resist change (Fazio, Ledbetter, & Towles-Schwen, 2000).
Not only do we often seek out evidence more readily if it fits our pre-existing beliefs, but we also tend to evaluate its credibility more favorably than we do evidence that runs against what we believe (Stanovich, West, & Toplak, 2013). These tendencies in turn help to explain the inertia that our beliefs2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 71 often display, and their resistance to contradictory evidence, even when they are inaccurate or dysfuntional. Applying these insights to the case study that opened this chapter, perhaps the financial meltdown of 2008 was caused in part by key decision-makers continuing with high-risk investment strategies, even in the face of growing evidence of the potential negative consequences.
Seen through the lens of the confirmation bias, these judgments start to make sense. Confirmation bias can lead investors to be overconfident, ignoring evidence that their strategies will lose money (Kida, 2006). It seems, then, that too much effort was spent on finding evidence confirming the wisdom of the current strategies and not enough time was allocated to finding the counterevidence.
Our reliance on confirmatory thinking can also make it more difficult for us to “think outside the box.” Peter Wason (1960) asked college students to determine the rule that was used to generate the numbers 2-4-6 by asking them to generate possible sequences and then telling them if those numbers followed the rule. The first guess that students made was usually “consecutive ascending even numbers,” and they then asked questions designed to confirm their hypothesis (“Does 102-104-106 fit?” “What about 434-436-438?”). Upon receiving information that those guesses did fit the rule, the students stated that the rule was “consecutive ascending even numbers.” But the students’ use of the confirmation bias led them to ask only about instances that confirmed their hypothesis and not about those that would disconfirm it.
They never bothered to ask whether 1-2-3 or 3-11-200 would fit; if they had, they would have learned that the rule was not “consecutive ascending even numbers” but simply “any three ascending numbers.” Again, you can see that once we have a schema (in this case, a hypothesis), we continually retrieve that schema from memory rather than other relevant ones, leading us to act in ways that tend to confirm our beliefs. Because expectations influence what we attend to, they also influence what we remember. One frequent outcome is that information that confirms our expectations is more easily processed and understood, and thus has a bigger impact than does disconfirming information.
There is substantial research evidence indicating that when processing information about social groups, individuals tend to remember information better that confirms their existing beliefs about those groups (Fyock & Stangor, 1994; Van Knippenberg & Dijksterhuis, 1996). If we have the (statistically erroneous) stereotype that women are bad drivers, we tend to remember the cases where we see a woman driving poorly but to forget the cases where we see a woman driving well. This of course strengthens and maintains our beliefs and produces even more assimilation.
And our schemas may also be maintained because when people get together, they talk about other people in ways that tend to express and confirm existing beliefs, including stereotypes (Ruscher & Duval, 1998; Schaller & Conway, 1999). Darley and Gross (1983) demonstrated how schemas about social class could influence memory. In their research, they gave participants a picture and some information about a girl in grade 4, named Hannah.
To activate a schema about her social class, Hannah was pictured sitting in front of a nice suburban house for one half of the participants and in front of an impoverished house in an urban area for the other half. Then the participants watched a video that showed Hannah taking an intelligence test. As the test went on, Hannah got some of the questions right and some of them wrong, but the number of correct and incorrect answers was the same in both conditions.
Then the participants were asked to remember how many questions Hannah got right and wrong. Demonstrating that stereotypes had influenced memory, the participants who thought that Hannah had come from an upper-class background judged that she had gotten more correct answers than those who thought she was from a72 Chapter 2. Social Cognition lower-class background.
It seems, then, that we have a reconstructive memory bias, as we often remember things that match our current beliefs better than those that don’t and reshape those memories to better align with our current beliefs (Hilsabeck, Gouvier, & Bolter, 1998). This is not to say that we only remember information that matches our expectations. Sometimes we encounter information that is so extreme and so conflicting with our expectations that we cannot help but attend to and remember it (Srull & Wyer, 1989).
Imagine that you have formed an impression of a good friend of yours as a very honest person. One day you discover, however, that he has taken some money from your wallet without getting your permission or even telling you. It is likely that this new information—because it is so personally involving and important—will have a dramatic effect on your perception of your friend and that you will remember it for a long time.
In short, information that is either consistent with, or very inconsistent with, an existing schema or attitude is likely to be well remembered. Still another way that our expectations tend to maintain themselves is by leading us to act toward others on the basis of our expectations, creating a self-fulfilling prophecy. A self-fulfilling prophecy is a process that occurs when our expectations about others lead us to behave toward those others in ways that make our expectations come true.
If I have a stereotype that Italians are friendly, then I may act toward Bianca in a friendly way. My friendly behavior may be reciprocated by Bianca, and if many other people also engage in the same positive behaviors with her, in the long run she may actually become a friendlier person, thus confirming my initial expectations. Of course, the opposite is also possible—if I believe that Italian people are boring, my behavior toward them may lead me to maintain those more negative, and probably inaccurate, beliefs as well (Figure 2.6).2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 73 Figure 2.6 Self-fulfilling prophecy effects have been implicated in a wide variety of social domains, including client responses to psychotherapy (Tambling, 2012), negative perceptions of aging (Wurm, Zielgelmann, Wolff, & Schuz, 2013), and parents’ beliefs about their children’s marijuana use (Lamb & Crano, 2014).
We can now begin to see why an individual who initially makes a judgment that a person has engaged in a given behavior (e.g., an eyewitness who believes that he or she saw a given person commit a crime) will find it very difficult to change his or her mind about that decision later. Even if the individual is provided with evidence that suggests that he or she was wrong, that individual will likely assimilate that information to the existing belief. Assimilation is thus one of many factors that help account for the inaccuracy of eyewitness testimony.
Research Focus Schemas as Energy Savers If schemas serve in part to help us make sense of the world around us, then we should be particularly likely to use them in situations where there is a lot of information to learn about, or when we have few cognitive resources available to process information. Schemas function like energy savers, to help us keep track of things when information processing gets complicated.74 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Stangor and Duan (1991) tested the hypothesis that people would be more likely to develop schemas when they had a lot of information to learn about.
In the research, participants were shown information describing the behaviors of people who supposedly belonged to different social groups, although the groups were actually fictitious and were labeled only as the “red group,” the “blue group,” the “yellow group,” and the “green group.” Each group engaged in behaviors that were primarily either honest, dishonest, intelligent, or unintelligent. Then, after they had read about the groups, the participants were asked to judge the groups and to recall as much information that they had read about them as they could. Stangor and Duan found that participants remembered more stereotype-supporting information about the groups when they were required to learn about four different groups than when they only needed to learn about one or two groups.
This result is consistent with the idea that we use our stereotypes more when “the going gets rough”—that is, when we need to rely on them to help us make sense of new information. Figure 2.7 Schemas are particularly powerful when we are tired. Participants were asked to judge the degree to which a defendant was guilty of a crime for which he was accused (however unfairly) and for which the crime fit the stereotype (e.g., that student athletes were likely to cheat on exams).
Participants had previously indicated whether they were “morning people” or “night people” on a questionnaire and were tested in either the morning or the evening. Data from Bodenhausen (1990). Bodenhausen (1990) presented research participants with information about court cases in jury trials.
Furthermore, he had obtained self-reports from the participants about whether they considered themselves to be primarily “morning people” (those who feel better and are more alert in the morning) or “evening people” (those who are more alert in the evening). As shown in Figure 2.7, Bodenhausen found that participants were more likely to make use of their stereotypes when they were judging the guilt or innocence of the individuals on trial at the time of day when the participants acknowledged that they were normally more fatigued. People who reported being most alert in the morning stereotyped more at night, and vice versa.
This experiment thus provides more support for the idea that schemas—in this case, those about social groups—serve, in part, to make our lives easier and that we rely on them when we need to rely on cognitive efficiency—for instance, when we are tired.2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 75 Key Takeaways • Human beings respond to the social challenges they face by relying on their substantial cognitive capacities. • Our knowledge about and our responses to social events are developed and influenced by operant learning, associational learning, and observational learning. • One outcome of our experiences is the development of mental representations about our environments—schemas and attitudes.
Once they have developed, our schemas influence our subsequent learning, such that the new people and situations we encounter are interpreted and understood in terms of our existing knowledge. • Accommodation occurs when existing schemas change on the basis of new information. Assimilation occurs when our knowledge acts to influence new information in a way that makes the conflicting information fit with our existing schemas.
• Because our expectations influence our attention and responses to, and our memory for, new information, often in a way that leads our expectations to be maintained, assimilation is generally more likely than accommodation. • Schemas serve as energy savers. We are particularly likely to use them when we are tired or when the situation that we must analyze is complex.
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Describe a time when you learned new social information or new behaviors through operant, associational, or observational learning. 2.
Think about a time when you made a snap judgment about another person. How did your expectations about people influence your judgment of this person? Looking back on this, to what extent do you think that the judgment fair or unfair?
3. Consider some of your beliefs about the people you know. Were these beliefs formed through assimilation, accommodation, or a combination of both?
To what degree do you think that your expectations now influence how you respond to these people? 4. Describe a time when you had a strong expectation about another person’s likely behavior.
In what ways and to what extent did that expectation serve as an energy saver?76 Chapter 2. Social Cognition References Akers, R. L.
(1998). Social learning and social structure: A general theory of crime and deviance. Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press.
Anderson, C. A., & Sechler, E. S.
(1986). Effects of explanation and counterexplanation on the development and use of social theories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(1), 24–34.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavior change.
Psychological Review, 84, 191–215. Bandura, A., & Walters, R. H.
(1959). Adolescent aggression. New York, NY: Ronald Press.
Bodenhausen, G. V. (1990).
Stereotypes as judgmental heuristics: Evidence of circadian variations in discrimination. Psychological Science, 1, 319–322. Darley, J.
M., & Gross, P. H. (1983).
A hypothesis-confirming bias in labeling effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 20–33. Das, E.
H. H. J., de Wit, J.
B. F., & Stroebe, W. (2003).
Fear appeals motivate acceptance of action recommendations: Evidence for a positive bias in the processing of persuasive messages. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(5), 650–664. Fazio, R.
H., Ledbetter, J. E., & Towles-Schwen, T. (2000).
On the costs of accessible attitudes: Detecting that the attitude object has changed. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(2), 197–210. Fiske, S.
T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990).
A continuum of impression formation, from category based to individuating processes: Influences of information and motivation on attention and interpretation. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 23, pp. 1–74).
New York, NY: Academic. Fyock, J., & Stangor, C. (1994).
The role of memory biases in stereotype maintenance. British Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 331–343. Gorn, G.
J. (1982). The effects of music in advertising on choice behavior: A classical conditioning approach.
Journal of Marketing, 46(1), 94–101. Hawkins, D., Best, R., & Coney, K. (1998.) Consumer behavior: Building marketing strategy (7th ed.).
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Hilsabeck, R. C., Gouvier, W., & Bolter, J. F.
(1998). Reconstructive memory bias in recall of neuropsychological symptomatology. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 20(3), 328-338 doi:10.1076/jcen.20.3.328.813 Kastenmuller, A., Greitemeyer, T., Jonas, E., Fischer, P., & Frey.
D. (2010). Selective exposure: The impact of individualism and collectivism.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 49, 745-763. Kida, Thomas E. (2006), Don’t believe everything you think: the 6 basic mistakes we make in thinking, Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books.
Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., & Damasio, A. (2007). Damage to the prefontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judgments.
Nature, 446(7138), 908–911.2.1 Sources of Social Knowledge 77 Lamb, C. S., & Crano, W. D.
(2014). Parent’s beliefs and children’s marijuana use: Evidence for a self-fulfilling prophecy effect. Addictive Behaviors, 39(1), 127-132.
Lewicki, P. (1985). Nonconscious biasing effects of single instances on subsequent judgments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 563–574. Mae, L., & Carlston, D. E.
(2005). Hoist on your own petard: When prejudiced remarks are recognized and backfire on speakers. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41(3), 240–255.
Mitchell, J. P., Mason, M. F., Macrae, C.
N., & Banaji, M. R. (2006).
Thinking about others: The neural substrates of social cognition. In J. T.
Cacioppo, P. S. Visser, & C.
L. Pickett (Eds.), Social neuroscience: People thinking about thinking people (pp. 63–82).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Perloff, R. M.
(2003). The dynamics of persuasion: Communication and attitudes in the 21st century (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Piaget, J., and Inhelder, B. (1962). The psychology of the child.
New York, NY: Basic Books. Ross, L., Lepper, M. R., & Hubbard, M.
(1975). Perseverance in self-perception and social perception: Biased attributional processes in the debriefing paradigm. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 32, 880–892.
Ruscher, J. B., & Duval, L. L.
(1998). Multiple communicators with unique target information transmit less stereotypical impressions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(2), 329–344.
Schaller, M., & Conway, G. (1999). Influence of impression-management goals on the emerging content of group stereotypes: Support for a social-evolutionary perspective.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 819–833. Schemer, C., Matthes, J. R., Wirth, W., & Textor, S.
(2008). Does “passing the Courvoisier” always pay off? Positive and negative evaluative conditioning effects of brand placements in music videos.
Psychology & Marketing, 25(10), 923–943. Sigall, H., & Landy, D. (1973).
Radiating beauty: Effects of having a physically attractive partner on person perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28(2), 218–224. Skowronski, J.
J., Carlston, D. E., Mae, L., & Crawford, M. T.
(1998). Spontaneous trait transference: Communicators take on the qualities they describe in others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(4), 837–848.
Srull, T., & Wyer, R. (1989). Person memory and judgment.
Psychological Review, 96(1), 58–83. Stangor, C., & Duan, C. (1991).
Effects of multiple task demands upon memory for information about social groups. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27, 357–378. Stanovich, K.
E., West, R. F., & Toplak, M. E.
(2013). Myside bias, rational thinking, and intelligence. Current Directions In Psychological Science, 22(4), 259-264.
doi:10.1177/ 0963721413480174 Tambling, R. B. (2012).
A literature review of expectancy effects. Contemporary Family Therapy, 34(3), 402-415. Taylor, S.
E., & Crocker, J. (1981). Schematic bases of social information processing.
In E. T. Higgins, C.
P. Herman, & M. P.
Zanna (Eds.), Social cognition: The Ontario symposium (Vol. 1, pp. 89–134).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.78 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Van Knippenberg, A., & Dijksterhuis, A. (1996).
A posteriori sterotype activation: The preservation of sterotypes through memory distortion. Social Cognition, 14, 21–54. Wason, P.
(1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a conceptual task. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 12(3), 129–140.
Wurm, S. W., Ziegelmann, L. M., Wolff, J.
K., & Schuz, B. (2013). How do negative self-perceptions of aging become a self-fulfilling prophecy?
Psychology and Aging, 28(4), 1088-1097. Witte, K., & Allen, M. (2000).
A meta-analysis of fear appeals: Implications for effective public health campaigns. Health Education & Behavior, 27(5), 591–615. Media Attributions • “Funny Commercials” by kin100 is licensed under a Standard YouTube License.
• “Cigarettes brazil” by Brazilian Health Ministry (MS) – Instituto Nacional do Câncer (INCA) is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence. • “Flickr – Israel Defense Forces – Terrorist Disguised as a Woman” by Israel Defense Forces is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “Flooded urban poor area in Manila” by SuSanA Secretariat is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “Father and Son” by Shawn is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “Bandura Bobo Doll.wmv” by Heath Kaplan is licensed under a Standard YouTube License.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations Learning Objectives 1. Provide examples of how salience and accessibility influence information processing.
2. Review, differentiate, and give examples of some important cognitive heuristics that influence social judgment. 3.
Summarize and give examples of the importance of social cognition in everyday life. Once we have developed a set of schemas and attitudes, we naturally use that information to help us evaluate and respond to others. Our expectations help us to think about, size up, and make sense of individuals, groups of people, and the relationships among people.
If we have learned, for example, that someone is friendly and interested in us, we are likely to approach them; if we have learned that they are threatening or unlikable, we will be more likely to withdraw. And if we believe that a person has committed a crime, we may process new information in a manner that helps convince us that our judgment was correct. In this section, we will consider how we use our stored knowledge to come to accurate (and sometimes inaccurate) conclusions about our social worlds.
Automatic versus Controlled Cognition A good part of both cognition and social cognition is spontaneous or automatic. Automatic cognition refers to thinking that occurs out of our awareness, quickly, and without taking much effort (Ferguson & Bargh, 2003; Ferguson, Hassin, & Bargh, 2008). The things that we do most frequently tend to become more automatic each time we do them, until they reach a level where they don’t really require us to think about them very much.
Most of us can ride a bike and operate a television remote control in an automatic way. Even though it took some work to do these things when we were first learning them, it just doesn’t take much effort anymore. And because we spend a lot of time making judgments about others, many of these judgments, which are strongly influenced by our schemas, are made quickly and automatically (Willis & Todorov, 2006).
Because automatic thinking occurs outside of our conscious awareness, we frequently have no idea that it is occurring and influencing our judgments or behaviors. You might remember a time when you returned home, unlocked the door, and 30 seconds later couldn’t remember where you had put your keys! You know that you must have used the keys to get in, and you know you must have put them somewhere, but you simply don’t remember a thing about it.
Because many of our everyday judgments and behaviors are performed automatically, we may not always be aware that they are occurring or influencing us. 7980 Chapter 2. Social Cognition It is of course a good thing that many things operate automatically because it would be extremely difficult to have to think about them all the time.
If you couldn’t drive a car automatically, you wouldn’t be able to talk to the other people riding with you or listen to the radio at the same time—you’d have to be putting most of your attention into driving. On the other hand, relying on our snap judgments about Bianca—that she’s likely to be expressive, for instance—can be erroneous. Sometimes we need to—and should—go beyond automatic cognition and consider people more carefully.
When we deliberately size up and think about something, for instance, another person, we call it controlled cognition. Although you might think that controlled cognition would be more common and that automatic thinking would be less likely, that is not always the case. The problem is that thinking takes effort and time, and we often don’t have too much of those things available.
In the following Research Focus, we consider an example of automatic cognition in a study that uses a common social cognitive procedure known as priming, a technique in which information is temporarily brought into memory through exposure to situational events, which can then influence judgments entirely out of awareness. Research Focus Behavioral Effects of Priming In one demonstration of how automatic cognition can influence our behaviors without us being aware of them, John Bargh and his colleagues (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996) conducted two studies, each with the exact same procedure. In the experiments, they showed college students sets of five scrambled words.
The students were to unscramble the five words in each set to make a sentence. Furthermore, for half of the research participants, the words were related to the stereotype of elderly people. These participants saw words such as “in Florida retired live people” and “bingo man the forgetful plays.” The other half of the research participants also made sentences but did so out of words that had nothing to do with the elderly stereotype.
The purpose of this task was to prime (activate) the schema of elderly people in memory for some of the participants but not for others. The experimenters then assessed whether the priming of elderly stereotypes would have any effect on the students’ behavior—and indeed it did. When each research participant had gathered all his or her belongings, thinking that the experiment was over, the experimenter thanked him or her for participating and gave directions to the closest elevator.
Then, without the participant knowing it, the experimenters recorded the amount of time that the participant spent walking from the doorway of the experimental room toward the elevator. As you can see in Figure 2.8, “Automatic Priming and Behavior,” the same results were found in both experiments—the participants who had made sentences using words related to the elderly stereotype took on the behaviors of the elderly—they walked significantly more slowly (in fact, about 12% more slowly across the two studies) as they left the experimental room.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 81 Figure 2.8 Automatic Priming and Behavior. In two separate experiments, Bargh, Chen, and Borroughs (1996) found that students who had been exposed to words related to the elderly stereotype walked more slowly than those who had been exposed to more neutral words.
To determine if these priming effects occurred out of the conscious awareness of the participants, Bargh and his colleagues asked a third group of students to complete the priming task and then to indicate whether they thought the words they had used to make the sentences had any relationship to each other or could possibly have influenced their behavior in any way. These students had no awareness of the possibility that the words might have been related to the elderly or could have influenced their behavior. The point of these experiments, and many others like them, is clear—it is quite possible that our judgments and behaviors are influenced by our social situations, and this influence may be entirely outside of our conscious awareness.
To return again to Bianca, it is even possible that we notice her nationality and that our beliefs about Italians influence our responses to her, even though we have no idea that they are doing so and really believe that they have not. Salience and Accessibility Determine Which Expectations We Use We each have a large number of schemas that we might bring to bear on any type of judgment we might make. When thinking about Bianca, for instance, we might focus on her nationality, her gender, her physical attractiveness, her intelligence, or any of many other possible features.
And we will react to Bianca differently depending on which schemas we use. Schema activation is determined both by the salience of the characteristics of the person we are judging and by the current activation or cognitive accessibility of the schema.82 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Salience Figure 2.9 Which of these people are more salient and therefore more likely to attract your attention?
One determinant of which schemas are likely to be used in social judgment is the extent to which we attend to particular features of the person or situation that we are responding to. We are more likely to judge people on the basis of characteristics of salience, which attract our attention when we see someone with them. For example, things that are unusual, negative, colorful, bright, and moving are more salient and thus more likely to be attended to than are things that do not have these characteristics (McArthur & Post, 1977; Taylor & Fiske, 1978).
We are more likely to initially judge people on the basis of their sex, race, age, and physical attractiveness, rather than on, say, their religious orientation or their political beliefs, in part because these features are so salient when we see them (Brewer, 1988). Another thing that makes something particularly salient is its infrequency or unusualness. If Bianca is from Italy and very few other people in our community are, that characteristic is something that we notice, it is salient, and we are therefore likely to attend to it.
That she is also a woman is, at least in this context, is less salient. The salience of the stimuli in our social worlds may sometimes lead us to make judgments on the basis2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 83 of information that is actually less informative than is other less salient information. Imagine, for instance, that you wanted to buy a new smartphone for yourself.
You’ve been trying to decide whether to get the iPhone or a rival product. You went online and checked out the reviews, and you found that although the phones differed on many dimensions, including price, battery life, and so forth, the rival product was nevertheless rated significantly higher by the owners than was the iPhone. As a result, you decide to go and purchase one the next day.
That night, however, you go to a party, and a friend of yours shows you her iPhone. You check it out, and it seems really great. You tell her that you were thinking of buying a rival product, and she tells you that you are crazy.
She says she knows someone who had one and had a lot of problems—it didn’t download music properly, the battery died right after the warranty was up, and so forth, and that she would never buy one. Would you still buy it, or would you switch your plans? If you think about this question logically, the information that you just got from your friend isn’t really all that important; you now know the opinions of one more person, but that can’t really change the overall consumer ratings of the two machines very much.
On the other hand, the information your friend gives you and the chance to use her iPhone are highly salient. The information is right there in front of you, in your hand, whereas the statistical information from reviews is only in the form of a table that you saw on your computer. The outcome in cases such as this is that people frequently ignore the less salient, but more important, information, such as the likelihood that events occur across a large population, known as base rates, in favor of the actually less important, but nevertheless more salient, information.
Another case in which we ignore base-rate information occurs when we use the representativeness heuristic, which occurs when we base our judgments on information that seems to represent, or match, what we expect will happen, while ignoring more informative base-rate information. Consider, for instance, the following puzzle. Let’s say that you went to a hospital this week, and you checked the records of the babies that were born on that day (Table 2.2, “Using the Representativeness Heuristic”).
Which pattern of births do you think that you are most likely to find? Table 2.2 Using the Representativeness Heuristic List A List B 6:31 a.m. Girl Boy 8:15 a.m.
Girl Girl 9:42 a.m. Girl Boy 1:13 p.m. Girl Girl 3:39 p.m.
Boy Girl 5:12 p.m. Boy Boy 7:42 p.m. Boy Girl 11:44 p.m.
Boy Boy84 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Most people think that List B is more likely, probably because it looks more random and thus matches (is “representative of”) our ideas about randomness. But statisticians know that any pattern of four girls and four boys is equally likely and thus that List B is no more likely than List A.
The problem is that we have an image of what randomness should be, which doesn’t always match what is rationally the case. Similarly, people who see a coin that comes up heads five times in a row will frequently predict (and perhaps even bet!) that tails will be next—it just seems like it has to be. But mathematically, this erroneous expectation (known as the gambler’s fallacy) is simply not true: the base-rate likelihood of any single coin flip being tails is only 50%, regardless of how many times it has come up heads in the past.
To take one more example, consider the following information: I have a friend who is analytical, argumentative, and is involved in community activism. Which of the following is she? (Choose one.) —A lawyer —A salesperson Can you see how you might be led, potentially incorrectly, into thinking that my friend is a lawyer?
Why? The description (“analytical, argumentative, and is involved in community activism”) just seems more representative or stereotypical of our expectations about lawyers than salespeople. But the base rates tell us something completely different, which should make us wary of that conclusion.
Simply put, the number of salespeople greatly outweighs the number of lawyers in society, and thus statistically it is far more likely that she is a salesperson. Nevertheless, the representativeness heuristic will often cause us to overlook such important information. One unfortunate consequence of this is that it can contribute to the maintenance of stereotypes.
If someone you meet seems, superficially at least, to represent the stereotypical characteristics of a social group, you may incorrectly classify that person as a member of that group, even when it is highly likely that he or she is not. Cognitive Accessibility Although the characteristics that we use to think about objects or people are determined in part by their salience, individual differences in the person who is doing the judging are also important. People vary in the type of schemas that they tend to use when judging others and when thinking about themselves.
One way to consider this is in terms of the cognitive accessibility of the schema. Cognitive accessibility refers to the extent to which a schema is activated in memory and thus likely to be used in information processing. Simply put, the schemas we tend to typically use are often those that are most accessible to us.
You probably know people who are football nuts (or maybe tennis or some other sport nuts). All they can talk about is football. For them, we would say that football is a highly accessible construct.
Because they love football, it is important to their self-concept; they set many of their goals in terms of the sport, and they tend to think about things and people in terms of it (“If he plays or watches football, he must be okay!”). Other people have highly accessible schemas about eating healthy food, exercising, environmental issues, or really good coffee, for instance. In short, when a schema is accessible, we are likely to use it to make judgments of ourselves and others.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 85 Although accessibility can be considered a person variable (a given idea is more highly accessible for some people than for others), accessibility can also be influenced by situational factors.
When we have recently or frequently thought about a given topic, that topic becomes more accessible and is likely to influence our judgments. This is in fact a potential explanation for the results of the priming study you read about earlier—people walked slower because the concept of elderly had been primed and thus was currently highly accessible for them. Because we rely so heavily on our schemas and attitudes, and particularly on those that are salient and accessible, we can sometimes be overly influenced by them.
Imagine, for instance, that I asked you to close your eyes and determine whether there are more words in the English language that begin with the letter R or that have the letter R as the third letter. You would probably try to solve this problem by thinking of words that have each of the characteristics. It turns out that most people think there are more words that begin with R, even though there are in fact more words that have R as the third letter.
You can see that this error can occur as a result of cognitive accessibility. To answer the question, we naturally try to think of all the words that we know that begin with R and that have R in the third position. The problem is that when we do that, it is much easier to retrieve the former than the latter, because we store words by their first, not by their third, letter.
We may also think that our friends are nice people because we see them primarily when they are around us (their friends). And the traffic might seem worse in our own neighborhood than we think it is in other places, in part because nearby traffic jams are more accessible for us than are traffic jams that occur somewhere else. And do you think it is more likely that you will be killed in a plane crash or in a car crash?
Many people fear the former, even though the latter is much more likely: statistically, your chances of being involved in an aircraft accident are far lower than being killed in an automobile accident. In this case, the problem is that plane crashes, which are highly salient, are more easily retrieved from our memory than are car crashes, which often receive far less media coverage. The tendency to make judgments of the frequency of an event, or the likelihood that an event will occur, on the basis of the ease with which the event can be retrieved from memory is known as the availability heuristic (Schwarz & Vaughn, 2002; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973).
The idea is that things that are highly accessible (in this case, the term availability is used) come to mind easily and thus may overly influence our judgments. Thus, despite the clear facts, it may be easier to think of plane crashes than of car crashes because the former are more accessible. If so, the availability heuristic can lead to errors in judgments.
For example, as people tend to overestimate the risk of rare but dramatic events, including plane crashes and terrorist attacks, their responses to these estimations may not always be proportionate to the true risks. For instance, it has been widely documented that fewer people chose to use air travel in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 (9/11), terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center, particularly in the United States. Correspondingly, many individuals chose other methods of travel, often electing to drive rather than fly to their destination.
Statistics across all regions of the world confirm that driving is far more dangerous than flying, and this prompted the cognitive psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer to estimate how many extra deaths that the increased road traffic following 9/11 might have caused. He arrived at an estimate of around an additional 1,500 road deaths in the United States alone in the year following those terrorist attacks, which was six times the number of people killed on the airplanes on September 11, 2001 (Gigerenzer, 2006).86 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Another way that the cognitive accessibility of constructs can influence information processing is through their effects on processing fluency.
Processing fluency refers to the ease with which we can process information in our environments. When stimuli are highly accessible, they can be quickly attended to and processed, and they therefore have a large influence on our perceptions. This influence is due, in part, to the fact that we often react positively to information that we can process quickly, and we use this positive response as a basis of judgment (Reber, Winkielman, & Schwarz, 1998; Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001).
In one study demonstrating this effect, Norbert Schwarz and his colleagues (Schwarz et al., 1991) asked one set of college students to list six occasions when they had acted either assertively or unassertively, and asked another set of college students to list 12 such examples. Schwarz determined that for most students, it was pretty easy to list six examples but pretty hard to list 12. The researchers then asked the participants to indicate how assertive or unassertive they actually were.
You can see from Figure 2.10, “Processing Fluency,” that the ease of processing influenced judgments. The participants who had an easy time listing examples of their behavior (because they only had to list six instances) judged that they did in fact have the characteristics they were asked about (either assertive or unassertive), in comparison with the participants who had a harder time doing the task (because they had to list 12 instances). Other research has found similar effects—people rate that they ride their bicycles more often after they have been asked to recall only a few rather than many instances of doing so (Aarts & Dijksterhuis, 1999), and they hold an attitude with more confidence after being asked to generate few rather than many arguments that support it (Haddock, Rothman, Reber, & Schwarz, 1999).
Sometimes less really is more! Figure 2.10 Processing Fluency. When it was relatively easy to complete the questionnaire (only six examples were required), the student participants rated that they had more of the trait than when the task was more difficult (12 answers were required).
Data are from Schwarz et al. (1991). Echoing the findings mentioned earlier in relation to schemas, we are likely to use this type of quick and “intuitive” processing, based on our feelings about how easy it is to complete a task, when we don’t have much time or energy for more in-depth processing, such as when we are under time pressure, tired, or unwilling to process the stimulus in sufficient detail.
Of course, it is very adaptive to respond to stimuli quickly (Sloman, 2002; Stanovich & West, 2002; Winkielman, Schwarz, & Nowak, 2002), and it is not impossible that in at least some cases, we are better off making decisions based on our initial responses than on a more thoughtful cognitive analysis (Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, &2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 87 Welch, 2001). For instance, Dijksterhuis, Bos, Nordgren, and van Baaren (2006) found that when participants were given tasks requiring decisions that were very difficult to make on the basis of a cognitive analysis of the problem, they made better decisions when they didn’t try to analyze the details carefully but simply relied on their intuitions. In sum, people are influenced not only by the information they get but on how they get it.
We are more highly influenced by things that are salient and accessible and thus easily attended to, remembered, and processed. On the other hand, information that is harder to access from memory, is less likely to be attended to, or takes more effort to consider is less likely to be used in our judgments, even if this information is statistically more informative. The False Consensus Bias Makes Us Think That Others Are More Like Us Than They Really Are The tendency to base our judgments on the accessibility of social constructs can lead to still other errors in judgment.
One such error is known as the false consensus bias, the tendency to overestimate the extent to which other people hold similar views to our own. As our own beliefs are highly accessible to us, we tend to rely on them too heavily when asked to predict those of others. For instance, if you are in favor of abortion rights and opposed to capital punishment, then you are likely to think that most other people share these beliefs (Ross, Greene, & House, 1977).
In one demonstration of the false consensus bias, Joachim Krueger and his colleagues (Krueger & Clement, 1994) gave their research participants, who were college students, a personality test. Then they asked the same participants to estimate the percentage of other students in their school who would have answered the questions the same way that they did. The students who agreed with the items often thought that others would agree with them too, whereas the students who disagreed typically believed that others would also disagree.
A closely related bias to the false consensus effect is the projection bias, which is the tendency to assume that others share our cognitive and affective states (Hsee, Hastie, & Chen, 2008). In regards to our chapter case study, the false consensus effect has also been implicated in the potential causes of the 2008 financial collapse. Considering investor behavior within its social context, an important part of sound decision making is the ability to predict other investors’ intentions and behaviors, as this will help to foresee potential market trends.
In this context, Egan, Merkle, and Weber (in press) outline how the false consensus effect can lead investors to overestimate the extent to which other investors share their judgments about the likely trends, which can in turn lead them to make inaccurate predictions of their behavior, with dire economic consequences. Although it is commonly observed, the false consensus bias does not occur on all dimensions. Specifically, the false consensus bias is not usually observed on judgments of positive personal traits that we highly value as important.
People (falsely, of course) report that they have better personalities (e.g., a better sense of humor), that they engage in better behaviors (e.g., they are more likely to wear seatbelts), and that they have brighter futures than almost everyone else (Chambers, 2008). These results suggest that although in most cases we assume that we are similar to others, in cases of valued personal characteristics the goals of self-concern lead us to see ourselves more positively than we see the average person. There are some important cultural differences here, though, with members of collectivist cultures typically showing less of this type of self-enhancing bias, than those from individualistic cultures (Heine, Lehman, Markus, & Kitayama, 1999).88 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition Perceptions of What “Might Have Been” Lead to Counterfactual Thinking In addition to influencing our judgments about ourselves and others, the salience and accessibility of information can have an important effect on our own emotions and self-esteem. Our emotional reactions to events are often colored not only by what did happen but also by what might have happened. If we can easily imagine an outcome that is better than what actually happened, then we may experience sadness and disappointment; on the other hand, if we can easily imagine that a result might have been worse that what actually happened, we may be more likely to experience happiness and satisfaction.
The tendency to think about events according to what might have been is known as counterfactual thinking (Roese, 1997). Imagine, for instance, that you were participating in an important contest, and you won the silver medal. How would you feel?
Certainly you would be happy that you won, but wouldn’t you probably also be thinking a lot about what might have happened if you had been just a little bit better—you might have won the gold medal! On the other hand, how might you feel if you won the bronze medal (third place)? If you were thinking about the counterfactual (the “what might have been”), perhaps the idea of not getting any medal at all would have been highly accessible and so you’d be happy that you got the medal you did get.
Medvec, Madey, and Gilovich (1995) investigated exactly this idea by videotaping the responses of athletes who won medals in the 1992 summer Olympic Games. They videotaped the athletes both as they learned that they had won a silver or a bronze medal and again as they were awarded the medal. Then they showed these videos, without any sound, to people who did not know which medal which athlete had won.
The raters indicated how they thought the athlete was feeling, on a range from “agony” to “ecstasy.” The results showed that the bronze medalists did indeed seem to be, on average, happier than were the silver medalists. Then, in a follow-up study, raters watched interviews with many of these same athletes as they talked about their performance. The raters indicated what we would expect on the basis of counterfactual thinking.
The silver medalists often talked about their disappointments in having finished second rather than first, whereas the bronze medalists tended to focus on how happy they were to have finished third rather than fourth.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 89 Figure 2.11 Does the bronze medalist look happier to you than the silver medalist? Medvec, Madey, and Gilovich (1995) found that, on average, bronze medalists were happier than silver medalists. Counterfactual thinking seems to be part of the human condition and has even been studied in numerous other social settings, including juries.
For example, people who were asked to award monetary damages to others who had been in an accident offered them substantially more in compensation if they were almost not injured than they did if the accident seemed more inevitable (Miller, Turnbull, & McFarland, 1988). Again, the moral of the story regarding the importance of cognitive accessibility is clear—in the case of counterfactual thinking, the accessibility of the potential alternative outcome can lead to some seemingly paradoxical effects. Anchoring and Adjustment Lead Us to Accept Ideas That We Should Revise In some cases, we may be aware of the danger of acting on our expectations and attempt to adjust for them.
Perhaps you have been in a situation where you are beginning a course with a new professor and you know that a good friend of yours does not like him. You may be thinking that you want to go beyond your negative expectation and prevent this knowledge from biasing your judgment. However, the accessibility of the initial information frequently prevents this adjustment from occurring—leading us to weight initial information too heavily and thereby insufficiently move our judgment away from it.
This is called the problem of anchoring and adjustment. Tversky and Kahneman (1974) asked some of the student participants in one of their studies of anchoring and adjustment to solve this multiplication problem quickly and without using a calculator:90 Chapter 2. Social Cognition 1 × 2 × 3 × 4 × 5 × 6 × 7 × 8 They asked other participants to solve this problem: 8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 They found that students who saw the first problem gave an estimated answer of about 512, whereas the students who saw the second problem estimated about 2,250.
Tversky and Kahneman argued that the students couldn’t solve the whole problem in their head, so they did the first few multiplications and then used the outcome of this preliminary calculation as their starting point, or anchor. Then the participants used their starting estimate to find an answer that sounded plausible. In both cases, the estimates were too low relative to the true value of the product (which is 40,320)—but the first set of guesses were even lower because they started from a lower anchor.
Interestingly, the tendency to anchor on initial information seems to be sufficiently strong that in some cases, people will do so even when the anchor is clearly irrelevant to the task at hand. For example, Ariely, Loewenstein, and Prelec (2003) asked students to bid on items in an auction after having noted the last two digits of their social security numbers. They then asked the students to generate and write down a hypothetical price for each of the auction items, based on these numbers.
If the last two digits were 11, then the bottle of wine, for example, was priced at $11. If the two numbers were 88, the textbook was $88. After they wrote down this initial, arbitrary price, they then had to bid for the item.
People with high numbers bid up to 346% more than those with low ones! Ariely, reflecting further on these findings, concluded that the “Social security numbers were the anchor in this experiment only because we requested them. We could have just as well asked for the current temperature or the manufacturer’s suggested retail price.
Any question, in fact, would have created the anchor. Does that seem rational? Of course not” (2008, p.
26). A rather startling conclusion from the effect of arbitrary, irrelevant anchors on our judgments is that we will often grab hold of any available information to guide our judgments, regardless of whether it is actually germane to the issue. Of course, savvy marketers have long used the anchoring phenomenon to help them.
You might not be surprised to hear that people are more likely to buy more products when they are listed as four for $1.00 than when they are listed as $0.25 each (leading people to anchor on the four and perhaps adjust only a bit away). And it is no accident that a car salesperson always starts negotiating with a high price and then works down. The salesperson is trying to get the consumer anchored on the high price, with the hope that it will have a big influence on the final sale value.
Overconfidence Still another potential judgmental bias, and one that has powerful and often negative effects on our judgments, is the overconfidence bias, a tendency to be overconfident in our own skills, abilities, and judgments. We often have little awareness of our own limitations, leading us to act as if we are more certain about things than we should be, particularly on tasks that are difficult. Adams and Adams (1960) found that for words that were difficult to spell, people were correct in spelling them only about 80% of the time, even though they indicated that they were “100% certain” that they were correct.
David Dunning and his colleagues (Dunning, Griffin, Milojkovic, & Ross, 1990) asked college students to predict how another student would react in various situations. Some participants made predictions about a fellow student whom they had just met and interviewed, and others made2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 91 predictions about their roommates. In both cases, participants reported their confidence in each prediction, and accuracy was determined by the responses of the target persons themselves.
The results were clear: regardless of whether they judged a stranger or a roommate, the students consistently overestimated the accuracy of their own predictions (Figure 2.12). Figure 2.12 Dunning and colleagues (1990) found that, regardless of whether they were judging strangers or their roommates, students were overconfident. The percentage confidence that they assigned to their own predictions was significantly higher than the actual percentage of their predictions that were correct.
Making matters even worse, Kruger and Dunning (1999) found that people who scored low rather than high on tests of spelling, logic, grammar, and humor appreciation were also most likely to show overconfidence by overestimating how well they would do. Apparently, poor performers are doubly cursed—they not only are unable to predict their own skills but also are the most unaware that they can’t do so (Dunning, Johnson, Ehrlinger, & Kruger, 2003). The tendency to be overconfident in our judgments can have some very negative effects.
When eyewitnesses testify in courtrooms regarding their memories of a crime, they often are completely sure that they are identifying the right person. But their confidence doesn’t correlate much with their actual accuracy. This is, in part, why so many people have been wrongfully convicted on the basis of inaccurate eyewitness testimony given by overconfident witnesses (Wells & Olson, 2003).
Overconfidence can also spill over into professional judgments, for example, in clinical psychology (Oskamp, 1965) and in market investment and trading (Chen, Kim, Nofsinger, & Rui, 2007). Indeed, in regards to our case study at the start of this chapter, the role of overconfidence bias in the financial crisis of 2008 and its aftermath has been well documented (Abbes, 2012). This overconfidence also often seems to apply to social judgments about the future in general.
A pervasive optimistic biashas been noted in members of many cultures (Sharot, 2011), which can be defined as a tendency to believe that positive outcomes are more likely to happen than negative ones, particularly in relation to ourselves versus others. Importantly, this optimism is often unwarranted. Most people, for example, underestimate their risk of experiencing negative events like divorce and illness, and overestimate the likelihood of positive ones, including gaining a promotion at work or living to a ripe old age (Schwarzer, 1994).
There is some evidence of diversity in regards to optimism, however, across different groups. People in collectivist cultures tend not to show this bias to the same extent as those living in individualistic ones (Chang, Asakawa, & Sanna, 2001). Moreover, individuals who have clinical depression have been shown to evidence a phenomenon termed depressive92 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition realism, whereby their social judgments about the future are less positively skewed and often more accurate than those who do not have depression (Moore & Fresco, 2012). The optimistic bias can also extend into the planning fallacy, defined as a tendency to overestimate the amount that we can accomplish over a particular time frame. This fallacy can also entail the underestimation of the resources and costs involved in completing a task or project, as anyone who has attempted to budget for home renovations can probably attest to.
Everyday examples of the planning fallacy abound, in everything from the completion of course assignments to the construction of new buildings. On a grander scale, newsworthy items in any country hosting a major sporting event, for example, the Olympics or World Cup soccer always seem to include the spiralling budgets and overrunning timelines as the events approach. Why is the planning fallacy so persistent?
Several factors appear to be at work here. Buehler, Griffin and Peetz (2010) argue that when planning projects, individuals orient to the future and pay too little attention to their past relevant experiences. This can cause them to overlook previous occasions where they experienced difficulties and over-runs.
They also tend to plan for what time and resources are likely to be needed, if things run as planned. That is, they do not spend enough time thinking about all the things that might go wrong, for example, all the unforeseen demands on their time and resources that may occur during the completion of the task. Worryingly, the planning fallacy seems to be even stronger for tasks where we are highly motivated and invested in timely completions.
It appears that wishful thinking is often at work here (Buehler et al., 2010). For some further perspectives on the advantages and disadvantages of the optimism bias, see this engaging TED Talk by Tali Sharot. If these biases related to overconfidence appear at least sometimes to lead us to inaccurate social judgments, a key question here is why are they so pervasive?
What functions do they serve? One possibility is that they help to enhance people’s motivation and self-esteem levels. If we have a positive view of our abilities and judgments, and are confident that we can execute tasks to deadlines, we will be more likely to attempt challenging projects and to put ourselves forward for demanding opportunities.
Moreover, there is consistent evidence that a mild degree of optimism can predict a range of positive outcomes, including success and even physical health (Forgeard & Seligman, 2012). The Importance of Cognitive Biases in Everyday Life In our review of some of the many cognitive biases that affect our social judgment, we have seen that the effects on us as individuals range from fairly trivial decisions; for example, which phone to buy (which perhaps doesn’t seem so trivial at the time) to potentially life and death decisions (about methods of travel, for instance). However, when we consider that many of these errors will not only affect us but also everyone around us, then their consequences can really add up.
Why would so many people continue to buy lottery tickets or to gamble their money in casinos when the likelihood of them ever winning is so low? One possibility, of course, is the representative heuristic—people ignore the low base rates of winning and focus their attention on the salient likelihood of winning a huge prize. And the belief in astrology, which all scientific evidence suggests is not accurate, is probably driven in part by the salience of the occasions when the predictions do occur—when a horoscope is correct (which it will of course sometimes be), the correct prediction is highly salient and may allow people to maintain the (overall false) belief as they recollect confirming evidence more readily.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 93 People may also take more care to prepare for unlikely events than for more likely ones because the unlikely ones are more salient or accessible.
For instance, people may think that they are more likely to die from a terrorist attack or as the result of a homicide than they are from diabetes, stroke, or tuberculosis. But the odds are much greater of dying from the health problems than from terrorism or homicide. Because people don’t accurately calibrate their behaviors to match the true potential risks, the individual and societal costs are quite large (Slovic, 2000).
As well as influencing our judgments relating to ourselves, salience and accessibility also color how we perceive our social worlds, which may have a big influence on our behavior. For instance, people who watch a lot of violent television shows also tend to view the world as more dangerous in comparison to those who watch less violent TV (Doob & Macdonald, 1979). This follows from the idea that our judgments are based on the accessibility of relevant constructs.
We also overestimate our contribution to joint projects (Ross & Sicoly, 1979), perhaps in part because our own contributions are so obvious and salient, whereas the contributions of others are much less so. And the use of cognitive heuristics can even affect our views about global warming. Joireman, Barnes, Truelove, and Duell (2010) found that people were more likely to believe in the existence of global warming when they were asked about it on hotter rather than colder days and when they had first been primed with words relating to heat.
Thus the principles of salience and accessibility, because they are such an important part of our social judgments, can create a series of biases that can make a difference on a truly global level. As we have already seen specifically in relation to overconfidence, research has found that even people who should know better—and who need to know better—are subject to cognitive biases in general. Economists, stock traders, managers, lawyers, and even doctors have been found to make the same kinds of mistakes in their professional activities that people make in their everyday lives (Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Gilovich, Griffin, & Kahneman, 2002; Hilton, 2001).
And the use of cognitive heuristics is increased when people are under time pressure (Kruglanski & Freund, 1983) or when they feel threatened (Kassam, Koslov, & Mendes, 2009), exactly the situations that often occur when professionals are required to make their decisions. Biased About Our Biases: The Bias Blind Spot So far, we have discussed some of the most important and heavily researched social cognitive biases that affect our appraisals of ourselves in relation to our social worlds and noted some of their key limitations. Recently, some social psychologists have become interested in how aware we are of how these biases and the ways in which they can affect our own and others’ thinking.
The short answer to this is that we often underestimate the extent to which our social cognition is biased, and that we typically (incorrectly) believe that we are less biased than the average person. Researchers have named this tendency to believe that our own judgments are less susceptible to the influence of bias than those of others as the bias blind spot (Ehrlinger, Gilovich, & Ross, 2005). Interestingly, the level of bias blind spot that people demonstrate is unrelated to the actual amount of bias they show in their social judgments (West, Meserve, & Stanovich, 2012).
Moreover, those scoring higher in cognitive ability actually tend to show a larger bias blind spot (West et al., 2012). So, if our social cognition appears to be riddled with multiple biases, and we tend to show biases about these biases, what hope is there for us in reaching sound social judgments? Before we arrive at such a pessimistic conclusion, however, it is important to redress the balance of evidence a little.
Perhaps just learning more about these biases, as we have done in this chapter, can help us to recognize when they94 Chapter 2. Social Cognition are likely to be useful to our social judgments, and to take steps to reduce their effects when they hinder our understanding of our social worlds. Maybe, although many of the biases discussed tend to persist even in the face of our awareness, at the very least, learning about them could be an important first step toward reducing their unhelpful effects on our social cognition.
In order to get reliably better at policing our biases, though, we probably need to go further. One of the world’s foremost authorities on social cognitive biases, Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman, certainly thinks so. He argues that individual awareness of biases is an important precursor to the development of a common vocabulary about them, that will then make us better able as communities to discuss their effects on our social judgments (Kahneman, 2011).
Kahneman also asserts that we may be more likely to recognize and challenge bias in each other’s thinking than in our own, an observation that certainly fits with the concept of the bias blind spot. Perhaps, even if we cannot effectively police our thinking on our own, we can help to police one another’s. These arguments are consistent with some evidence that, although mere awareness is rarely enough to significantly attenuate the effects of bias, it can be helpful when accompanied by systematic cognitive retraining.
Many social psychologists and other scientists are working to help people make better decisions. One possibility is to provide people with better feedback. Weather forecasters, for instance, are quite accurate in their decisions (at least in the short-term), in part because they are able to learn from the clear feedback that they get about the accuracy of their predictions.
Other research has found that accessibility biases can be reduced by leading people to consider multiple alternatives rather than focusing only on the most obvious ones, and by encouraging people to think about exactly the opposite possible outcomes than the ones they are expecting (Hirt, Kardes, & Markman, 2004). And certain educational experiences can help people to make better decisions. For instance, Lehman, Lempert, and Nisbett (1988) found that graduate students in medicine, law, and chemistry, and particularly those in psychology, all showed significant improvement in their ability to reason correctly over the course of their graduate training.
Another source for some optimism about the accuracy of our social cognition is that these heuristics and biases can, despite their limitations, often lead us to a broadly accurate understanding of the situations we encounter. Although we do have limited cognitive abilities, information, and time when making social judgments, that does not mean we cannot and do not make enough sense of our social worlds in order to function effectively in our daily lives. Indeed, some researchers, including Cosmides and Tooby (2000) and Gigerenzer (2004) have argued that these biases and heuristics have been sculpted by evolutionary forces to offer fast and frugal ways of reaching sound judgments about our infinitely complex social worlds enough of the time to have adaptive value.
If, for example, you were asked to say which Spanish city had a larger population, Madrid or Valencia, the chances are you would quickly answer that Madrid was bigger, even if you did not know the relevant population figures. Why? Perhaps the availability heuristic and cognitive accessibility had something to do with it—the chances are that most people have just heard more about Madrid in the global media over the years, and they can more readily bring these instances to mind.
From there, it is a short leap to the general rule that larger cities tend to get more media coverage. So, although our journeys to our social judgments may not be always be pretty, at least we often arrive at the right destination.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 95 H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 2 DRAG THE WORDS – BIASES AND HEURISTICS To check your learning of some key concepts so far, match each of the scenarios below to one of the following social cognitive biases or heuristics that we have covered in this chapter. Match the concept that you think is most clearly shown in each scenario into the correct box.
Concepts: overconfidence bias, availability heuristic, bias blind spot, false consensus bias, confirmation bias Scenarios: 1. After the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the U.S., it has been estimated that more people were killed in road accidents when driving instead of flying to their destinations than were killed in those terrorist attacks themselves. Which bias or heuristic is most relevant to people’s overestimation of the risk of another airborne terrorist attack?
2. The ship RMS Titanic was fitted with fewer than half the lifeboat capacity needed to save her passengers and crew. Part of the reason for this was that she had been designed to be practically unsinkable, and no-one could envisage an event which would cause her to founder.
On April 14th, 1912, Titanic collided with an iceberg on her maiden voyage, and sank with the loss of more than 1500 lives. Which bias or heuristic is most relevant to this underestimation of the dangers? 3.
In a recent news item, a federal judge defended his ability to impartially preside over a case involving a close friend. Many others could see that his impartiality had been compromised. Which bias or heuristic is most relevant to the judge’s inability to see this?
4. During the COVID-19 pandemic, many people have used search engines to find support for their beliefs around things like the effectiveness of mask wearing and social distancing. Which bias or heuristic is most relevant to these types of information searches?
5. People who talk about political candidates they like are sometimes surprised when the others around them do not share their views, which can lead to some heated arguments! Which bias or heuristic is most relevant to people being surprised here?
Social Psychology in the Public Interest The Validity of Eyewitness Testimony One social situation in which the accuracy of our person-perception skills is vitally important is the area of eyewitness testimony (Charman & Wells, 2007; Toglia, Read, Ross, & Lindsay, 2007; Wells, Memon, & Penrod, 2006). Every year, thousands of individuals are charged with and often convicted of crimes based largely on eyewitness evidence. In fact, many people who were convicted prior to the existence of forensic DNA have now been exonerated by DNA tests, and more than 75% of these people were victims of mistaken eyewitness identification (Wells, Memon, & Penrod, 2006; Fisher, 2011).96 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition The judgments of eyewitnesses are often incorrect, and there is only a small correlation between how accurate and how confident an eyewitness is. Witnesses are frequently overconfident, and a person who claims to be absolutely certain about his or her identification is not much more likely to be accurate than someone who appears much less sure, making it almost impossible to determine whether a particular witness is accurate or not (Wells & Olson, 2003). To accurately remember a person or an event at a later time, we must be able to accurately see and store the information in the first place, keep it in memory over time, and then accurately retrieve it later.
But the social situation can influence any of these processes, causing errors and biases. In terms of initial encoding of the memory, crimes normally occur quickly, often in situations that are accompanied by a lot of stress, distraction, and arousal. Typically, the eyewitness gets only a brief glimpse of the person committing the crime, and this may be under poor lighting conditions and from far away.
And the eyewitness may not always focus on the most important aspects of the scene. Weapons are highly salient, and if a weapon is present during the crime, the eyewitness may focus on the weapon, which would draw his or her attention away from the individual committing the crime (Steblay, 1997). In one relevant study, Loftus, Loftus, and Messo (1987) showed people slides of a customer walking up to a bank teller and pulling out either a pistol or a checkbook.
By tracking eye movements, the researchers determined that people were more likely to look at the gun than at the checkbook and that this reduced their ability to accurately identify the criminal in a lineup that was given later. People may be particularly inaccurate when they are asked to identify members of a race other than their own (Brigham, Bennett, Meissner, & Mitchell, 2007). In one field study, for example, Meissner and Brigham (2001) sent European-American, African-American, and Hispanic students into convenience stores in El Paso, Texas.
Each of the students made a purchase, and the researchers came in later to ask the clerks to identify photos of the shoppers. Results showed that the clerks demonstrated the own-race bias: they were all more accurate at identifying customers belonging to their own racial or ethnic group, which may be more salient to them, than they were at identifying people from other groups. There seems to be some truth to the adage that “They all look alike”—at least if an individual is looking at someone who is not of his or her own race.
Figure 2.13 One source of error in eyewitness testimony is the relative difficulty of accurately identifying people who are not of one’s own race. Even if information gets encoded properly, memories may become distorted over time. For one thing, people might discuss what they saw with other people, or they might read information relating to it from other bystanders or in the media.
Such postevent information can distort the original memories such that the witnesses are no longer sure what the real information is and what was provided later. The problem is that the new, inaccurate information is highly cognitively accessible, whereas the older2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 97 information is much less so. The reconstructive memory bias suggests that the memory may shift over time to fit the individual’s current beliefs about the crime.
Even describing a face makes it more difficult to recognize the face later (Dodson, Johnson, & Schooler, 1997). In an experiment by Loftus and Palmer (1974), participants viewed a film of a traffic accident and then, according to random assignment to experimental conditions, answered one of three questions: 1. About how fast were the cars going when they hit each other?
2. About how fast were the cars going when they smashed each other? 3.
About how fast were the cars going when they contacted each other? As you can see in in the Figure 2.14, “Reconstructive Memory,” although all the participants saw the same accident, their estimates of the speed of the cars varied by condition. People who had seen the “smashed” question estimated the highest average speed, and those who had seen the “contacted” question estimated the lowest.
Figure 2.14 Reconstructive Memory Participants viewed a film of a traffic accident and then answered a question about the accident. According to random assignment, the blank was filled by either “hit,” “smashed,” or “contacted” each other. The wording of the question influenced the participants’ memory of the accident.
Data are from Loftus and Palmer (1974). The situation is particularly problematic when the eyewitnesses are children, because research has found that children are more likely to make incorrect identifications than are adults (Pozzulo & Lindsay, 1998) and are also subject to the own-race identification bias (Pezdek, Blandon-Gitlin, & Moore, 2003). In many cases, when sex abuse charges have been filed against babysitters, teachers, religious officials, and family members, the children are the only source of evidence.
The possibility that children are not accurately remembering the events that have occurred to them creates substantial problems for the legal system. Another setting in which eyewitnesses may be inaccurate is when they try to identify suspects from mug shots or lineups. A lineup generally includes the suspect and five to seven other innocent people (the fillers), and the eyewitness must pick out the true perpetrator.
The problem is that eyewitnesses typically feel pressured to pick a suspect out of the lineup, which increases the likelihood that they will mistakenly pick someone (rather than no one) as the suspect. Research has attempted to better understand how people remember and potentially misremember the98 Chapter 2. Social Cognition scenes of and people involved in crimes and to attempt to improve how the legal system makes use of eyewitness testimony.
In many states, efforts are being made to better inform judges, juries, and lawyers about how inaccurate eyewitness testimony can be. Guidelines have also been proposed to help ensure that child witnesses are questioned in a nonbiasing way (Poole & Lamb, 1998). Steps can also be taken to ensure that lineups yield more accurate eyewitness identifications.
Lineups are more fair when the fillers resemble the suspect, when the interviewer makes it clear that the suspect might or might not be present (Steblay, Dysart, Fulero, & Lindsay, 2001), and when the eyewitness has not been shown the same pictures in a mug-shot book prior to the lineup decision. And several recent studies have found that witnesses who make accurate identifications from a lineup reach their decision faster than do witnesses who make mistaken identifications, suggesting that authorities must take into consideration not only the response but how fast it is given (Dunning & Perretta, 2002). In addition to distorting our memories for events that have actually occurred, misinformation may lead us to falsely remember information that never occurred.
Loftus and her colleagues asked parents to provide them with descriptions of events that did happen (e.g., moving to a new house) and did not happen (e.g., being lost in a shopping mall) to their children. Then (without telling the children which events were real or made up) the researchers asked the children to imagine both types of events. The children were instructed to “think really hard” about whether the events had occurred (Ceci, Huffman, Smith, & Loftus, 1994).
More than half of the children generated stories regarding at least one of the made-up events, and they remained insistent that the events did in fact occur even when told by the researcher that they could not possibly have occurred (Loftus & Pickrell, 1995). Even college students are susceptible to manipulations that make events that did not actually occur seem as if they did (Mazzoni, Loftus, & Kirsch, 2001). The ease with which memories can be created or implanted is particularly problematic when the events to be recalled have important consequences.
Therapists often argue that patients may repress memories of traumatic events they experienced as children, such as childhood sexual abuse, and then recover the events years later as the therapist leads them to recall the information—for instance, by using dream interpretation and hypnosis (Brown, Scheflin, & Hammond, 1998). But other researchers argue that painful memories such as sexual abuse are usually very well remembered, that few memories are actually repressed, and that even if they are, it is virtually impossible for patients to accurately retrieve them years later (McNally, Bryant, & Ehlers, 2003; Pope, Poliakoff, Parker, Boynes, & Hudson, 2007). These researchers have argued that the procedures used by the therapists to “retrieve” the memories are more likely to actually implant false memories, leading the patients to erroneously recall events that did not actually occur.
Because hundreds of people have been accused, and even imprisoned, on the basis of claims about “recovered memory” of child sexual abuse, the accuracy of these memories has important societal implications. Many psychologists now believe that most of these claims of recovered memories are due to implanted, rather than real, memories (Loftus & Ketcham, 1994). Taken together, then, the problems of eyewitness testimony represent another example of how social cognition—including the processes that we use to size up and remember other people—may be influenced, sometimes in a way that creates inaccurate perceptions, by the operation of salience, cognitive accessibility, and other information-processing biases.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 99 H5P: TEXT YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 2 FIILL IN THE BLANKS – COVID-19 AND FAMILY DYNAMICS CASE STUDY Use your understanding of some key social cognitive biases and heuristics to identify which one is most relevant to each part of the case study below.
Please choose from the following alternatives, using each one only once, by typing it in the correct box: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic. 1. Cole and Kristin have been married ten years and have two school-age children.
Like so many families around the world during the COVID-19 pandemic, they have had many new stressors to cope with. One has been their different beliefs about COVID-19. In the early months of the pandemic, Cole thought that it didn’t seem to be much more serious than the flu and was skeptical about things like needing to wear a mask.
Kristin, on the other hand, was more frightened of getting the virus and wore a mask indoors long before it was mandatory. The search histories on their laptops are very different around COVID issues, including mask wearing. Cole’s had search terms like: “why wearing masks doesn’t work”, whereas Kristin’s had things like: “why wearing a mask could save your life”.
What concept is especially relevant to their different search histories here? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic. 2.
There have been many arguments in their household about their different beliefs, which has sometimes put a strain on their relationship. In a particularly heated debate around mask wearing, Cole mentioned a recent headline where someone who’d worn a mask at work every day at work had nonetheless contracted COVID-19. Kristin said she did not remember that headline, but did note some media stories of indoor outbreaks linked to people not wearing masks.
Their tendency to remember headlines that fitted their current beliefs is most linked to which concept? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic. 3.
As mask wearing became mandatory in indoor public spaces, Cole reluctantly adopted this practice. However, he noticed that the third wave of cases in their local area happened months after this mandate was introduced. He mentioned this to Kristin, saying “How is it that even with all this mask wearing, here we are with the case numbers increasing so fast?” Kristin replied that this wasn’t a fair question, as the number of cases that would have occurred if mask wearing had not been mandatory could have been much higher.
Cole responded by saying that there was no way of knowing that for sure. This conversation about how things might have been under different conditions is most relevant to which concept? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic.
4. They have also discussed these issues with family and friends, and Cole tends to be more outspoken than Kristin on these issues. Sometimes, though, he has found himself surprised100 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition while sharing his views about mask wearing that not many people have agreed with him. Which concept best explains his surprise here? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic.
5. Another issue they clashed on was around their children’s schooling in the Fall of 2020. In their local area, the government gave parents the option of either sending their children back to school full-time, or of enrolling in remote classes online.
Kristin was leaning towards the latter option, as there had been a couple of cases at local schools when schools had reopened in the Summer of 2020. Cole pointed out that the number of cases linked to schools had been low overall, and they eventually decided to send their children back full- time. Although the number of outbreaks of schools remained low, Kristin continued to feel anxious, and assessed the risks as higher than they probably were.
Which concept is most relevant here to her difficulty focusing on the low base rates of transmission in schools? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic. 6.
Cole sometimes got frustrated at Kristin’s anxiety here, and told her that she wasn’t modifying her beliefs enough based on this more recent evidence. Which concept here was Kristin’s thinking most related to? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic.
7. Another common topic of conversation during the pandemic was about when it would be over. In the first few months, they were both hopeful that it would be under control some time in 2020.
Like many people, they underestimated how long it and would take to control, and how many different resources would be needed. Which concept most clearly relates to this underestimation? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic.
8. Cole thought that life would return to some normalcy earlier than Kristin, reflecting his more positive outlook in general about what the future holds. Kristin has maintained that her more cautious view is more realistic, but Cole has countered that Kristin’s view is counterproductive.
Which bias is most relevant here to their different dispositions here? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic. 9.
A final contentious issue in their household was that of vaccination. Kristin was very keen to get a vaccination as soon as a vaccine became available, whereas Cole was more skeptical. When the vaccine was rolled out for their age group in their local area, they both got their first shot.
Afterwards, Cole was saying that this would allow them to return to a more normal life, and start meeting up with more people. Kristin countered by saying that they would need to wait for their second shots, and probably beyond. They began2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 101 arguing, with Cole saying that he was tired of Kristin living in fear, and her saying that he was being too reckless.
In the end, they agreed to disagree on this point, but these tensions are likely to continue. Which concept best relates to Cole’s reaction to having his first shot here? Choose one from the following alternatives: overconfidence bias, optimistic bias, counterfactual thinking, confirmation bias, false consensus bias, reconstructive memory bias, planning fallacy, anchoring and adjustment, availability heuristic.
Key Takeaways • We use our schemas and attitudes to help us judge and respond to others. In many cases, this is appropriate, but our expectations can also lead to biases in our judgments of ourselves and others. • A good part of our social cognition is spontaneous or automatic, operating without much thought or effort.
On the other hand, when we have the time and the motivation to think about things carefully, we may engage in thoughtful, controlled cognition. • Which expectations we use to judge others is based on both the situational salience of the things we are judging and the cognitive accessibility of our own schemas and attitudes. • Variations in the accessibility of schemas lead to biases such as the availability heuristic, the representativeness heuristic, the false consensus bias, biases caused by counterfactual thinking, and those elated to overconfidence.
• The potential biases that are the result of everyday social cognition can have important consequences, both for us in our everyday lives but even for people who make important decisions affecting many other people. Although biases are common, they are not impossible to control, and psychologists and other scientists are working to help people make better decisions. • The operation of cognitive biases, including the potential for new information to distort information already in memory, can help explain the tendency for eyewitnesses to be overconfident and frequently inaccurate in their recollections of what occurred at crime scenes.
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Give an example of a time when you may have committed one of the cognitive heuristics and biases discussed in this chapter. What factors (e.g., availability; salience) caused the error, and what was the outcome of your use of the shortcut or heuristic?
What do you see as the general advantages and disadvantages of using this bias in your everyday life? Describe one possible strategy you could use to reduce the potentially harmful effects of this bias in your life.102 Chapter 2. Social Cognition 2.
Go to the website The Hot Hand in Sports, which analyzes the extent to which people accurately perceive “streakiness” in sports. Based on the information provided on this site, as well as that in this chapter, in what ways might our sports perceptions be influenced by our expectations and the use of cognitive heuristics and biases? 3.
Different cognitive heuristics and biases often operate together to influence our social cognition in particular situations. Describe a situation where you feel that two or more biases were affecting your judgment. How did they interact?
What combined effects on your social cognition did they have? Which of the heuristics and biases outlined in this chapter do you think might be particularly likely to happen together in social situations and why? References Aarts, H., & Dijksterhuis, A.
(1999). How often did I do it? Experienced ease of retrieval and frequency estimates of past behavior.
Acta Psychologica, 103(1–2), 77–89. Abbes, M. B.
(2012). Does overconfidence explain volatility during the global financial crisis? Transition Studies Review, 19(3), 291-312.
Adams, P. A., & Adams, J. K.
(1960). Confidence in the recognition and reproduction of words difficult to spell. American Journal of Psychology, 73, 544–552.
Ariely, D. (2008). Predictably irrational: The hidden forces that shape our decisions.
New York: Harper Perennial. Ariely, D., Loewenstein, D., & Prelec, D. (2003).
Coherent arbitrariness: Stable demand curves without stable preferences. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 73–106. Bargh, J.
A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and stereotype activation on action.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71(2), 230–244. Brewer, M. B.
(1988). A dual process model of impression formation. In T.
K. Srull & R. S.
Wyer (Eds.), Advances in social cognition (Vol. 1, pp. 1–36).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Brigham, J. C., Bennett, L.
B., Meissner, C. A., & Mitchell, T. L.
(Eds.). (2007). The influence of race on eyewitness memory.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. Brown, D., Scheflin, A. W., & Hammond, D.
C. (1998). Memory, trauma treatment, and the law.
New York, NY: Norton. Buehler, R., Griffin, D., & Peetz, J. (2010).
The planning fallacy: Cognitive, motivational, and social origins. In M. P.
Zanna, J. M. Olson (Eds.) , Advances in experimental social psychology, Vol 43 (pp.
1-62). San Diego, CA US: Academic Press. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(10)43001-4 Byrne, R.
M. J., & McEleney, A. (2000).
Counterfactual thinking about actions and failures to act. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 1318–1331. Ceci, S.
J., Huffman, M. L. C., Smith, E., & Loftus, E.
F. (1994). Repeatedly thinking about a non-2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 103 event: Source misattributions among preschoolers.
Consciousness and Cognition: An International Journal, 3(3–4), 388–407. Chambers, J. R.
(2008). Explaining false uniqueness: Why we are both better and worse than others. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(2), 878–894.
Chang, E. C., Asakawa, K., & Sanna, L. J.
(2001). Cultural variations in optimistic and pessimistic bias: Do Easterners really expect the worst and Westerners really expect the best when predicting future life events?. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,81(3), 476-491.
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.81.3.476 Charman, S. D., & Wells, G. L.
(2007). Eyewitness lineups: Is the appearance-changes instruction a good idea? Law and Human Behavior, 31(1), 3–22.
Chen, G., Kim, K. A., Nofsinger, J. R., & Rui, O.
M. (2007). Trading performance, disposition effect, overconfidence, representativeness bias, and experience of emerging market investors.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20(4), 425-451. doi:10.1002/bdm.561 Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000).
Evolutionary psychology and the emotions. In M. Lewis & J.
M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions, 2nd edition (pp. 91-115).
New York, NY: The Guilford Press. Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L.
F., & van Baaren, R. B. (2006).
On making the right choice: The deliberation-without-attention effect. Science, 311(5763), 1005–1007. Dodson, C.
S., Johnson, M. K., & Schooler, J. W.
(1997). The verbal overshadowing effect: Why descriptions impair face recognition. Memory & Cognition, 25(2), 129–139.
Doob, A. N., & Macdonald, G. E.
(1979). Television viewing and fear of victimization: Is the relationship causal? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(2), 170–179.
Dunning, D., & Perretta, S. (2002). Automaticity and eyewitness accuracy: A 10- to 12-second rule for distinguishing accurate from inaccurate positive identifications.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(5), 951–962. Dunning, D., Griffin, D. W., Milojkovic, J.
D., & Ross, L. (1990). The overconfidence effect in social prediction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(4), 568–581. Dunning, D., Johnson, K., Ehrlinger, J., & Kruger, J. (2003).
Why people fail to recognize their own incompetence. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12(3), 83–87. Egan, D., Merkle, C., & Weber, M.
(in press). Second-order beliefs and the individual investor. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization.
Ehrlinger J., Gilovich, T.D., & Ross, L. (2005). Peering into the bias blind spot: People’s assessments of bias in themselves and others.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1-13. Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J.
A. (2003). The constructive nature of automatic evaluation.
In J. Musch & K. C.
Klauer (Eds.), The psychology of evaluation: Affective processes in cognition and emotion (pp. 169–188). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Ferguson, M. J., Hassin, R., & Bargh, J. A.
(2008). Implicit motivation: Past, present, and future. In J.
Y. Shah & W. L.
Gardner (Eds.), Handbook of motivation science (pp. 150–166). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fisher, R. P. (2011).
Editor’s introduction: Special issue on psychology and law. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 4. doi:10.1177/0963721410397654104 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition Forgeard, M. C., & Seligman, M. P.
(2012). Seeing the glass half full: A review of the causes and consequences of optimism.Pratiques Psychologiques, 18(2), 107-120. doi:10.1016/ j.prps.2012.02.002 Gigerenzer, G.
(2004). Fast and frugal heuristics: The tools of founded rationality. In D.
J. Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision making (pp.
62-88). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. Gigerenzer, G.
(2006). Out of the frying pan and into the fire: Behavioral reactions to terrorist attacks. Risk Analysis, 26, 347-351.
Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002).
Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Haddock, G., Rothman, A.
J., Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Forming judgments of attitude certainty, intensity, and importance: The role of subjective experiences.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 771–782. Heine, S. J., Lehman, D.
R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1999).
Is there a universal need for positive self-regard? Psychological Review, 106(4), 766-794. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.106.4.766 Hilton, D.
J. (2001). The psychology of financial decision-making: Applications to trading, dealing, and investment analysis.
Journal of Behavioral Finance, 2, 37–53. doi: 10.1207/ S15327760JPFM0201_4 Hirt, E. R., Kardes, F.
R., & Markman, K. D. (2004).
Activating a mental simulation mind-set through generation of alternatives: Implications for debiasing in related and unrelated domains. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40(3), 374–383. Hsee, C.
K., Hastie, R., & Chen, J. (2008). Hedonomics: Bridging decision research with happiness research.
Perspectives On Psychological Science, 3(3), 224-243. doi:10.1111/ j.1745-6924.2008.00076.x Joireman, J., Barnes Truelove, H., & Duell, B. (2010).
Effect of outdoor temperature, heat primes and anchoring on belief in global warming. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(4), 358–367. Kahneman, D.
(2011). Thinking fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Strauss, Giroux.
Kassam, K. S., Koslov, K., & Mendes, W. B.
(2009). Decisions under distress: Stress profiles influence anchoring and adjustment. Psychological Science, 20(11), 1394–1399.
Krueger, J., & Clement, R. W. (1994).
The truly false consensus effect: An ineradicable and egocentric bias in social perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(4), 596–610. Kruger, J., & Dunning, D.
(1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 1121–1134.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Freund, T. (1983).
The freezing and unfreezing of lay inferences: Effects on impressional primacy, ethnic stereotyping, and numerical anchoring. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 448–468. Lehman, D.
R., Lempert, R. O., & Nisbett, R. E.
(1988). The effects of graduate training on reasoning: Formal discipline and thinking about everyday-life events. American Psychologist, 43(6), 431–442.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C.
K., & Welch, N. (2001). Risk as feelings.
Psychological Bulletin, 127(2), 267–286.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 105 Loftus, E. F., & Ketcham, K. (1994).
The myth of repressed memory: False memories and allegations of sexual abuse (1st ed.). New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C.
(1974). Reconstruction of automobile destruction: An example of the interaction between language and memory. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 13(5), 585–589.
Loftus, E. F., & Pickrell, J. E.
(1995). The formation of false memories. Psychiatric Annals, 25(12), 720–725.
Loftus, E. F., Loftus, G. R., & Messo, J.
(1987). Some facts about “weapon focus.” Law and Human Behavior, 11(1), 55–62. Mazzoni, G.
A. L., Loftus, E. F., & Kirsch, I.
(2001). Changing beliefs about implausible autobiographical events: A little plausibility goes a long way. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 7(1), 51–59.
McArthur, L. Z., & Post, D. L.
(1977). Figural emphasis and person perception. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(6), 520–535.
McNally, R. J., Bryant, R. A., & Ehlers, A.
(2003). Does early psychological intervention promote recovery from posttraumatic stress? Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(2), 45–79.
Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. F., & Gilovich, T.
(1995). When less is more: Counterfactual thinking and satisfaction among Olympic medalists. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(4), 603–610.
Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C.
(2001). Thirty years of investigating the own-race bias in memory for faces: A meta-analytic review. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7(1), 3–35.
Miller, D. T., Turnbull, W., & McFarland, C. (1988).
Particularistic and universalistic evaluation in the social comparison process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 908–917. Moore, M.
T., & Fresco, D. M. (2012).
Depressive realism: A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 32(6), 496-509. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2012.05.004 Oskamp, S.
(1965). Overconfidence in case-study judgments. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29(3), 261-265.
Pezdek, K., Blandon-Gitlin, I., & Moore, C. (2003). Children’s face recognition memory: More evidence for the cross-race effect.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(4), 760–763. Poole, D. A., & Lamb, M.
E. (1998). The development of interview protocols.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Pope, H. G., Jr., Poliakoff, M.
B., Parker, M. P., Boynes, M., & Hudson, J. I.
(2007). Is dissociative amnesia a culture-bound syndrome? Findings from a survey of historical literature.
Psychological Medicine: A Journal of Research in Psychiatry and the Allied Sciences, 37(2), 225–233. Pozzulo, J. D., & Lindsay, R.
C. L. (1998).
Identification accuracy of children versus adults: A meta- analysis. Law and Human Behavior, 22(5), 549–570. Reber, R., Winkielman, P., & Schwarz, N.
(1998). Effects of perceptual fluency on affective judgments. Psychological Science, 9(1), 45–48.
Roese, N. J. (1997).
Counterfactual thinking. Psychological Bulletin, 121(1), 133–148.106 Chapter 2. Social Cognition Ross, L., Greene, D., & House, P.
(1977). The false consensus effect: An egocentric bias in social perception and attribution processes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(3), 279–301.
Ross, M., & Sicoly, F. (1979). Egocentric biases in availability and attribution.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(3), 322–336. Schwarz, N., & Vaughn, L. A.
(Eds.). (2002). The availability heuristic revisited: Ease of recall and content of recall as distinct sources of information.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., & Simons, A. (1991).
Ease of retrieval as information: Another look at the availability heuristic. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 195–202. Sharot, T.
(2011). The optimism bias: A tour of the irrationally positive brain. New York: Pantheon Books.
Sloman, S. A. (Ed.).
(2002). Two systems of reasoning. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Slovic, P. (Ed.). (2000).
The perception of risk. London, England: Earthscan Publications. Stanovich, K.
E., & West, R. F. (Eds.).
(2002). Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate? New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Steblay, N. M. (1997).
Social influence in eyewitness recall: A meta-analytic review of lineup instruction effects. Law and Human Behavior, 21(3), 283–297. Steblay, N., Dysart, J., Fulero, S., & Lindsay, R.
C. L. (2001).
Eyewitness accuracy rates in sequential and simultaneous lineup presentations: A meta-analytic comparison. Law and Human Behavior, 25(5), 459–473. Taylor, S.
E., & Fiske, S. T. (1978).
Salience, attention and attribution: Top of the head phenomena. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 11, 249–288. Toglia, M.
P., Read, J. D., Ross, D. F., & Lindsay, R.
C. L. (Eds.).
(2007). The handbook of eyewitness psychology (Vols. 1 & 2).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973).
Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207–232. Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D.
(1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157), 1124–1131.
Wells, G. L., & Olson, E. A.
(2003). Eyewitness testimony. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 277–295.
Wells, G. L., Memon, A., & Penrod, S. D.
(2006). Eyewitness evidence: Improving its probative value. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(2), 45–75.
West, R. F., Meserve, R. J., & Stanovich, K.
E. (2012). Cognitive sophistication does not attenuate the bias blind spot.
Journal Of Personality and Social Psychology, 103(3), 506-519. doi:10.1037/ a0028857 Willis, J., & Todorov, A. (2006).
First impressions: Making up your mind after a 100-Ms exposure to a face. Psychological Science, 17(7), 592–598. Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J.
T. (2001). Mind at ease puts a smile on the face: Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilitation elicits positive affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(6), 989–1000.2.2 How We Use Our Expectations 107 Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., & Nowak, A. (Eds.). (2002).
Affect and processing dynamics: Perceptual fluency enhances evaluations. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company. Media Attributions • “Man with a moustache, Chambal, India” by Yann is licensed under a GNU Free Documentation License.
• “Jill Jackson” by Kris Kesiak used under CC BY-NC 2.0 licence. • “Amelia earhart” is in Public Domain. • “Ralph Lauren Photoshoot – Kelsey” by Brandon Warren is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence.
• “Wild hair” by peter klashorst is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “Tina Maze Andrea Fischbacher and Lindsey Vonn” by Duncan Rawlinson – Duncan.co is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence. • “Ladakh, Hemis Shukpachan” by Dietmar Temps is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.
• “Group Portrait | St Paul Hill Malacca | Mar 15, 2014” by John Ragai is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “College Students” by Adam S is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.2.3 Social Cognition and Affect Learning Objectives 1. Describe important ways in which our affective states can influence our social cognition, both directly and indirectly, for example, through the operation of the affect heuristic.
2. Outline mechanisms through which our social cognition can alter our affective states, for instance, through the mechanism of misattribution of arousal. 3.
Review the role that strategies, including cognitive reappraisal, can play in successful self- regulation. 4. Explore the relationship between positive cognition, affect, and behaviors.
5. Outline important findings in relation to our affective forecasting abilities. This chapter is about social cognition, and so it should not be surprising that we have been focusing, so far, on cognitive phenomena, including schemas and heuristics, that affect our social judgments.
In reality, though, these cognitive influences do not operate in isolation from our feelings, or affect. Indeed, researchers have long been interested in the complex ways in which our thoughts are shaped by our feelings, and vice versa (Oatley, Parrott, Smith, & Watts, 2011). Affect Influences Cognition There is abundant evidence that our social cognition is strongly influenced by our affective states.
For example, whatever current mood we are experiencing can influence our judgments of people we meet. Think back to a time when you were in a positive mood when you were introduced to someone new versus a time you were in a negative mood. The chances are that you made more positive evaluations than you did when you met a person when you were feeling bad (Clore, Schwarz, & Conway, 1993).
Don’t new places also often seem better when you visit them in a good mood? The influences of mood on our social cognition even seem to extend to our judgments about ideas, with positive mood linked to more positive appraisals than neutral mood (Garcia-Marques, Mackie, Claypool & Garcia-Marques, 2004). Positive moods may even help to reduce negative feelings toward others.
For example, Ito, Chiao, Devine, Lorig, and Cacioppo (2006) found that people who were smiling were also less prejudiced. Mood states are also powerful determinants of our current judgments about our well-being. Norbert Schwarz and Gerald Clore (1983) called participants on the telephone, pretending that they were researchers from a different city conducting a survey.
Furthermore, they varied the day on which they made the calls, such that some of the participants were interviewed on sunny days and some were 109110 Chapter 2. Social Cognition interviewed on rainy days. During the course of the interview, the participants were asked to report on their current mood states and also on their general well-being.
Schwarz and Clore found that the participants reported better moods and greater well-being on sunny days than they did on rainy days. Schwarz and Clore wondered whether people were using their current mood (“I feel good today”) to determine how they felt about their life overall. To test this idea, they simply asked half of their respondents about the local weather conditions at the beginning of the interview.
The idea was to subtly focus these participants on the fact that the weather might be influencing their mood states. They found that as soon as they did this, although mood states were still influenced by the weather, the weather no longer influenced perceptions of well-being (Figure 2.15, “Mood as Information”). When the participants were aware that their moods might have been influenced by the weather, they realized that the moods were not informative about their overall well-being, and so they no longer used this information.
Similar effects have been found for mood that is induced by music or other sources (Keltner, Locke, & Audrain, 1993; Savitsky, Medvec, Charlton, & Gilovich, 1998). Figure 2.15 Mood as Information. The current weather influences people’s judgments of their well-being, but only when they are not aware that it might be doing so.
After Schwarz and Clore (1983). Even moods that are created very subtly can have effects on our social judgments. Fritz Strack and his colleagues (Strack, Martin, & Stepper, 1988) had participants rate how funny cartoons were while holding a writing pen in their mouth such that it forced them either to use muscles that are associated with smiling or to use muscles that are associated with frowning (Figure 2.16, “Facial Expression and Mood”).
They found that participants rated the cartoons as funnier when the pen created muscle contractions that are normally used for smiling rather than frowning. And Stepper and Strack (1993) found that people interpreted events more positively when they were sitting in an upright position rather than a slumped position. Even finding a coin in a pay phone or being offered some milk and cookies is enough to put people in a good mood and to make them rate their surroundings more2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 111 positively (Clark & Isen, 1982; Isen & Levin, 1972; Isen, Shalker, Clark, & Karp, 1978).
Figure 2.16 Facial Expression and Mood. The position of our mouth muscles can influence our mood states and our social judgments (Strack, Martin, & Stepper, 1988). We have seen many ways in which our current mood can help to shape our social cognition.
There are many possible mechanisms that can help to explain this influence, but one concept seems particularly relevant here. The affect heuristic describes a tendency to rely on automatically occurring affective responses to stimuli to guide our judgments of them. For example, we judge a particular product to be the best option because we experience a very favorable affective response to its packaging, or we choose to hire a new staff member because we like her or him better than the other candidates.
Empirically, the affect heuristic has been shown to influence a wide range of social judgments and behaviors (Kahneman, 2011; Slovic, Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2002). Kahneman (2003) has gone so far as to say that “The idea of an affect heuristic…is probably the most important development in the study of…heuristics in the past few decades. There is compelling evidence for the proposition that every stimulus evokes an affective evaluation, which is not always conscious….”(p.
710) Given the power of the affect heuristic to influence our judgments, it is useful to explore why it is so strong. As with other heuristics, Kahneman and Frederick (2002) proposed that the affect heuristic works by a process called attribute substitution, which happens without conscious awareness. According to this theory, when somebody makes a judgment about a target attribute that is very complex to calculate, for example, the overall suitability of a candidate for a job, that person tends to substitute these calculations for an easier heuristic attribute, for example, the likeability of a candidate.
In effect, we deal with cognitively difficult social judgments by replacing them with easier ones, without being aware of this happening. To return to our choice of job applicant, rather than trying to reach a judgment based on the complex question of which candidate would be the best one to select,112 Chapter 2. Social Cognition given their past experiences, future potential, the demands of the position, the organizational culture, and so on, we choose to base it on the much simpler question of which candidate do we like the most.
In this way, people often do hire the candidates they like the best, and, not coincidentally, also those who tend to be more similar to themselves (Rivera, 2012). So far, we have seen some of the many ways that our affective states can directly influence our social judgments. There are other, more indirect means by which this can happen, too.
As well as affecting the content of our social judgments, our moods can also affect the types of cognitive strategies that we use to make them. Our current mood, either positive or negative, can, for instance, influence our tendency to use more automatic versus controlled thinking about our social worlds. For example, there is some evidence that being in a happy, as opposed to a neutral, mood can actually make people more likely to rely on cognitive heuristics than on more effortful strategies (Ruder & Bless, 2003).
There are also indications that experiencing certain negative affective states, for example anger, can cause individuals to make more stereotypical judgments of others, compared with individuals who are in a neutral mood (Bodenhausen, Sheppard, & Kramer, 1994). So, being in particular affective states may further increase the likelihood of us relying on heuristics, and these processes, as we have already seen, have big effects on our social judgments. Affect may also influence our social judgments indirectly by influencing the type of information that we draw on.
Our mood can, for example, affect both the type and intensity of our schemas that are active in particular situations. For instance, when in an angry mood, we may find that our schemas relating to that emotion are more active than those relating to other affective states, and these schemas will in turn influence our social judgments (Lomax & Lam, 2011). In addition to influencing our schemas, our mood can also cause us to retrieve particular types of memories that we then use to guide our social judgments.
Mood-dependent memory describes a tendency to better remember information when our current mood matches the mood we were in when we encoded that information. For example, if we originally learned the information while experiencing positive affect, we will tend to find it easier to retrieve and then use if we are currently also in a good mood. Similarly, mood congruence effectsoccur when we are more able to retrieve memories that match our current mood.
Have you ever noticed, for example, that when you are feeling sad, that sad memories seem to come more readily to mind than happy ones? So, our affective states can influence our social cognition in multiple ways, but what about situations where our cognition influences our mood? Here, too, we find some interesting relationships.
Cognition Influences Affect Just as they have helped to illuminate some of the routes through which our moods influence our cognition, so social cognitive researchers have also contributed to our knowledge of how our thoughts can change our moods. Indeed, some researchers have argued that affective experiences are only possible following cognitive appraisals. Although physiological arousal is necessary for emotion, many have argued that it is not sufficient (Lazarus, 1984).
Under this view, arousal becomes emotion only when it is accompanied by a label or by an explanation for the arousal (Schachter & Singer, 1962). If this is correct, then emotions have two factors—an arousal factor and a cognitive factor (James, 1890; Schachter & Singer, 1962). In some cases, it may be difficult for people who are experiencing a high level of arousal to accurately2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 113 determine which emotion they are experiencing.
That is, they may be certain that they are feeling arousal, but the meaning of the arousal (the cognitive factor) may be less clear. Some romantic relationships, for instance, are characterized by high levels of arousal, and the partners alternately experience extreme highs and lows in the relationship. One day they are madly in love with each other, and the next they are having a huge fight.
In situations that are accompanied by high arousal, people may be unsure what emotion they are experiencing. In the high-arousal relationship, for instance, the partners may be uncertain whether the emotion they are feeling is love, hate, or both at the same time. Misattribution of arousal occurs when people incorrectly label the source of the arousal that they are experiencing.
Research Focus Misattributing Arousal If you think a bit about your own experiences of different emotions, and if you consider the equation that suggests that emotions are represented by both arousal and cognition, you might start to wonder how much was determined by each. That is, do we know what emotion we are experiencing by monitoring our feelings (arousal) or by monitoring our thoughts (cognition)? Stanley Schachter and Jerome Singer (1962) addressed this question in a well-known social psychological experiment.
Schachter and Singer believed that the cognitive part of the emotion was critical—in fact, they believed that the arousal that we are experiencing could be interpreted as any emotion, provided we had the right label for it. Thus they hypothesized that if individuals are experiencing arousal for which they have no immediate explanation, they will “label” this state in terms of the cognitions that are most accessible in the environment. On the other hand, they argued that people who already have a clear label for their arousal would have no need to search for a relevant label and therefore should not experience an emotion.
In the research experiment, the male participants were told that they would be participating in a study on the effects of a new drug, called “suproxin,” on vision. On the basis of this cover story, the men were injected with a shot of epinephrine, a drug that produces physiological arousal. The idea was to give all the participants arousal; epinephrine normally creates feelings of tremors, flushing, and accelerated breathing in people.
Then, according to random assignment to conditions, the men were told that the drug would make them feel certain ways. The men in the epinephrine-informed condition were told the truth about the effects of the drug—they were told that other participants had experienced tremors and that their hands would start to shake, their hearts would start to pound, and their faces might get warm and flushed. The participants in the epinephrine-uninformed condition, however, were told something untrue—that their feet would feel numb, that they would have an itching sensation over parts of their body, and that they might get a slight headache.
The idea was to make some of the men think that the arousal they were experiencing was caused by the drug (the informed condition), whereas others would be unsure where the arousal came from (the uninformed condition). Then the men were left alone with a confederate who they thought had received the same injection. While they were waiting for the experiment (which was supposedly about vision) to begin, the confederate behaved in a wild and crazy (Schachter and Singer called it “euphoric”) manner.
He114 Chapter 2. Social Cognition wadded up spitballs, flew paper airplanes, and played with a hula hoop. He kept trying to get the participants to join in his games.
Then right before the vision experiment was to begin, the participants were asked to indicate their current emotional states on a number of scales. One of the emotions they were asked about was euphoria. If you are following the story here, you will realize what was expected—that the men who had a label for their arousal (the informed group) would not be experiencing much emotion—they had a label already available for their arousal.
The men in the misinformed group, on the other hand, were expected to be unsure about the source of the arousal—they needed to find an explanation for their arousal, and the confederate provided one. Indeed, as you can see in Figure 2.17, “Misattributing Emotion,” this is just what the researchers found. Then Schachter and Singer did another part of the study, using new participants.
Everything was exactly the same except for the behavior of the confederate. Rather than being euphoric, he acted angry. He complained about having to complete the questionnaire he had been asked to do, indicating that the questions were stupid and too personal.
He ended up tearing up the questionnaire that he was working on, yelling, “I don’t have to tell them that!” Then he grabbed his books and stormed out of the room. What do you think happened in this condition? The answer, of course, is, exactly the same thing—the misinformed participants experienced more anger than did the informed participants.
The idea is that because cognitions are such strong determinants of emotional states, the same state of physiological arousal could be labeled in many different ways, depending entirely on the label provided by the social situation. We will revisit the effects of misattribution of arousal when we consider sources of romantic attraction. Figure 2.17 Misattributing Emotion.
The results of an experiment by Schachter and Singer (1962) supported the two-factor theory of emotion. The participants who did not have a clear label for their arousal were more likely to take on the emotion of the confederate. So, our attribution of the sources of our arousal will often strongly influence the emotional states we experience in social situations.
How else might our cognition influence our affect? Another example is demonstrated in framing effects, which occur when people’s judgments about different options are affected by whether they are framed as resulting in gains or losses. In general, people feel more positive about options that are framed positively, as opposed to negatively.
For example, individuals2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 115 seeking to eat healthily tend to feel more positive about a product described as 95% fat free than one described as 5% fat, even though the information in the two messages is the same. In the same way, people tend to prefer treatment options that stress survival rates as opposed to death rates. Framing effects have been demonstrated in regards to numerous social issues, including judgments relating to charitable donations (Chang & Lee, 2010) and green environmental practices (Tu, Kao, & Tu, 2013).
In reference to our chapter case study, they have also been implicated in decisions about risk in financial contexts and in the explanation of market behaviors (Kirchler, Maciejovsky, & Weber, 2010). Social psychologists have also studied how we use our cognitive faculties to try to control our emotions in social situations, to prevent them from letting our behavior get out of control. The process of setting goals and using our cognitive and affective capacities to reach those goals is known as self-regulation, and a good part of self-regulation involves regulating our emotions.
To be the best people that we possibly can, we have to work hard at it. Succeeding at school, at work, and at our relationships with others takes a lot of effort. When we are successful at self-regulation, we are able to move toward or meet the goals that we set for ourselves.
When we fail at self-regulation, we are not able to meet those goals. People who are better able to regulate their behaviors and emotions are more successful in their personal and social encounters (Eisenberg & Fabes, 1992), and thus self-regulation is a skill we should seek to master. A significant part of our skill in self-regulation comes from the deployment of cognitive strategies to try to harness positive emotions and to overcome more challenging ones.
For example, to achieve our goals we often have to stay motivated and to be persistent in the face of setbacks. If, for example, an employee has already gone for a promotion at work and has been unsuccessful twice before, this could lead him or her to feel very negative about his or her competence and the possibility of trying for promotion again, should an opportunity arise. In these types of challenging situations, the strategy of cognitive reappraisal can be a very effective way of coping.
Cognitive reappraisal involves altering an emotional state by reinterpreting the meaning of the triggering situation or stimulus. For example, if another promotion position does comes up, the employee could reappraise it as an opportunity to be successful and focus on how the lessons learned in previous attempts could strengthen his or her candidacy this time around. In this case, the employee would likely feel more positive towards the opportunity and choose to go after it.
Using strategies like cognitive reappraisal to self-regulate negative emotional states and to exert greater self-control in challenging situations has some important positive outcomes. Consider, for instance, research by Walter Mischel and his colleagues (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). In their studies, they had four- and five-year-old children sit at a table in front of a yummy snack, such as a chocolate chip cookie or a marshmallow.
The children were told that they could eat the snack right away if they wanted to. However, they were also told that if they could wait for just a couple of minutes, they’d be able to have two snacks—both the one in front of them and another just like it. However, if they ate the one that was in front of them before the time was up, they would not get a second.
Mischel found that some children were able to self-regulate—they were able to use their cognitive abilities to override the impulse to seek immediate gratification in order to obtain a greater reward at a later time. Other children, of course, were not—they just ate the first snack right away. Furthermore, the inability to delay gratification seemed to occur in a spontaneous and emotional manner, without much thought.
The children who could not resist simply grabbed the cookie because it looked so116 Chapter 2. Social Cognition yummy, without being able to cognitively stop themselves (Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999; Strack & Deutsch, 2007). The ability to self-regulate in childhood has important consequences later in life.
When Mischel followed up on the children in his original study, he found that those who had been able to self-regulate as children grew up to have some highly positive characteristics—they got better SAT scores, were rated by their friends as more socially adept, and were found to cope with frustration and stress better than those children who could not resist the tempting first cookie at a young age. Effective self- regulation is therefore an important key to success in life (Ayduk et al., 2000; Eigsti et al., 2006; Mischel, Ayduk, & Mendoza-Denton, 2003). Self-regulation is difficult, though, particularly when we are tired, depressed, or anxious, and it is under these conditions that we more easily lose our self-control and fail to live up to our goals (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000).
If you are tired and worried about an upcoming test, you may find yourself getting angry and taking it out on your friend, even though your friend really hasn’t done anything to deserve it and you don’t really want to be angry. It is no secret that we are more likely to fail at our diets when we are under a lot of stress or at night when we are tired. In these challenging situations, and when our resources are particularly drained, the ability to use cognitive strategies to successfully self-regulate becomes more even more important, and difficult.
Muraven, Tice, and Baumeister (1998) conducted a study to demonstrate that emotion regulation—that is, either increasing or decreasing our emotional responses—takes work. They speculated that self- control was like a muscle—it just gets tired when it is used too much. In their experiment, they asked their participants to watch a short movie about environmental disasters involving radioactive waste and their negative effects on wildlife.
The scenes included sick and dying animals, which were very upsetting. According to random assignment to conditions, one group (the increase-emotional-response condition) was told to really get into the movie and to express emotions in response to it, a second group was to hold back and decrease emotional responses (the decrease-emotional-response condition), and a third (control) group received no instructions on emotion regulation. Both before and after the movie, the experimenter asked the participants to engage in a measure of physical strength by squeezing as hard as they could on a hand-grip exerciser, a device used for building up hand muscles.
The experimenter put a piece of paper in the grip and timed how long the participants could hold the grip together before the paper fell out. Table 2.2, “Self-Control Takes Effort,” shows the results of this study. It seems that emotion regulation does indeed take effort because the participants who had been asked to control their emotions showed significantly less ability to squeeze the hand grip after the movie than before.
Thus the effort to regulate emotional responses seems to have consumed resources, leaving the participants less capacity to make use of in performing the hand-grip task.2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 117 Table 2.2 Self-Control Takes Effort Condition Handgrip strength before movie Handgrip strength after movie Change Increase emotional response 78.73 54.63 –25.1 No emotional control 60.09 58.52 –1.57 Decrease emotional response 70.74 52.25 –18.49 Participants who had been required to either express or refrain from expressing their emotions had less strength to squeeze a hand grip after doing so. Data are from Muraven et al. (1998).
In other studies, people who had to resist the temptation to eat chocolates and cookies, who made important decisions, or who were forced to conform to others all performed more poorly on subsequent tasks that took energy in comparison to people who had not been emotionally taxed. After controlling their emotions, they gave up on subsequent tasks sooner and failed to resist new temptations (Vohs & Heatherton, 2000). Can we improve our emotion regulation?
It turns out that training in self-regulation—just like physical training—can help. Students who practiced doing difficult tasks, such as exercising, avoiding swearing, or maintaining good posture, were later found to perform better in laboratory tests of self-regulation (Baumeister, Gailliot, DeWall, & Oaten, 2006; Baumeister, Schmeichel, & Vohs, 2007; Oaten & Cheng, 2006), such as maintaining a diet or completing a puzzle. The Power of Positive Cognition You have probably heard about “the power of positive thinking”—the idea that thinking positively helps people meet their goals and keeps them healthy, happy, and able to effectively cope with the negative events that they experience.
It turns out that positive thinking really works. People who think positively about their future, who believe that they can control their outcomes, and who are willing to open up and share with others are happier, healthier people (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). The power of positive thinking comes in different forms, but they are all helpful.
Notwithstanding the potential risks of wildly optimistic beliefs about the future, outlined earlier in this chapter, some researchers have studied the effects of having an optimistic explanatory style, a way of explaining current outcomes affecting the self in a way that leads to an expectation of positive future outcomes, and have found that optimists are happier and have less stress (Carver & Scheier, 2009). Others have focused on self-efficacy, the belief in our ability to carry out actions that produce desired outcomes. People with high self-efficacy feel more confident to respond to environmental and other threats in an active, constructive way—by getting information, talking to friends, and attempting to face and reduce the difficulties they are experiencing.
These people, too, are better able to ward off their stresses in comparison with people with less self-efficacy (Thompson, 2009). Self-efficacy helps in part because it leads us to perceive that we can control the potential stressors that may affect us. Workers who have control over their work environment (e.g., by being able to move furniture and control distractions) experience less stress, as do patients in nursing homes who are able to choose their everyday activities (Rodin, 1986).
Glass, Reim, and Singer (1971) found in a study that participants who believed they could stop a loud noise experienced less stress than those who did not118 Chapter 2. Social Cognition think they could, even though the people who had the option never actually used it. The ability to control our outcomes may help explain why animals and people who have higher social status live longer (Sapolsky, 2005).
Importantly, it is possible to learn to think more positively, and doing so can be beneficial to our moods and behaviors. For example, Antoni et al. (2001) found that pessimistic cancer patients who were given training in optimism reported more optimistic outlooks after the training and were less fatigued after their treatments.
Cognition About Affect: The Case of Affective Forecasting Another way in which our cognition intersects with our emotions occurs when we engage in affective forecasting, which describes our attempts to predict how future events will make us feel. For example, we may decide to apply for a promotion at work with a larger salary partly based on forecasting that the increased income will make us happier. While it is true that we do need money to afford food and adequate shelter for ourselves and our families, after this minimum level of wealth is reached, more money does not generally buy more happiness (Easterlin, 2005).
For instance, citizens in many countries today have several times the buying power they had in previous decades, and yet overall reported happiness has not typically increased (Layard, 2005). Psychologists have found that our affective forecasting is often not very accurate (Wilson & Gilbert, 2005). For one, we tend to overestimate our emotional reactions to events.
Although we think that positive and negative events that we might experience will make a huge difference in our lives, and although these changes do make at least some difference in well-being, they tend to be less influential than we think they are going to be. Positive events tend to make us feel good, but their effects wear off pretty quickly, and the same is true for negative events. For instance, Brickman, Coates, and Janoff- Bulman (1978) interviewed people who had won more than $50,000 in a lottery and found that they were not happier than they had been in the past and were also not happier than a control group of similar people who had not won the lottery.
On the other hand, the researchers found that individuals who were paralyzed as a result of accidents were not as unhappy as might be expected. How can this possibly be? There are several reasons.
For one, people are resilient; they bring their coping skills into play when negative events occur, and this makes them feel better. Second, most people do not continually experience very positive or very negative affect over a long period of time but, rather, adapt to their current circumstances. Just as we enjoy the second chocolate bar we eat less than we enjoy the first, as we experience more and more positive outcomes in our daily lives, we habituate to them and our well-being returns to a more moderate level (Small, Zatorre, Dagher, Evans, & Jones-Gotman, 2001).
Another reason we may predict our happiness incorrectly is that our social comparisons change when our own status changes as a result of new events. People who are wealthy compare themselves with other wealthy people, people who are poor tend to compare themselves with other poor people, and people who are ill tend to compare themselves with other ill people. When our comparisons change, our happiness levels are correspondingly influenced.
And when people are asked to predict their future emotions, they may focus only on the positive or negative event they are asked about and forget about all the other things that won’t change. Wilson, Wheatley, Meyers, Gilbert, and Axsom (2000) found that when people were asked to focus on all the more regular things that they will still be doing in the future (e.g., working, going to church, socializing with family and friends), their predictions about how something really good or bad would influence them were less extreme. If pleasure is fleeting, at least misery shares some of the same quality.
We might think we can’t be2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 119 happy if something terrible were to happen to us, such as losing a partner, but after a period of adjustment, most people find that happiness levels return to prior levels (Bonanno et al., 2002). Health concerns tend to decrease subjective well-being, and those with a serious disability or illness show slightly lowered mood levels. But even when health is compromised, levels of misery are lower than most people expect (Lucas, 2007).
For instance, although individuals with disabilities have more concern about health, safety, and acceptance in the community, they still experience overall positive happiness levels (Marinić & Brkljačić, 2008). It has been estimated that taken together, our wealth, health, and life circumstances account for only 15% to 20% of well-being scores (Argyle, 1999). Clearly, the main ingredient in happiness lies beyond, or perhaps beneath, external factors.
For some further perspectives on our affective forecasting abilities, and their implications for the study of happiness, see Daniel Gilbert’s popular TED Talk. Having reviewed some of the literature on the interplay between social cognition and affect, it is clear that we must be mindful of how our thoughts and moods shape one another, and, in turn, affect our evaluations of our social worlds. Key Takeaways • Our current affective states profoundly shape our social cognition.
• Our cognitive processes, in turn, influence our affective states. • Our ability to forecast our future emotional states is often less accurate than we think. • The better we understand these links between our cognition and affect, the better we can harness both to reach our social goals.
Exercises and Critical Thinking • Describe a time when you feel that the affect heuristic played a big part in a social judgment or decision that you made. What impact did this heuristic have? Looking back, how sound was the judgment or decision that you made and why?
• Outline a situation where you experienced either mood-dependent memory or the mood- congruence effect. What effects did this then have on your affect and social cognition? • Describe a situation where you feel that you may have misattributed the source of an emotional state you experienced.
Who or what did you misattribute the arousal to and why? In hindsight, who or what do you think was the actual source of your arousal? With this knowledge, outline how the emotion you experienced at the time may have been different if you had made a correct source attribution.
• Outline a situation that you interpreted in an optimistic way and describe how you feel that this then affected your future outcomes.120 Chapter 2. Social Cognition • Describe an instance where you feel that your affective forecasting about how a future event would make you feel was particularly inaccurate. Try to identify the reasons why your predictions were so far off the mark.
References Antoni, M. H., Lehman, J. M., Klibourn, K.
M., Boyers, A. E., Culver, J. L., Alferi, S.
M., Kilbourn, K. (2001). Cognitive-behavioral stress management intervention decreases the prevalence of depression and enhances benefit finding among women under treatment for early-stage breast cancer.
Health Psychology, 20(1), 20–32. Argyle, M. (1999).
Causes and correlates of happiness. In D. Kahneman, E.
Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well being: The foundations of hedonic psychology. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Ayduk, O., Mendoza-Denton, R., Mischel, W., Downey, G., Peake, P. K., & Rodriguez, M. (2000).
Regulating the interpersonal self: Strategic self-regulation for coping with rejection sensitivity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(5), 776–792. Baumeister, R.
F., Gailliot, M., DeWall, C. N., & Oaten, M. (2006).
Self-regulation and personality: How interventions increase regulatory success, and how depletion moderates the effects of traits on behavior. Journal of Personality, 74,1773–1801. Baumeister, R.
F., Schmeichel, B., & Vohs, K. D. (2007).
Self-regulation and the executive function: The self as controlling agent. In A. W.
Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (Vol.
2). New York, NY: Guilford. Bodenhausen, G.
V., Sheppard, L., & Kramer, G. P. (1994).
Negative affect and social perception: The differential impact of anger and sadness. European Journal of Social Psychology, 24, 45-62. Bonanno, G.
A., Wortman, C. B., Lehman, D., Tweed, R., Sonnega, J., Carr, D., et al. (2002).
Resilience to loss, chronic grief, and their pre-bereavement predictors. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1150–1164. Brickman, P., Coates, D., & Janoff-Bulman, R.
(1978). Lottery winners and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(8), 917–927.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F.
(2009). Optimism. In M.
R. Leary & R. H.
Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of individual differences in social behavior (pp. 330–342). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Chang, C., & Lee, Y. (2010). Effects of message framing, vividness congruency and statistical framing on responses to charity advertising.
International Journal Of Advertising: The Quarterly Review Of Marketing Communications, 29(2), 195-220. doi:10.2501/S0265048710201129 Clark, M. S., & Isen, A.
M. (1982). Toward understanding the relationship between feeling states and social behavior.
In A. H. Hastorf & A.
M. Isen (Eds.), Cognitive social psychology (pp. 73–108).
New York. NY: Elsevier/North-Holland. Clore, G.
L., Schwarz, N., & Conway, M. (1993). Affective causes and consequences of social2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 121 information processing.
In R. S. Wyer & T.
K. Srull (eds.), Handbook of social cognition (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). If we are so rich, why aren’t we happy?
American Psychologist, 54(10), 821–827. Easterlin, R. (2005).
Feeding the illusion of growth and happiness: A reply to Hagerty and Veenhoven. Social Indicators Research, 74(3), 429–443. doi:10.1007/ s11205-004-6170-z Eigsti, I.-M., Zayas, V., Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., Ayduk, O., Dadlani, M.
B., et al. (2006). Predicting cognitive control from preschool to late adolescence and young adulthood.
Psychological Science, 17(6), 478–484. Eisenberg, N., & Fabes, R. A.
(1992). Emotion, regulation, and the development of social competence. In Emotion and social behavior (pp.
119–150). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Garcia-Marques, T., Mackie, D.
M., Claypool, H. M., & Garcia-Marques, L. (2004).
Positivity can cue familiarity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 585-593. Glass, D.
C., Reim, B., & Singer, J. E. (1971).
Behavioral consequences of adaptation to controllable and uncontrollable noise. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 7(2), 244–257. Gross, J.
J., & Levenson, R. W. (1997).
Hiding feelings: The acute effects of inhibiting negative and positive emotion. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(1), 95–103. Isen, A.
M., & Levin, P. F. (1972).
Effect of feeling good on helping: Cookies and kindness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 384–388. Isen, A.
M., Shalker, T. E., Clark, M., & Karp, L. (1978).
Affect, accessibility of material in memory and behavior: A cognitive loop? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1–12. Ito, T., Chiao, K., Devine, P.
G., Lorig, T., & Cacioppo, J. (2006). The influence of facial feedback on race bias.
Psychological Science, 17, 256–61. James, W. (1890).
The principles of psychology. New York, NY: Dover. Kahneman, D.
(2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist 58: 697–720.
doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.58.9.697 Kahneman D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow.
New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002).
Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. In T. Gilovich, D.
Griffin & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp. 49-81).
New York: Cambridge University Press. Keltner, D., Locke, K. D., & Audrain, P.
C. (1993). The influence of attributions on the relevance of negative feelings to personal satisfaction.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19(1), 21–29. Kirchler, E., Maciejovsky, B., & Weber, M. (2010).
Framing effects, selective information and market behavior: An experimental analysis. In B. Bruce (Ed.) , Handbook of behavioral finance (pp.
7-24). Northampton, MA US: Edward Elgar Publishing. Layard, R.
(2005). Happiness: Lessons from a new science. London: Allen Lane.
Lazarus, R. S. (1984).
On the primacy of cognition. American Psychologist, 39(2), 124-129. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.39.2.124122 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition Lomax, C. L., & Lam, D. (2011).
Investigation into activation of dysfunctional schemas in euthymic bipolar disorder following positive mood induction. British Journal Of Clinical Psychology, 50(2), 115-126. doi:10.1348/014466510X497841 Lucas, R.
(2007). Long-term disability is associated with lasting changes in subjective well-being: Evidence from two nationally representative longitudinal studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(4), 717–730.
Marinić, M., & Brkljačić, T. (2008). Love over gold: The correlation of happiness level with some life satisfaction factors between persons with and without physical disability.
Journal of Developmental & Physical Disabilities, 20(6), 527–540. doi:10.1007/s10882-008-9115-7 Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W. (1999).
A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of gratification: Dynamics of willpower. Psychological Review, 106(1), 3–19. Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., & Mendoza-Denton, R.
(Eds.). (2003). Sustaining delay of gratification over time: A hot-cool systems perspective.
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation. Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L.
(1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244, 933–938.
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000).
Self-regulation and depletion of limited resources: Does self-control resemble a muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126, 247–259. Muraven, M., Tice, D.
M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998).
Self-control as a limited resource: Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(3), 774–789. Oaten, M., & Cheng, K.
(2006). Longitudinal gains in self-regulation from regular physical exercise. British Journal of Health Psychology, 11, 717–733.
Oatley, K., Parrott, W. G., Smith, C., & Watts, F. (2011).
Cognition and emotion over twenty-five years. Cognition and Emotion, 25(8), 1341-1348. Rivera, L.
A. (2012). Diversity within reach: Recruitment versus hiring in elite firms.
Annals Of The American Academy Of Political And Social Science, 639(1), 71-90. doi:10.1177/ 0002716211421112 Rodin, J. (1986).
Aging and health: Effects of the sense of control. Science, 233(4770), 1271–1276. Ruder, M., & Bless, H.
(2003). Mood and the reliance on the ease of retrieval heuristic. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 20-32.
Russell, J. A. (1980) A circumplex model of affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1161–1178. Sapolsky, R. M.
(2005). The influence of social hierarchy on primate health. Science, 308(5722), 648–652.
Savitsky, K., Medvec, V. H., Charlton, A. E., & Gilovich, T.
(1998). “What, me worry?” Arousal, misattribution and the effect of temporal distance on confidence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24(5), 529–536.
Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M.
(2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. American Psychologist, 55(1), 5–14.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of emotional state.
Psychological Review, 69(5), 379–399.2.3 Social Cognition and Affect 123 Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. (1983).
Mood, misattribution, and judgments of well-being: Informative and directive functions of affective states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 513–523. Slovic P, Finucane M, Peters E, MacGregor DG (2002) The affect heuristic.
In: Gilovich T, Griffin DW, Kahneman D, editors. Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
pp. 397–420. Small, D.
M., Zatorre, R. J., Dagher, A., Evans, A. C., & Jones-Gotman, M.
(2001). Changes in brain activity related to eating chocolate. Brain, 124(9), 1720.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2007). The role of impulse in social behavior.
In A. W. Kruglanski & E.
T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (Vol. 2).
New York, NY: Guilford. Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Stepper, S.
(1988). Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 768–777.
Stepper, S., & Strack, F. (1993). Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and nonemotional feelings.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(2), 211–220. Thompson, S. C.
(2009). The role of personal control in adaptive functioning. In S.
J. Lopez & C. R.
Snyder (Eds.), Oxford handbook of positive psychology (2nd ed., pp. 271–278). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tu, J., Kao, T., & Tu, Y. (2013). Influences of framing effect and green message on advertising effect.
Social Behavior And Personality, 41(7), 1083-1098. Vohs, K. D., & Heatherton, T.
F. (2000). Self-regulatory failure: A resource depletion approach.
Psychological Science, 11, 249–254. Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D.
T. (2005). Affective forecasting: Knowing what to want.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14(3), 131–134. Wilson, T. D., Wheatley, T., Meyers, J.
M., Gilbert, D. T., & Axsom, D. (2000).
Focalism: A source of durability bias in affective forecasting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(5), 821–836.2.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Social Cognition Consider your schemas and attitudes toward some of the many people you have met in your life—perhaps those you knew in school, the people in your family, or those in your wider social groups or other organizations. And also think about people you have only heard about rather than have met—maybe those from other countries or cultures.
Did operant learning influence your opinions about them? Did you model your behavior after them? Or perhaps you had a single negative encounter with one person and disliked that person or his or her social group for a long time after.
Perhaps you can remember some times when you may have misinterpreted events or judged people incorrectly because your opinions were influenced by the operation of your existing expectations. Did you ever falsely assume that someone had a given characteristic and assimilate information into your existing expectations more than you might have? For instance, did you ever find yourself thinking that the referees in a sports game were favoring the other team rather than your own, or that the media was treating the political candidate that you oppose better than the one you prefer?
Could this have occurred because your attitudes or beliefs influenced your interpretation of the information? And perhaps you can remember times when you were influenced by salience, accessibility, or other information-processing biases. Did you ever feel bad when you got a 94 on your test when a 95 would have given you an A, or when you changed an answer on an exam rather than sticking with it?
In these cases, you might have fallen victim to counterfactual thinking. Perhaps you erroneously judged someone on the basis of your beliefs about what they “should have been like” rather than on the basis of more accurate statistical information—the misuse of the representativeness heuristic. Maybe you can now more fully reflect on all the ways in which your social cognition and affective states influence each other, and just how intertwined they are in understanding your social worlds.
Finally, think back once more on the story with which we opened this chapter. Can you see how important social cognitive biases can be in how we understand the world we live in, and how useful it is to understand the ways in which our thinking operates to produce accurate, and yet sometimes inaccurate, judgments? In many ways, our lives are influenced by our social cognition.
We hope that this chapter has provided you with some new and useful ideas about how you and others form impressions and has reminded you how others are forming (potentially erroneous) impressions of you. Most important, perhaps you have learned to be more modest about your judgments. Please remember to consider the possibility that your judgments and decisions, no matter how right and accurate they feel to you, may simply be wrong.
H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 2 TRUE OF FALSE QUIZTry this quick true-false quiz to see how well you have remembered some key concepts from this chapter. You can check your answers as you go, or wait for overall feedback at the end. Good luck!
125126 Chapter 2. Social Cognition 1. Social cognition is a topic that explores how we process and utilize information about our social worlds.
a. True b. False 2.
Our schemas about our social worlds make it easier for us to notice information that confirms rather than disconfirms them. a. True b.
False 3. As heuristics are cognitive shortcuts, more often than not they cause us to make mistakes in our social cognition. a.
True b. False 4. When Hector underestimates the time and effort that a school project will take to complete, this is an example of the planning fallacy.
a. True b. False 5.
The mood congruence effect occurs when we remember information that is inconsistent with our current moods, but disregard that information quickly. a. True b.
False2.5 Chapter Summary This chapter has focused primarily on one central topic in social psychology: namely, the ways that we learn about and judge other people—our social cognition. The ability to make accurate judgments about our social situation is critical. For example, if we cannot understand others and predict how they will respond to us, our social interactions will be difficult indeed.
We have seen that social cognition is efficient, frequently operating quickly and even out of our awareness, and generally accurate. However, although we are often quite accurate at evaluating other people and in creating effective social interactions, we are not perfect. The errors we make frequently occur because of our reliance on our mental knowledge (our schemas and attitudes) as well our tendency to take shortcuts through the use of cognitive heuristics.
We use schemas and heuristics as energy savers, because we are often overwhelmed by the amount of information we need to process. Social knowledge is gained as the result of learning—the relatively permanent change in thoughts, feelings, or behavior that occurs as a result of experience. Some learning is based on the principles of operant learning—experiences that are followed by positive emotions (rewards) are more likely to be repeated, whereas experiences that are followed by negative emotions (punishments) are less likely to be repeated.
Associational learning occurs when an object or event comes to be associated with a response, such as a behavior or a positive or negative emotion. We also learn through observational learning by modeling the behavior of others. Accommodation occurs when our existing schemas or attitudes change on the basis of new information.
Assimilation, on the other hand, occurs when our existing knowledge influences new information in a way that makes the conflicting information fit with our existing knowledge. Assimilation is often more powerful than is accommodation. Much of our social cognition is automatic, meaning that it occurs quickly and without taking much effort.
In other cases, when we have the time and motivation, we think about things more deliberately and carefully. In this case, we are engaging in more thoughtful, controlled cognition. We pay particular attention to stimuli that are salient—things that are unique, negative, colorful, bright, and moving.
In many cases, we base our judgments on information that seems to represent, or match, what we expect will happen. When we do so, we are using the representativeness heuristic. Cognitive accessibility refers to the extent to which knowledge is activated in memory and thus likely to be used to guide our reactions to others.
The tendency to overuse accessible social constructs can lead to errors in judgment, such as the availability heuristic and the false consensus bias. Counterfactual thinking about what might have happened and the tendency to anchor on an initial construct and not adjust sufficiently from it are also influenced by cognitive accessibility. We also have a tendency to be overconfident in our judgments of ourselves, others, and the future.
We should also be mindful that we tend to have blind spots about our own biases and how much they affect our social cognition. Perhaps the best hope, then, for us going forward is that we become better at recognizing and challenging biases in each other’s thinking. 127128 Chapter 2.
Social Cognition Ultimately, perhaps we can use our understanding of social cognition to understand more fully how we think accurately—but also sometimes inaccurately—about ourselves and others. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 2 MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUIZ To round out your review of social cognition, try this multiple-choice quiz. You can check your answers as you go, or wait until after the last question for feedback.
Good luck! 1. In the last week of the semester, Aman is convinced that he will be able to do all four major assignments for his classes.
He is shocked when he barely finishes two. What has he fallen victim of here? a.
the pessimistic bias b. the availability heuristic c. the planning fallacy d.
the representativeness heuristic 2. Events that are easier to recall specific examples of are assumed to be more frequently occurring and/or important. This is known as: a.
the base rate heuristic b. the planning fallacy c. the availability heuristic d.
automatic priming 3. Ken has been experiencing more frequent low moods linked to social isolation during the COVID-19 pandemic. He has found that sad memories often come to mind when he is in these low moods.
This is an example of: a. the affect heuristic b. the mood congruence effect c.
affective state determined retrieval d. mood dependent memory 4. Which heuristic would individuals likely use if they were asked the following question: “Which sequence of coin flips is more likely: H H H T T T or H T T H T H ?” a.
representativeness heuristic b. fluency heuristic c. affect heuristic d.
availability heuristic 5. The tendency to recall events in ways that fit our current schemas is known as: a. the mood congruence effect b.
the self-fulfilling prophecy2.5 Chapter Summary 129 c. mood dependent memory d. reconstructive memory biasChapter 3.
The Self Chapter Learning Objectives 1. The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept • Define and describe the self-concept, its influence on information processing, and its diversity across social groups. • Describe the concepts of self-complexity and self-concept clarity, and explain how they influence social cognition and behavior.
• Differentiate the various types of self-awareness and self-consciousness. • Describe self-awareness, self-discrepancy, and self-affirmation theories, and their interrelationships. • Explore how we sometimes overestimate the accuracy with which other people view us.
2. The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem • Define self-esteem and explain how it is measured by social psychologists. • Explore findings indicating diversity in self-esteem in relation to culture, gender, and age.
• Provide examples of ways that people attempt to increase and maintain their self-esteem. • Outline the benefits of having high self-esteem. • Review the limits of self-esteem, with a focus on the negative aspects of narcissism.
3. The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation • Describe the concept of the looking-glass self and how it affects our self-concept. • Explore the impact of the labeling bias, self-labeling, and internalized prejudice on people’s self- concepts, particularly in those from marginalized social groups.
• Define social comparison, and summarize how people use it to define their self-concepts and self- esteem. • Give examples of the use of upward and downward social comparison and their influences on social cognition and affect. • Explain the concept of social identity and why it is important to human behavior.
• Describe how self-evaluation maintenance theory helps to explain how we react when other people’s behaviors threaten our sense of self. • Describe the concept of self-presentation and the various strategies we use to portray ourselves to others. 131132 Dr.
Hammond Tarry • Outline the concept of reputation management and how it relates to self-presentation. • Discuss the individual-difference variable of self-monitoring and how it relates to the ability and desire to self-present. Social Media – Living Our Social Lives Online Recent statistics suggest that there are around 2.5 billion global Internet users as of 2014 – roughly 35 percent of the world’s population.
Some sources suggest the true figure to be closer to 3 billion people, and this number will likely continue to grow, particularly with the increasing availability of mobile technology. Figure 3.1. Girl on Cellphone.
As well as having increased access to the Internet, people across all regions of the globe are spending greater amounts of their time online. Many recent studies in a large number of countries indicate that people are spending several hours every day online, on their PCs, laptops, and mobiles. Of that time online, often more than 20 percent is spent on social networking sites.
Facebook, QZone, Google+, LinkedIn, Twitter, Tumblr, and Tencent Weibo all had more than 200 million registered users by 2014.Principles of Social Psychology 133 Facebook alone now has more than 1 billion users. These social networking users are also drawn from increasingly diverse demographic groups. Social psychologists have become very interested in why and how so many of us are conducting increasing amounts of our social interactions online, and on social networking sites in particular.
Like any social context in the offline world, sites like Facebook and Twitter provide an environment where a huge range of human social cognition, affect, and behavior can be displayed, with everything from posting selfies and status updates about wild nights out to communicating our views about social issues. One area of social psychology that seems particularly relevant to these online activities is the study of the self—our thoughts and feelings about who we are and the social influences on them. In many ways, the online social behaviors outlined above both affect and are a result of people’s perceptions of and feelings about themselves, and their desire to project those selves out into the social worlds that they belong to.
Often, these dynamics in our online lives mirror those that social psychologists have long been aware of as operating in our offline existences. We will thus explore the various aspects of the self in relation to both our offline and online social lives throughout this chapter. Source: Social, Digital, and Mobile Worldwide in 2014.
At the foundation of all human behavior is the self—our sense of personal identity and of who we are as individuals. Because an understanding of the self is so important, it has been studied for many years by psychologists (James, 1890; Mead, 1934) and is still one of the most important and most researched topics in social psychology (Dweck & Grant, 2008; Taylor & Sherman, 2008). Social psychologists conceptualize the self using the basic principles of social psychology—that is, the relationship between individual persons and the people around them (the person-situation interaction) and the ABCs of social psychology—the affective, behavioral, and cognitive components of the self.
In this chapter, we will first consider the cognitive aspects of the self, including the self-concept (the thoughts that we hold about ourselves) and self-awareness (the extent to which we are currently fixing our attention on our own self-concept). Then we will move on to the role of affect, focusing on concepts including self-esteem (the positive or negative feelings that we have about ourselves) and the many ways that we try to gain positive self-esteem. Finally, we will consider the social aspects of the self, including how we present ourselves to others in order to portray a positive self-image, as well as the many ways that our thoughts and feelings about ourselves are determined by our relationships with others.
References Dweck, C. S., & Grant, H. (2008).
Self-theories, goals, and meaning. In J. Y.
Shah, W. L. Gardner, J.
Y. E. Shah, & W.
L. E. Gardner (Eds.), Handbook of motivation science (pp.
405–416). New York, NY: Guilford Press.134 Dr. Hammond Tarry James, W.
(1890). The principles of psychology. New York, NY: Dover.
Mead, G. H. (1934).
Mind, self, and society. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. Mead, G.
H. (1934). Mind, Self, and Society from the Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist.
University of Chicago Press: Chicago. Taylor, S. E., & Sherman, D.
K. (2008). Self-enhancement and self-affirmation: The consequences of positive self-thoughts for motivation and health.
In J. Y. Shah, W.
L. Gardner, J. Y.
E. Shah, & W. L.
E. Gardner (Eds.), Handbook of motivation science (pp. 57–70).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Media Attributions • “Tween Cell Phone Texting” by Carissa Rogers is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept Learning Objectives 1. Define and describe the self-concept, its influence on information processing, and its diversity across social groups.
2. Describe the concepts of self-complexity and self-concept clarity, and explain how they influence social cognition and behavior. 3.
Differentiate the various types of self-awareness and self-consciousness. 4. Describe self-awareness, self-discrepancy, and self-affirmation theories, and their interrelationships.
5. Explore how we sometimes overestimate the accuracy with which other people view us. Some nonhuman animals, including chimpanzees, orangutans, and perhaps dolphins, have at least a primitive sense of self (Boysen & Himes, 1999).
We know this because of some interesting experiments that have been done with animals. In one study (Gallup, 1970), researchers painted a red dot on the forehead of anesthetized chimpanzees and then placed the animals in a cage with a mirror. When the chimps woke up and looked in the mirror, they touched the dot on their faces, not the dot on the faces in the mirror.
This action suggests that the chimps understood that they were looking at themselves and not at other animals, and thus we can assume that they are able to realize that they exist as individuals. Most other animals, including dogs, cats, and monkeys, never realize that it is themselves they see in a mirror. 135136 Chapter 3.
The Self Figure 3.2 A simple test of self-awareness is the ability to recognize oneself in a mirror. Humans and chimpanzees can pass the test; dogs never do. Infants who have similar red dots painted on their foreheads recognize themselves in a mirror in the same way that chimps do, and they do this by about 18 months of age (Asendorpf, Warkentin, & Baudonnière, 1996; Povinelli, Landau, & Perilloux, 1996).
The child’s knowledge about the self continues to develop as the child grows. By two years of age, the infant becomes aware of his or her gender as a boy or a girl. At age four, the child’s self-descriptions are likely to be based on physical features, such as hair color, and by about age six, the child is able to understand basic emotions and the concepts of traits, being able to make statements such as “I am a nice person” (Harter, 1998).
By the time children are in grade school, they have learned that they are unique individuals, and they can think about and analyze their own behavior. They also begin to show awareness of the social situation—they understand that other people are looking at and judging them the same way that they are looking at and judging others (Doherty, 2009). Development and Characteristics of the Self-Concept Part of what is developing in children as they grow is the fundamental cognitive part of the self, known as the self-concept.
The self-concept is a knowledge representation that contains knowledge about us, including our beliefs about our personality traits, physical characteristics, abilities, values, goals, and roles, as well as the knowledge that we exist as individuals. Throughout childhood and adolescence, the self-concept becomes more abstract and complex and is organized into a variety of different cognitive aspects of the self, known as self-schemas. Children have self-schemas about their progress in school,3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 137 their appearance, their skills at sports and other activities, and many other aspects.
In turn, these self- schemas direct and inform their processing of self-relevant information (Harter, 1999), much as we saw schemas in general affecting our social cognition. These self-schemas can be studied using the methods that we would use to study any other schema. One approach is to use neuroimaging to directly study the self in the brain.
As you can see in Figure 3.3, neuroimaging studies have shown that information about the self is stored in the prefrontal cortex, the same place that other information about people is stored (Barrios et al., 2008). Figure 3.3 This figure shows the areas of the human brain that are known to be important in processing information about the self. They include primarily areas of the prefrontal cortex (areas 1, 2, 4, and 5).
Data are from Lieberman (2010) Another approach to studying the self is to investigate how we attend to and remember things that relate to the self. Indeed, because the self-concept is the most important of all our schemas, it has an138 Chapter 3. The Self extraordinary degree of influence on our thoughts, feelings, and behavior.
Have you ever been at a party where there was a lot of noise and bustle, and yet you were surprised to discover that you could easily hear your own name being mentioned in the background? Because our own name is such an important part of our self-concept, and because we value it highly, it is highly accessible. We are very alert for, and react quickly to, the mention of our own name.
Other research has found that information related to the self-schema is better remembered than information that is unrelated to it, and that information related to the self can also be processed very quickly (Lieberman, Jarcho, & Satpute, 2004). In one classic study that demonstrated the importance of the self-schema, Rogers, Kuiper, and Kirker (1977) conducted an experiment to assess how college students recalled information that they had learned under different processing conditions. All the participants were presented with the same list of 40 adjectives to process, but through the use of random assignment, the participants were given one of four different sets of instructions about how to process the adjectives.
Participants assigned to the structural task condition were asked to judge whether the word was printed in uppercase or lowercase letters. Participants in the phonemic task condition were asked whether the word rhymed with another given word. In the semantic task condition, the participants were asked if the word was a synonym of another word.
And in the self-reference task condition, participants indicated whether the given adjective was or was not true of themselves. After completing the specified task, each participant was asked to recall as many adjectives as he or she could remember. Rogers and his colleagues hypothesized that different types of processing would have different effects on memory.
As you can see in Figure 3.4, “The Self-Reference Effect,” the students in the self-reference task condition recalled significantly more adjectives than did students in any other condition. Figure 3.4 The Self-Reference Effect The chart shows the proportion of adjectives that students were able to recall under each of four learning conditions. The same words were recalled significantly better when they were processed in relation to the self than when they were processed in other ways.
Data from Rogers et al. (1977). The finding that information that is processed in relationship to the self is particularly well remembered, known as the self-reference effect, is powerful evidence that the self-concept helps us organize and remember information.
The next time you are studying, you might try relating the3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 139 material to your own experiences—the self-reference effect suggests that doing so will help you better remember the information. The specific content of our self-concept powerfully affects the way that we process information relating to ourselves. But how can we measure that specific content?
One way is by using self-report tests. One of these is a deceptively simple fill-in-the-blank measure that has been widely used by many scientists to get a picture of the self-concept (Rees & Nicholson, 1994). All of the 20 items in the measure are exactly the same, but the person is asked to fill in a different response for each statement.
This self- report measure, known as the Twenty Statements Test (TST), can reveal a lot about a person because it is designed to measure the most accessible—and thus the most important—parts of a person’s self- concept. Try it for yourself, at least five times: • I am (please fill in the blank) • I am (please fill in the blank) • I am (please fill in the blank) • I am (please fill in the blank) • I am (please fill in the blank) Although each person has a unique self-concept, we can identify some characteristics that are common across the responses given by different people on the measure. Physical characteristics are an important component of the self-concept, and they are mentioned by many people when they describe themselves.
If you’ve been concerned lately that you’ve been gaining weight, you might write, “I am overweight.” If you think you’re particularly good looking (“I am attractive”), or if you think you’re too short (“I am too short”), those things might have been reflected in your responses. Our physical characteristics are important to our self-concept because we realize that other people use them to judge us. People often list the physical characteristics that make them different from others in either positive or negative ways (“I am blond,” “I am short”), in part because they understand that these characteristics are salient and thus likely to be used by others when judging them (McGuire, McGuire, Child, & Fujioka, 1978).
A second aspect of the self-concept relating to personal characteristics is made up of personality traits—the specific and stable personality characteristics that describe an individual (“I am friendly,” “I am shy,” “I am persistent”). These individual differences are important determinants of behavior, and this aspect of the self-concept varies among people. The remainder of the self-concept reflects its more external, social components; for example, memberships in the social groups that we belong to and care about.
Common responses for this component may include “I am an artist,” “I am Jewish,” and “I am a mother, sister, daughter.” As we will see later in this chapter, group memberships form an important part of the self-concept because they provide us with our social identity—the sense of our self that involves our memberships in social groups. Although we all define ourselves in relation to these three broad categories of characteristics—physical, personality, and social – some interesting cultural differences in the relative importance of these categories have been shown in people’s responses to the TST. For example, Ip and Bond (1995) found that the responses from Asian participants included significantly more references to140 Chapter 3.
The Self themselves as occupants of social roles (e.g., “I am Joyce’s friend”) or social groups (e.g., “I am a member of the Cheng family”) than those of American participants. Similarly, Markus and Kitayama (1991) reported that Asian participants were more than twice as likely to include references to other people in their self-concept than did their Western counterparts. This greater emphasis on either external and social aspects of the self-concept reflects the relative importance that collectivistic and individualistic cultures place on an interdependence versus independence (Nisbett, 2003).
Interestingly, bicultural individuals who report acculturation to both collectivist and individualist cultures show shifts in their self-concept depending on which culture they are primed to think about when completing the TST. For example, Ross, Xun, & Wilson (2002) found that students born in China but living in Canada reported more interdependent aspects of themselves on the TST when asked to write their responses in Chinese, as opposed to English. These culturally different responses to the TST are also related to a broader distinction in self-concept, with people from individualistic cultures often describing themselves using internal characteristics that emphasize their uniqueness, compared with those from collectivistic backgrounds who tend to stress shared social group memberships and roles.
In turn, this distinction can lead to important differences in social behavior. One simple yet powerful demonstration of cultural differences in self-concept affecting social behavior is shown in a study that was conducted by Kim and Markus (1999). In this study, participants were contacted in the waiting area of the San Francisco airport and asked to fill out a short questionnaire for the researcher.
The participants were selected according to their cultural background: about one-half of them indicated they were European Americans whose parents were born in the United States, and the other half indicated they were Asian Americans whose parents were born in China and who spoke Chinese at home. After completing the questionnaires (which were not used in the data analysis except to determine the cultural backgrounds), participants were asked if they would like to take a pen with them as a token of appreciation. The experimenter extended his or her hand, which contained five pens.
The pens offered to the participants were either three or four of one color and one or two of another color (the ink in the pens was always black). As shown in Figure 3.5, “Cultural Differences in Desire for Uniqueness,” and consistent with the hypothesized preference for uniqueness in Western, but not Eastern, cultures, the European Americans preferred to take a pen with the more unusual color, whereas the Asian American participants preferred one with the more common color. Figure 3.5 Cultural Differences in Desire for Uniqueness In this study, participants from European American and East Asian cultures were asked to choose a pen3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 141 as a token of appreciation for completing a questionnaire.
There were either four pens of one color and one of another color, or three pens of one color and two of another. European Americans were significantly more likely to choose the more uncommon pen color in both cases. Data are from Kim and Markus (1999, Experiment 3).
Cultural differences in self-concept have even been found in people’s self-descriptions on social networking sites. DeAndrea, Shaw, and Levine (2010) examined individuals’ free-text self-descriptions in the About Me section in their Facebook profiles. Consistent with the researchers’ hypotheses, and with previous research using the TST, African American participants had the most the most independently (internally) described self-concepts, and Asian Americans had the most interdependent (external) self-descriptions, with European Americans in the middle.
As well as indications of cultural diversity in the content of the self-concept, there is also evidence of parallel gender diversity between males and females from various cultures, with females, on average, giving more external and social responses to the TST than males (Kashima et al., 1995). Interestingly, these gender differences have been found to be more apparent in individualistic nations than in collectivistic nations (Watkins et al., 1998). Self-Complexity and Self-Concept Clarity As we have seen, the self-concept is a rich and complex social representation of who we are, encompassing both our internal characteristics and our social roles.
In addition to our thoughts about who we are right now, the self-concept also includes thoughts about our past self—our experiences, accomplishments, and failures—and about our future self—our hopes, plans, goals, and possibilities (Oyserman, Bybee, Terry, & Hart-Johnson, 2004). The multidimensional nature of our self-concept means that we need to consider not just each component in isolation, but also their interactions with each other and their overall structure. Two particularly important structural aspects of our self-concept are complexity and clarity.
Although every human being has a complex self-concept, there are nevertheless individual differences in self-complexity, the extent to which individuals have many different and relatively independent ways of thinking about themselves (Linville, 1987; Roccas & Brewer, 2002). Some selves are more complex than others, and these individual differences can be important in determining psychological outcomes. Having a complex self means that we have a lot of different ways of thinking about ourselves.
For example, imagine a woman whose self-concept contains the social identities of student, girlfriend, daughter, psychology student, and tennis player and who has encountered a wide variety of life experiences. Social psychologists would say that she has high self-complexity. On the other hand, a man who perceives himself primarily as either a student or as a member of the soccer team and who has had a relatively narrow range of life experiences would be said to have low self-complexity.
For those with high self-complexity, the various aspects of the self are separate, as the positive and negative thoughts about a particular self-aspect do not spill over into thoughts about other aspects. Research has found that compared with people low in self-complexity, those higher in self-complexity tend to experience more positive outcomes, including higher levels of self-esteem (Rafaeli-Mor & Steinberg, 2002), lower levels of stress and illness (Kalthoff & Neimeyer, 1993), and a greater tolerance for frustration (Gramzow, Sedikides, Panter, & Insko, 2000).142 Chapter 3. The Self The benefits of self-complexity occur because the various domains of the self help to buffer us against negative events and enjoy the positive events that we experience.
For people low in self-complexity, negative outcomes in relation to one aspect of the self tend to have a big impact on their self-esteem. For example, if the only thing that Maria cares about is getting into medical school, she may be devastated if she fails to make it. On the other hand, Marty, who is also passionate about medical school but who has a more complex self-concept, may be better able to adjust to such a blow by turning to other interests.
Although having high self-complexity seems useful overall, it does not seem to help everyone equally in their response to all events (Rafaeli-Mor & Steinberg, 2002). People with high self-complexity seem to react more positively to the good things that happen to them but not necessarily less negatively to the bad things. And the positive effects of self-complexity are stronger for people who have other positive aspects of the self as well.
This buffering effect is stronger for people with high self-esteem, whose self-complexity involves positive rather than negative characteristics (Koch & Shepperd, 2004), and for people who feel that they have control over their outcomes (McConnell et al., 2005). Just as we may differ in the complexity of our self-concept, so we may also differ in its clarity. Self- concept clarityis the extent to which one’s self-concept is clearly and consistently defined (Campbell, 1990).
Theoretically, the concepts of complexity and clarity are independent of each other—a person could have either a more or less complex self-concept that is either well defined and consistent, or ill defined and inconsistent. However, in reality, they each have similar relationships to many indices of well-being. For example, as has been found with self-complexity, higher self-concept clarity is positively related to self-esteem (Campbell et al., 1996).
Why might this be? Perhaps people with higher self-esteem tend to have a more well-defined and stable view of their positive qualities, whereas those with lower self- esteem show more inconsistency and instability in their self-concept, which is then more vulnerable to being negatively affected by challenging situations. Consistent with this assertion, self-concept clarity appears to mediate the relationship between stress and well-being (Ritchie et al., 2011).
Also, having a clear and stable view of ourselves can help us in our relationships. Lewandowski, Nardine, and Raines (2010) found a positive correlation between clarity and relationship satisfaction, as well as a significant increase in reported satisfaction following an experimental manipulation of participants’ self-concept clarity. Greater clarity may promote relationship satisfaction in a number of ways.
As Lewandowski and colleagues (2010) argue, when we have a clear self-concept, we may be better able to consistently communicate who we are and what we want to our partner, which will promote greater understanding and satisfaction. Also, perhaps when we feel clearer about who we are, then we feel less of a threat to our self-concept and autonomy when we find ourselves having to make compromises in our close relationships. Thinking back to the cultural differences we discussed earlier in this section in the context of people’s self-concepts, it could be that self-concept clarity is generally higher in individuals from individualistic cultures, as their self-concept is based more on internal characteristics that are held to be stable across situations, than on external social facets of the self that may be more changeable.
This is indeed what the research suggests. Not only do members of more collectivistic cultures tend to have lower self- concept clarity, that clarity is also less strongly related to their self-esteem compared with those from more individualistic cultures (Campbell et al., 1996). As we shall see when our attention turns3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 143 to perceiving others in Chapter 5, our cultural background not only affects the clarity and consistency of how we see ourselves, but also how consistently we view other people and their behavior.
Self-Awareness Like any other schema, the self-concept can vary in its current cognitive accessibility. Self-awareness refers to the extent to which we are currently fixing our attention on our own self-concept. When our self-concept becomes highly accessible because of our concerns about being observed and potentially judged by others, we experience the publicly induced self-awareness known as self- consciousness (Duval & Wicklund, 1972; Rochat, 2009).
Perhaps you can remember times when your self-awareness was increased and you became self- conscious—for instance, when you were giving a presentation and you were perhaps painfully aware that everyone was looking at you, or when you did something in public that embarrassed you. Emotions such as anxiety and embarrassment occur in large part because the self-concept becomes highly accessible, and they serve as a signal to monitor and perhaps change our behavior. Not all aspects of our self-concept are equally accessible at all times, and these long-term differences in the accessibility of the different self-schemas help create individual differences in terms of, for instance, our current concerns and interests.
You may know some people for whom the physical appearance component of the self-concept is highly accessible. They check their hair every time they see a mirror, worry whether their clothes are making them look good, and do a lot of shopping—for themselves, of course. Other people are more focused on their social group memberships—they tend to think about things in terms of their role as Muslims or Christians, for example, or as members of the local tennis or soccer team.
In addition to variation in long-term accessibility, the self and its various components may also be made temporarily more accessible through priming. We become more self-aware when we are in front of a mirror, when a TV camera is focused on us, when we are speaking in front of an audience, or when we are listening to our own tape-recorded voice (Kernis & Grannemann, 1988). When the knowledge contained in the self-schema becomes more accessible, it also becomes more likely to be used in information processing and to influence our behavior.
Beaman, Klentz, Diener, and Svanum (1979) conducted a field experiment to see if self-awareness would influence children’s honesty. The researchers expected that most children viewed stealing as wrong but that they would be more likely to act on this belief when they were more self-aware. They conducted this experiment on Halloween in homes within the city of Seattle, Washington.
At particular houses, children who were trick-or-treating were greeted by one of the experimenters, shown a large bowl of candy, and were told to take only one piece each. The researchers unobtrusively watched each child to see how many pieces he or she actually took. In some of the houses there was a large mirror behind the candy bowl; in other houses, there was no mirror.
Out of the 363 children who were observed in the study, 19% disobeyed instructions and took more than one piece of candy. However, the children who were in front of a mirror were significantly less likely to steal (14.4%) than were those who did not see a mirror (28.5%). These results suggest that the mirror activated the children’s self-awareness, which reminded them of their belief about the importance of being honest.
Other research has shown that being self-aware has a144 Chapter 3. The Self powerful influence on other behaviors as well. For instance, people are more likely to stay on a diet, eat better food, and act more morally overall when they are self-aware (Baumeister, Zell, & Tice, 2007; Heatherton, Polivy, Herman, & Baumeister, 1993).
What this means is that when you are trying to stick to a diet, study harder, or engage in other difficult behaviors, you should try to focus on yourself and the importance of the goals you have set. Social psychologists are interested in studying self-awareness because it has such an important influence on behavior. People become more likely to violate acceptable, mainstream social norms when, for example, they put on a Halloween mask or engage in other behaviors that hide their identities.
For example, the members of the militant White supremacist organization the Ku Klux Klan wear white robes and hats when they meet and when they engage in their racist behavior. And when people are in large crowds, such as in a mass demonstration or a riot, they may become so much a part of the group that they experience deindividuation—the loss of individual self-awareness and individual accountability in groups (Festinger, Pepitone, & Newcomb, 1952; Zimbardo, 1969) and become more attuned to themselves as group members and to the specific social norms of the particular situation (Reicher & Stott, 2011).3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 145 Figure 3.6 Examples of situations that may create deindividuation include wearing uniforms that hide the self and alcohol intoxication. Social Psychology in the Public Interest Deindividuation and Rioting Rioting occurs when civilians engage in violent public disturbances.
The targets of these disturbances can be people in authority, other civilians, or property. The triggers for riots are varied, including everything from the aftermath of sporting events, to the killing of a civilian by law enforcement officers, to commodity shortages, to political oppression. Both civilians and law enforcement personnel are frequently seriously injured or killed during riots, and the damage to public property can be considerable.146 Chapter 3.
The Self Social psychologists, like many other academics, have long been interested in the forces that shape rioting behavior. One of the earliest and most influential perspectives on rioting was offered by French sociologist, Gustav Le Bon (1841–1931). In his book The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind, Le Bon (1895) described the transformation of the individual in the crowd.
According to Le Bon, the forces of anonymity, suggestibility, and contagion combine to change a collection of individuals into a “psychological crowd.” Under this view, the individuals then become submerged in the crowd, lose self-control, and engage in antisocial behaviors. Some of the early social psychological accounts of rioting focused in particular on the concept of deindividuation as a way of trying to account for the forces that Le Bon described. Festinger et al.
(1952), for instance, argued that members of large groups do not pay attention to other people as individuals and do not feel that their own behavior is being scrutinized. Under this view, being unidentified and thereby unaccountable has the psychological consequence of reducing inner restraints and increasing behavior that is usually repressed, such as that often seen in riots. Extending these ideas, Zimbardo (1969) argued that deindividuation involved feelings of reduced self- observation, which then bring about antinormative and disinhibited behavior.
In support of this position, he found that participants engaged in more antisocial behavior when their identity was made anonymous by wearing Ku Klux Klan uniforms. However, in the context of rioting, these perspectives, which focus on behaviors that are antinormative (e.g., aggressive behavior is typically antinormative), neglect the possibility that they might actually be normative in the particular situation. For example, during some riots, antisocial behavior can be viewed as a normative response to injustice or oppression.
Consistent with this assertion, Johnson and Downing (1979) found that when participants were able to mask their identities by wearing nurses uniforms, their deindividuated state actually led them to show more prosocial behavior than when their identities were visible to others. In other words, if the group situation is associated with more prosocial norms, deindividuation can actually increase these behaviors, and therefore does not inevitably lead to antisocial conduct. Building on these findings, researchers have developed more contemporary accounts of deindividuation and rioting.
One particularly important approach has been the social identity model of deindividuation effects (or SIDE model), developed by Reicher, Spears, and Postmes (1995). This perspective argues that being in a deindividuated state can actually reinforce group salience and conformity to specific group norms in the current situation. According to this model, deindividuation does not, then, lead to a loss of identity per se.
Instead, people take on a more collective identity. Seen in this way, rioting behavior is more about the conscious adoption of behaviors reflecting collective identity than the abdication of personal identity and responsibility outlined in the earlier perspectives on deindividuation. In support of the SIDE model, although crowd behavior during riots might seem mindless, antinormative, and disinhibited to the outside observer, to those taking part it is often perceived as rational, normative, and subject to well-defined limits (Reicher, 1987).
For instance, when law enforcement officers are the target of rioters, then any targeting of other civilians by rioters is often condemned and policed by the group members themselves (Reicher & Stott, 2011). Indeed, as Fogelson (1971) concluded in his analysis of rioting in the United States in the 1960s, restraint and selectivity, as opposed to mindless and indiscriminate violence, were among the most crucial features of the riots. Seeing rioting in this way, as a rational, normative response, Reicher and Stott (2011) describe it as3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 147 being caused by a number of interlocking factors, including a sense of illegitimacy or grievance, a lack of alternatives to confrontation, the formation of a shared identity, and a sense of confidence in collective power.
Viewing deindividuation as a force that causes people to increase their sense of collective identity and then to express that identity in meaningful ways leads to some important recommendations for controlling rioting more effectively, including that: • Labeling rioters as “mindless,” “thugs,” and so on will not address the underlying causes of riots. • Indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force by police will often lead to an escalation of rioting behavior. • Law enforcement personnel should allow legitimate and legal protest behaviors to occur during riots, and only illegal and inappropriate behaviors should be targeted.
• Police officers should communicate their intentions to crowds before using force. Tellingly, in analyses of the policing of high-risk rioting situations, when police follow these guidelines, riots are often prevented altogether, or at least de-escalated relatively quickly (Reicher & Stott, 2011). Thus, the social psychological research on deindividuation has not only helped us to refine our understanding of this concept, but has also led us to better understand the social dynamics of rioting behavior.
Ultimately, this increased understanding has helped to put more effective strategies in place for reducing the risks to people and property that riots bring. Two aspects of individual differences in self-awareness have been found to be important, and they relate to self-concern and other-concern, respectively (Fenigstein, Scheier, & Buss, 1975; Lalwani, Shrum, & Chiu, 2009). Private self-consciousness refers to the tendency to introspect about our inner thoughts and feelings.
People who are high in private self-consciousness tend to think about themselves a lot and agree with statements such as “I’m always trying to figure myself out” and “I am generally attentive to my inner feelings.” People who are high on private self-consciousness are likely to base their behavior on their own inner beliefs and values—they let their inner thoughts and feelings guide their actions—and they may be particularly likely to strive to succeed on dimensions that allow them to demonstrate their own personal accomplishments (Lalwani et al., 2009). Public self-consciousness, in contrast, refers to the tendency to focus on our outer public image and to be particularly aware of the extent to which we are meeting the standards set by others. Those high in public self-consciousness agree with statements such as “I’m concerned about what other people think of me,” “Before I leave my house, I check how I look,” and “I care a lot about how I present myself to others.” These are the people who check their hair in a mirror they pass and spend a lot of time getting ready in the morning; they are more likely to let the opinions of others (rather than their own opinions) guide their behaviors and are particularly concerned with making good impressions on others.
Research has found cultural differences in public self-consciousness, with people from East Asian, collectivistic cultures having higher public self-consciousness than people from Western, individualistic cultures. Steve Heine and colleagues (2008) found that when college students from Canada (a Western culture) completed questionnaires in front of a large mirror, they subsequently became more self- critical and were less likely to cheat (much like the trick-or-treaters discussed earlier) than were Canadian students who were not in front of a mirror. However, the presence of the mirror had no effect on college students from Japan.
This person-situation interaction is consistent with the idea that people148 Chapter 3. The Self from East Asian cultures are normally already high in public self-consciousness compared with people from Western cultures, and thus manipulations designed to increase public self-consciousness influence them less. So we see that there are clearly individual and cultural differences in the degree to and manner in which we tend to be aware of ourselves.
In general, though, we all experience heightened moments of self- awareness from time to time. According to self-awareness theory(Duval & Wicklund, 1972), when we focus our attention on ourselves, we tend to compare our current behavior against our internal standards. Sometimes when we make these comparisons, we realize that we are not currently measuring up.
In these cases, self-discrepancy theory states that when we perceive a discrepancy between our actual and ideal selves, this is distressing to us (Higgins, Klein, & Strauman, 1987). In contrast, on the occasions when self-awareness leads us to comparisons where we feel that we are being congruent with our standards, then self-awareness can produce positive affect (Greenberg & Musham, 1981). Tying these ideas from the two theories together, Philips and Silvia (2005) found that people felt significantly more distressed when exposed to self-discrepancies while sitting in front of a mirror.
In contrast, those not sitting in front of a mirror, and presumably experiencing lower self- awareness, were not significantly emotionally affected by perceived self-discrepancies. Simply put, the more self-aware we are in a given situation, the more pain we feel when we are not living up to our ideals. In part, the stress arising from perceived self-discrepancy relates to a sense of cognitive dissonance, which is the discomfort that occurs when we respond in ways that we see as inconsistent.
In these cases, we may realign our current state to be closer to our ideals, or shift our ideals to be closer to our current state, both of which will help reduce our sense of dissonance. Another potential response to feelings of self-discrepancy is to try to reduce the state of self-awareness that gave rise to these feelings by focusing on other things. For example, Moskalenko and Heine (2002) found that people who are given false negative feedback about their performance on an intelligence test, which presumably lead them to feel discrepant from their internal performance standards about such tasks, subsequently focused significantly more on a video playing in a room than those given positive feedback.
There are certain situations, however, where these common dissonance-reduction strategies may not be realistic options to pursue. For example, if someone who has generally negative attitudes toward drug use nevertheless becomes addicted to a particular substance, it will often not be easy to quit the habit, to reframe the evidence regarding the drug’s negative effects, or to reduce self-awareness. In such cases, self-affirmation theorysuggests that people will try to reduce the threat to their self-concept posed by feelings of self-discrepancy by focusing on and affirming their worth in another domain, unrelated to the issue at hand.
For instance, the person who has become addicted to an illegal substance may choose to focus on healthy eating and exercise regimes instead as a way of reducing the dissonance created by the drug use. Although self-affirmation can often help people feel more comfortable by reducing their sense of dissonance, it can also have have some negative effects. For example, Munro and Stansbury (2009) tested people’s social cognitive responses to hypotheses that were either threatening or non-threatening to their self-concepts, following exposure to either a self-affirming or non-affirming activity.
The key findings were that those who had engaged in the self-affirmation condition and were then exposed to a threatening hypothesis showed greater tendencies than those in the non-affirming group to seek out3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 149 evidence confirming their own views, and to detect illusory correlations in support of these positions. One possible interpretation of these results is that self-affirmation elevates people’s mood and they then become more likely to engage in heuristic processing, as discussed in Chapter 2. Still another option to pursue when we feel that our current self is not matching up to our ideal self is to seek out opportunities to get closer to our ideal selves.
One method of doing this can be in online environments. Massively multiplayer online (MMO) gaming, for instance, offers people the chance to interact with others in a virtual world, using graphical alter egos, or avatars, to represent themselves. The role of the self-concept in influencing people’s choice of avatars is only just beginning to be researched, but some evidence suggests that gamers design avatars that are closer to their ideal than their actual selves.
For example, a study of avatars used in one popular MMO role-play game indicated that players rated their avatars as having more favorable attributes than their own self-ratings, particularly if they had lower self-esteem (Bessiere, Seay, & Keisler, 2007). They also rated their avatars as more similar to their ideal selves than they themselves were. The authors of this study concluded that these online environments allow players to explore their ideal selves, freed from the constraints of the physical world.
There are also emerging findings exploring the role of self-awareness and self-affirmation in relation to behaviors on social networking sites. Gonzales and Hancock (2011) conducted an experiment showing that individuals became more self-aware after viewing and updating their Facebook profiles, and in turn reported higher self-esteem than participants assigned to an offline, control condition. The increased self-awareness that can come from Facebook activity may not always have beneficial effects, however.
Chiou and Lee (2013) conducted two experiments indicating that when individuals put personal photos and wall postings onto their Facebook accounts, they show increased self-awareness, but subsequently decreased ability to take other people’s perspectives. Perhaps sometimes we can have too much self-awareness and focus to the detriment of our abilities to understand others. Toma and Hancock (2013) investigated the role of self-affirmation in Facebook usage and found that users viewed their profiles in self-affirming ways, which enhanced their self-worth.
They were also more likely to look at their Facebook profiles after receiving threats to their self-concept, doing so in an attempt to use self-affirmation to restore their self-esteem. It seems, then, that the dynamics of self- awareness and affirmation are quite similar in our online and offline behaviors. Having reviewed some important theories and findings in relation to self-discrepancy and affirmation, we should now turn our attention to diversity.
Once again, as with many other aspects of the self- concept, we find that there are important cultural differences. For instance, Heine and Lehman (1997) tested participants from a more individualistic nation (Canada) and a more collectivistic one (Japan) in a situation where they took a personality test and then received bogus positive or negative feedback. They were then asked to rate the desirability of 10 music CDs.
Subsequently, they were offered the choice of taking home either their fifth- or sixth-ranked CD, and then required to re-rate the 10 CDs. The critical finding was that the Canadians overall rated their chosen CD higher and their unchosen one lower the second time around, mirroring classic findings on dissonance reduction, whereas the Japanese participants did not. Crucially, though, the Canadian participants who had been given positive feedback about their personalities (in other words, had been given self-affirming evidence in an unrelated domain) did not feel the need to pursue this dissonance reduction strategy.
In contrast, the Japanese did not significantly adjust their ratings in response to either positive or negative feedback from the personality test.150 Chapter 3. The Self Once more, these findings make sense if we consider that the pressure to avoid self-discrepant feelings will tend to be higher in individualistic cultures, where people are expected to be more cross- situationally consistent in their behaviors. Those from collectivistic cultures, however, are more accustomed to shifting their behaviors to fit the needs of the ingroup and the situation, and so are less troubled by such seeming inconsistencies.
Overestimating How Closely and Accurately Others View Us Although the self-concept is the most important of all our schemas, and although people (particularly those high in self-consciousness) are aware of their self and how they are seen by others, this does not mean that people are always thinking about themselves. In fact, people do not generally focus on their self-concept any more than they focus on the other things and other people in their environments (Csikszentmihalyi & Figurski, 1982). On the other hand, self-awareness is more powerful for the person experiencing it than it is for others who are looking on, and the fact that self-concept is so highly accessible frequently leads people to overestimate the extent to which other people are focusing on them (Gilovich & Savitsky, 1999).
Although you may be highly self-conscious about something you’ve done in a particular situation, that does not mean that others are necessarily paying all that much attention to you. Research by Thomas Gilovich and colleagues (Gilovich, Medvec, & Savitsky, 2000) found that people who were interacting with others thought that other people were paying much more attention to them than those other people reported actually doing. This may be welcome news, for example, when we find ourselves wincing over an embarrassing comment we made during a group conversation.
It may well be that no one else paid nearly as much attention to it as we did! There is also some diversity in relation to age. Teenagers are particularly likely to be highly self- conscious, often believing that others are watching them (Goossens, Beyers, Emmen, & van Aken, 2002).
Because teens think so much about themselves, they are particularly likely to believe that others must be thinking about them, too (Rycek, Stuhr, McDermott, Benker, & Swartz, 1998). Viewed in this light, it is perhaps not surprising that teens can become embarrassed so easily by their parents’ behaviour in public, or by their own physical appearance, for example. People also often mistakenly believe that their internal states show to others more than they really do.
Gilovich, Savitsky, and Medvec (1998) asked groups of five students to work together on a “lie detection” task. One at a time, each student stood up in front of the others and answered a question that the researcher had written on a card (e.g., “I have met David Letterman”). On each round, one person’s card indicated that they were to give a false answer, whereas the other four were told to tell the truth.
After each round, the students who had not been asked to lie indicated which of the students they thought had actually lied in that round, and the liar was asked to estimate the number of other students who would correctly guess who had been the liar. As you can see in Figure 3.7, “The Illusion of Transparency,” the liars overestimated the detectability of their lies: on average, they predicted that over 44% of their fellow players had known that they were the liar, but in fact only about 25% were able to accurately identify them. Gilovich and colleagues called this effect the “illusion of transparency.” This illusion brings home an important final learning point about our self-concepts: although we may feel that our view of ourselves is obvious to others, it may not always be!3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 151 Figure 3.7 The Illusion of Transparency Key Takeaways • The self-concept is a schema that contains knowledge about us.
It is primarily made up of physical characteristics, group memberships, and traits. • Because the self-concept is so complex, it has extraordinary influence on our thoughts, feelings, and behavior, and we can remember information that is related to it well. • Self-complexity, the extent to which individuals have many different and relatively independent ways of thinking about themselves, helps people respond more positively to events that they experience.
• Self-concept clarity, the extent to which individuals have self-concepts that are clearly defined and stable over time, can also help people to respond more positively to challenging situations. • Self-awareness refers to the extent to which we are currently fixing our attention on our own self- concept. Differences in the accessibility of different self-schemas help create individual differences: for instance, in terms of our current concerns and interests.
• People who are experiencing high self-awareness may notice self-discrepancies between their actual and ideal selves. This can, in turn, lead them to engage in self-affirmation as a way of resolving these discrepancies. • When people lose their self-awareness, they experience deindividuation.
• Private self-consciousness refers to the tendency to introspect about our inner thoughts and feelings; public self-consciousness refers to the tendency to focus on our outer public image and the standards set by others. • There are cultural differences in self-consciousness: public self-consciousness may be higher in Eastern than in Western cultures. • People frequently overestimate the extent to which others are paying attention to them and accurately understand their true intentions in public situations.152 Chapter 3.
The Self Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. What are the most important aspects of your self-concept, and how do they influence your self- esteem and social behavior? 2.
Consider people you know who vary in terms of their self-complexity and self-concept clarity. What effects do these differences seem to have on their self-esteem and behavior? 3.
Describe a situation where you experienced a feeling of self-discrepancy between your actual and ideal selves. How well does self-affirmation theory help to explain how you responded to these feelings of discrepancy? 4.
Try to identify some situations where you have been influenced by your private and public self- consciousness. What did this lead you to do? What have you learned about yourself from these experiences?
5. Describe some situations where you overestimated the extent to which people were paying attention to you in public. Why do you think that you did this and what were the consequences?
References Asendorpf, J. B., Warkentin, V., & Baudonnière, P-M. (1996).
Self-awareness and other-awareness. II: Mirror self-recognition, social contingency awareness, and synchronic imitation. Developmental Psychology, 32(2), 313–321.
Barrios, V., Kwan, V. S. Y., Ganis, G., Gorman, J., Romanowski, J., & Keenan, J.
P. (2008). Elucidating the neural correlates of egoistic and moralistic self-enhancement.
Consciousness and Cognition: An International Journal, 17(2), 451–456. Baumeister, R. F., Zell, A.
L., & Tice, D. M. (2007).
How emotions facilitate and impair self- regulation. In J. J.
Gross & J. J. E.
Gross (Eds.), Handbook of emotion regulation (pp. 408–426). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Beaman, A. L., Klentz, B., Diener, E., & Svanum, S. (1979).
Self-awareness and transgression in children: Two field studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(10), 1835–1846. Bessiere, K., Seay, A.
F., & Kiesler, S. (2007). The ideal elf: Identity exploration in World of Warcraft.
Cyberpsychology and Behavior: The Impact of the Internet, Multimedia and Virtual Reality on Behavior and Society, 10(4), 530-535. Boysen, S. T., & Himes, G.
T. (1999). Current issues and emerging theories in animal cognition.
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 683–705. Campbell, J. D.
(1990). Self-esteem and clarity of the self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 538-549.
Campbell, J. D., Trapnell, P. D., Heine, S.
J., Katz, I. M., Lavalle, L. F., & Lehman, D.
R. (1996).3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 153 Self-concept clarity: Measurement, personality correlates, and cultural boundaries. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 141-156.
Chiou, W., & Lee, C. (2013). Enactment of one-to-many communication may induce self-focused attention that leads to diminished perspective taking: The case of Facebook.
Judgment And Decision Making, 8(3), 372-380. Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Figurski, T. J.
(1982). Self-awareness and aversive experience in everyday life. Journal of Personality, 50(1), 15–28.
DeAndrea, D. C., Shaw, A. S., & Levine, T.
R. (2010). Online language: The role of culture in self- expression and self-construal on Facebook.
Journal Of Language And Social Psychology, 29(4), 425-442. doi:10.1177/0261927X10377989 Doherty, M. J.
(2009). Theory of mind: How children understand others’ thoughts and feelings. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Duval, S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1972).
A theory of objective self-awareness. New York, NY: Academic Press. Fenigstein, A., Scheier, M.
F., & Buss, A. H. (1975).
Public and private self-consciousness: Assessment and theory. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 43, 522–527. Festinger, L., Pepitone, A., & Newcomb, B.
(1952). Some consequences of deindividuation in a group. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 47, 382–389.
Fogelson, R. M. (1971).
Violence as protest: A study of riots and ghettos. New York: Anchor. Gallup, G.
G., Jr. (1970). Chimpanzees: self-recognition.
Science, 167, 86–87. Gilovich, T., & Savitsky, K. (1999).
The spotlight effect and the illusion of transparency: Egocentric assessments of how we are seen by others. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 8(6), 165–168. Gilovich, T., Medvec, V.
H., & Savitsky, K. (2000). The spotlight effect in social judgment: An egocentric bias in estimates of the salience of one’s own actions and appearance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(2), 211–222. Gilovich, T., Savitsky, K., & Medvec, V. H.
(1998). The illusion of transparency: Biased assessments of others’ ability to read one’s emotional states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(2), 332–346.
Gonzales, A. L., & Hancock, J. T.
(2011). Mirror, mirror on my Facebook wall: Effects of exposure to Facebook on self-esteem.Cyberpsychology, Behavior, And Social Networking, 14(1-2), 79-83. doi:10.1089/cyber.2009.0411 Goossens, L., Beyers, W., Emmen, M., & van Aken, M.
(2002). The imaginary audience and personal fable: Factor analyses and concurrent validity of the “new look” measures. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 12(2), 193–215.
Gramzow, R. H., Sedikides, C., Panter, A. T., & Insko, C.
A. (2000). Aspects of self-regulation and self-structure as predictors of perceived emotional distress.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 188–205. Greenberg, J., & Musham, C. (1981).
Avoiding and seeking self-focused attention. Journal of Research in Personality, 15, 191-200.154 Chapter 3. The Self Harter, S.
(1998). The development of self-representations. In W.
Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Social, emotional, & personality development (5th ed., Vol. 3, pp.
553–618). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. Harter, S.
(1999). The construction of the self: A developmental perspective. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Heatherton, T. F., Polivy, J., Herman, C. P., & Baumeister, R.
F. (1993). Self-awareness, task failure, and disinhibition: How attentional focus affects eating.
Journal of Personality, 61, 138–143. Heine, S. J., and Lehman, D.
R. (1997). Culture, dissonance, and self-affirmation.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 389-400. Heine, S. J., Takemoto, T., Moskalenko, S., Lasaleta, J., & Henrich, J.
(2008). Mirrors in the head: Cultural variation in objective self-awareness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(7), 879–887.
Higgins, E. T., Klein, R., & Strauman, T. (1987).
Self-discrepancies: Distinguishing among self-states, self-state conflicts, and emotional vulnerabilities. In K. M.
Yardley & T. M. Honess (Eds.), Self and identity: Psychosocial perspectives.
(pp. 173-186). New York: Wiley.
Ip, G. W. M., & Bond, M.
H. (1995). Culture, values, and the spontaneous self-concept.
Asian Journal of Psychology, 1, 29-35. Johnson, R. D.
& Downing, L. L. (1979).
Deindividuation and valence of cues: Effects of prosocial and antisocial behavior. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 37, 1532-1538 10.1037//0022-3514 .37.9.1532. Kalthoff, R.
A., & Neimeyer, R. A. (1993).
Self-complexity and psychological distress: A test of the buffering model. International Journal of Personal Construct Psychology, 6(4), 327–349. Kashima, Y., Yamaguchi, S., Kim, U., Choi, S., Gelfank, M., & Yuki, M.
(1995). Culture, gender, and self: A perspective from individualism-collectivism research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 925-937.
Kernis, M. H., & Grannemann, B. D.
(1988). Private self-consciousness and perceptions of self- consistency. Personality and Individual Differences, 9(5), 897–902.
Kim, H., & Markus, H. (1999). Deviance or uniqueness, harmony or conformity?
A cultural analysis. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 77(4), 785-800. doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.77.4.785 Koch, E.
J., & Shepperd, J. A. (2004).
Is self-complexity linked to better coping? A review of the literature. Journal of Personality, 72(4), 727–760.
Lalwani, A. K., Shrum, L. J., & Chiu, C-Y.
(2009). Motivated response styles: The role of cultural values, regulatory focus, and self-consciousness in socially desirable responding. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 870–882.
Le Bon, G. (1895). The crowd: A study of the popular mind.
Project Gutenberg. Lewandowski, G. R., Nardon, N., Raines, A.
J. (2010). The role of self-concept clarity in relationship quality.
Self and Identity, 9(4), 416-433. Lieberman, M. D.
(2010). Social cognitive neuroscience. In S.
T. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp.
143–193). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.3.1 The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept 155 Lieberman, M. D., Jarcho, J.
M., & Satpute, A. B. (2004).
Evidence-based and intuition-based self- knowledge: An fMRI study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(4), 421–435. Linville, P.
W. (1987). Self-complexity as a cognitive buffer against stress-related illness and depression.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(4), 663–676. Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S.
(1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98(2), 224-253.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224 McConnell, A. R., Renaud, J. M., Dean, K.
K., Green, S. P., Lamoreaux, M. J., Hall, C.
E.,…Rydel, R. J. (2005).
Whose self is it anyway? Self-aspect control moderates the relation between self- complexity and well-being. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41(1), 1–18.
doi: 10.1016/ j.jesp.2004.02.004 McGuire, W. J., McGuire, C. V., Child, P., & Fujioka, T.
(1978). Salience of ethnicity in the spontaneous self-concept as a function of one’s ethnic distinctiveness in the social enviornment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 511–520.
Moskalenko, S., & Heine, S. J. (2002).
Watching your troubles away: Television viewing as a stimulus for subjective self-awareness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 76-85. Munro, G.
D., & Stansbury, J. A. (2009).
The dark side of self-affirmation: Confirmation bias and illusory correlation in response to threatening information. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35(9), 1143-1153. Nisbett, R.
E. (2003). The geography of thought.
New York, NY: Free Press. Oyserman, D., Bybee, D., Terry, K., & Hart-Johnson, T. (2004).
Possible selves as roadmaps. Journal of Research in Personality, 38(2), 130–149. Phillips, A.
G., & Silvia, P. J. (2005).
Self-Awareness and the Emotional Consequences of Self- Discrepancies. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(5), 703-713. doi:10.1177/ 0146167204271559 Povinelli, D.
J., Landau, K. R., & Perilloux, H. K.
(1996). Self-recognition in young children using delayed versus live feedback: Evidence of a developmental asynchrony. Child Development, 67(4), 1540–1554.
Rafaeli-Mor, E., & Steinberg, J. (2002). Self-complexity and well-being: A review and research synthesis.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6, 31–58. Reicher, S. D.
(1987). Crowd behaviour as social action. In J.
C. Turner, M. A.
Hogg, P. J. Oakes, S.
D. Reicher, & M. S.
Wetherell (Eds.), Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory (pp. 171–202). Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell Reicher, S.
D., Spears, R., & Postmes, T. (1995). A social identity model of deindividuation phenomena.
In W. Strobe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social psychology (pp.161-198).
Chichester, UK: Wiley. Reicher, S., & Stott, C. (2011).
Mad mobs and Englishmen? Myths and realities of the 2011 riots. London: Constable and Robinson.
Rees, A., & Nicholson, N. (1994). The Twenty Statements Test.
In C. Cassell & G. Symon (Eds.), Qualitative methods in organizational research: A practical guide (pp.
37–54). Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Arndt, J., & Gidron, Y.
(2011). Self-concept clarity mediates the relation between stress and subjective well-being. Self and Identity, 10(4), 493-508.156 Chapter 3.
The Self Roccas, S., & Brewer, M. (2002). Social identity complexity.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(2), 88–106. Rochat, P. (2009).
Others in mind: Social origins of self-consciousness. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Rogers, T.
B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S.
(1977). Self-reference and the encoding of personal information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 677–688.
Ross, M., Xun, W. Q., & Wilson, A. E.
(2002). Language and the bicultural self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1040-1050.
Rycek, R. F., Stuhr, S. L., McDermott, J., Benker, J., & Swartz, M.
D. (1998). Adolescent egocentrism and cognitive functioning during late adolescence.
Adolescence, 33, 746–750. Toma, C. L., & Hancock, J.
T. (2013). Self-affirmation underlies Facebook use.
Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 39(3), 321-331. doi:10.1177/0146167212474694 Watkins, D., Akande, A. , Fleming, J., Ismail, M., Lefner, K., Regmi, M., Watson, S., Yu, J., Adair, J., Cheng, C., Gerong, A., McInerney, D., Mpofu, E., Sinch-Sengupta, S., & Wondimu, H.
(1998). Cultural dimensions, gender, and the nature of self-concept: A fourteen-country study. International Journal of Psychology, 33, 17-31.
Zimbardo, P. (1969). The human choice: Individuation, reason and order versus deindividuation impulse and chaos.
In W. J. Arnold & D.
Levine (Eds.), Nebraska Symposium of Motivation (Vol. 17). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Media Attributions • “Getting Ready” by Flavia is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence. • “mirror mirror who is the most beautiful dog?” by rromer is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “Quite reflection” by ucumari photography is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.
• “Toddler in mirror” by Samantha Steele is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence. • “08KKKfamilyPortrait” by Image Editor is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “CatholicClergyAndNaziOfficials” by Unknown author is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence.
• “Eric Church – Having a Beer On Stage 2 – Capitol Records Street Party 2011 – Nashville, Tn” by Larry Darling is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence.3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem Learning Objectives 1. Define self-esteem and explain how it is measured by social psychologists. 2.
Explore findings indicating diversity in self-esteem in relation to culture, gender, and age. 3. Provide examples of ways that people attempt to increase and maintain their self-esteem.
4. Outline the benefits of having high self-esteem. 5.
Review the limits of self-esteem, with a focus on the negative aspects of narcissism. As we have noted in our discussions of the self-concept, our sense of self is partly determined by our cognition. However, our view of ourselves is also the product of our affect, in other words how we feel about ourselves.
Just as we explored in Chapter 2, cognition and affect are inextricably linked. For example, self-discrepancy theory highlights how we feel distress when we perceive a gap between our actual and ideal selves. We will now examine this feeling self, starting with perhaps its most heavily researched aspect, self-esteem.
Self-Esteem Self-esteem refers to the positive (high self-esteem) or negative (low self-esteem) feelings that we have about ourselves. We experience the positive feelings of high self-esteem when we believe that we are good and worthy and that others view us positively. We experience the negative feelings of low self- esteem when we believe that we are inadequate and less worthy than others.
Our self-esteem is determined by many factors, including how well we view our own performance and appearance, and how satisfied we are with our relationships with other people (Tafarodi & Swann, 1995). Self-esteem is in part a trait that is stable over time, with some people having relatively high self-esteem and others having lower self-esteem. But self-esteem is also a state that varies day to day and even hour to hour.
When we have succeeded at an important task, when we have done something that we think is useful or important, or when we feel that we are accepted and valued by others, our self-concept will contain many positive thoughts and we will therefore have high self-esteem. When we have failed, done something harmful, or feel that we have been ignored or criticized, the negative aspects of the self-concept are more accessible and we experience low self-esteem. Self-esteem can be measured using both explicit and implicit measures, and both approaches find that most people tend to view themselves positively.
One common explicit self-report measure of self- 157158 Chapter 3. The Self esteem is the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Figure 3.8). Higher scores on the scale indicate higher self- esteem.
Figure 3.8 The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale Please rate yourself on the following items by writing a number in the blank before each statement, where you 1 = Strongly Disagree 2 = Disagree 3 = Agree 4 = Strongly Agree 1. _____I feel that I’m a person of worth, at least on any equal base with others. 2.
_____I feel that I have a number of good qualities. 3. _____All in all, I am inclined to think that I am a failure (R).
4. _____I am able to do things as well as other people. 5.
_____I feel I do not have much to be proud of. (R) 6. _____I take a positive attitude towards myself.
7. _____On the whole, I am satisfied with myself. 8.
_____I wish I could have more respect for myself. (R) 9. _____I certainly feel useless at times.
(R) 10. _____At times I think I am no good at all. (R) Note.
(R) denotes an item that should be reverse scored. Subtract your response on these items from 5 before calculating the total. Data are from Rosenberg (1965).
Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Numerous studies have used the Rosenberg scale to assess people’s self-esteem in many areas of the world.
An interesting finding in many samples from the Western world, particularly in North America, is that the average score is often significantly higher than the mid-point. Heine and Lehman (1999), for example, reported meta-analytic data indicating that less than 7% of participants scored below the mid- point! One interesting implication of this is that participants in such samples classified as having low self-esteem on the basis of a median split will typically actually have at least moderate self-esteem.
If so many people, particularly in individualistic cultures, report having relatively high self-esteem, an interesting question is why this might be. Perhaps some cultures place more importance on developing high self-esteem than others, and people correspondingly feel more pressure to report feeling good about themselves (Held, 2002). A problem with measures such as the Rosenberg scale is that they can be influenced by the desire to portray the self positively.
The observed scores on the Rosenberg scale may be somewhat inflated because people naturally try to make themselves look as if they have very high self-esteem—maybe they lie a bit to the experimenters to make themselves look better than they really are and perhaps to make themselves feel better. If this the case, then we might expect to find average levels of reported self-esteem to be lower in cultures where having high self-worth is less of a3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 159 priority. This is indeed what has generally been found.
Heine and Lehman (1999) reported that Japanese participants living in Japan showed, on average, moderate levels of self-esteem, normally distributed around the scale mid-point. Many other studies have shown that people in Eastern, collectivistic cultures report significantly lower self-esteem than those from more Western, individualistic ones (Campbell et al., 1996). Do, then, such differences reflect these different cultural priorities and pressures, or could it be that they reflect genuine differences in actual self-esteem levels?
There are no easy answers here, of course, but there are some findings from studies, using different methods of measuring self-esteem, that may shed some light on this issue. Indirect measures of self-esteem have been created—measures that may provide a more accurate picture of the self-concept because they are less influenced by the desire to make a positive impression. Anthony Greenwald and Shelly Farnham (2000) used the Implicit Association Test to study the self- concept indirectly.
Participants worked at a computer and were presented with a series of words, each of which they were to categorize in one of two ways. One categorization decision involved whether the words were related to the self (e.g., me, myself, mine) or to another person (e.g., other, them, their). A second categorization decision involved determining whether words were pleasant (e.g., joy, smile, pleasant) or unpleasant (e.g., pain, death, tragedy).
On some trials, the self words were paired with the pleasant items, and the other words with the unpleasant items. On other trials, the self words were paired with the unpleasant items, and the other words with the pleasant items. Greenwald and Farnham found that on average, participants were significantly faster at categorizing positive words that were presented with self words than they were at categorizing negative words that were presented with self words, suggesting, again, that people did have positive self-esteem.
Furthermore, there were also meaningful differences among people in the speed of responding, suggesting that the measure captured some individual variation in implicit self-esteem. A number of studies have since explored cross-cultural differences in implicit self-esteem and have not found the same differences observed on explicit measures like the Rosenberg scale (Yamaguchi et al., 2007). Does this mean that we can conclude that the lower scores on self-report measures observed in members of collectivistic cultures are more apparent than real?
Maybe not just yet, especially given that the correlations between explicit and implicit measures of self-esteem are often quite small (Heine, Lehman, Markus, & Kitayama, 1999). Nevertheless, values such as modesty may be less prioritized in individualistic cultures than in collectivistic ones, which may in turn reflect differences in reported self- esteem levels. Indeed, Cai and colleagues (2007) found that differences in explicit self-esteem between Chinese and American participants were explained by cultural differences in modesty.
Another interesting aspect of diversity and self-esteem is the average difference observed between men and women. Across many countries, women have been found to report lower self-esteem than men (Sprecher, Brooks, & Avogo, 2013). However, these differences have generally been found to be small, particularly in nations where gender equality in law and opportunity is higher (Kling, Hyde, Showers, & Buswell, 1999).
These findings are consistent with Mead’s (1934) suggestion that self-esteem in part relates to the view that others have of our importance in the wider world. As women’s opportunities to participate in careers outside of the home have increased in many nations, so the differences between their self-esteem and that of men have decreased. There are also some interesting age differences in self-esteem that have been uncovered.
In a large Internet survey, Robins, Trzesniewski, Tracy, Gosling, & Potter (2002) found that self-esteem tends to decrease from childhood to early adolescence, and then rises steadily from adolescence into adulthood,160 Chapter 3. The Self usually until people are well into their sixties, after which point it begins to decline. One interesting implication of this is that we often will have higher self-esteem later in life than in our early adulthood years, which would appear to run against ageist stereotypes that older adults have lower self-worth.
What factors might help to explain these age-related increases in self-esteem? One possibility relates back to our discussion of self-discrepancy theory in the previous section on the cognitive self. Recall that this theory states that when our perceived self-discrepancy between our current and ideal selves is small, we tend to feel more positive about ourselves than when we see the gap as being large.
Could it be that older adults have a current view of self that is closer to their ideal than younger adults, and that this is why their self-esteem is often higher? Evidence from Ryff (1991) suggests that this may well be the case. In this study, elderly adults rated their current and ideal selves as more similar than either middle-aged or young adults.
In part, older adults are able to more closely align these two selves because they are better able to realistically adjust their ideal standards as they age (Rothermund & Brandstadter, 2003) and because they engage in more favorable and age-appropriate social comparisons than do younger adults (Helgeson & Mickelson, 2000). Maintaining and Enhancing Self-Esteem As we saw in our earlier discussion of cultural differences in self-esteem, in at least some cultures, individuals appear motivated to report high self-esteem. As we shall now see, they also often actively seek out higher self-worth.
The extent to which this is a universal cultural pursuit continues to be debated, with some researchers arguing that it is found everywhere (Brown, 2010), while others question whether the need for positive self-regard is equally valued in all cultures (Heine, Lehman, Markus, & Kitayama, 1999). For those of us who are actively seeking higher self-esteem, one way is to be successful at what we do. When we get a good grade on a test, perform well in a sports match, or get a date with someone we really like, our self-esteem naturally rises.
One reason that many of us have positive self-esteem is because we are generally successful at creating positive lives. When we fail in one domain, we tend to move on until we find something that we are good at. We don’t always expect to get the best grade on every test or to be the best player on the team.
Therefore, we are often not surprised or hurt when those things don’t happen. In short, we feel good about ourselves because we do a pretty good job at creating decent lives. Another way we can boost our self-esteem is through building connections with others.
Forming and maintaining satisfying relationships helps us to feel good about ourselves. A common way of doing this for many people around the world is through social networking sites. There are a growing number of studies exploring how we do this online and the effects that it has on our self-worth.
One common way on Facebook is to share status updates, which we hope that our friends will then “like” or comment on. When our friends do not respond to our updates, however, this can negatively impact how we feel about ourselves. One study found that when regular Facebook users were assigned to an experimental condition where they were banned from sharing information on Facebook for 48 hours, they reported significantly lower levels of belonging and meaningful existence.
In a second experiment, participants were allowed to post material to Facebook, but half of the participants’ profiles were set up by the researchers not to receive any responses, whether “likes” or comments, to their status updates. In line with predictions, that group reported lower self-esteem, level of belonging, level of control, and meaningful existence than the control group who did receive feedback (Tobin, Vanman, Verreynne, &3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 161 Saeri, 2014). Whether online or offline, then, feeling ignored by our friends can dent our self-worth.
We will explore other social influences on our self-esteem later in this chapter. Research Focus Processing Information to Enhance the Self Although we can all be quite good at creating positive self-esteem by doing positive things, it turns out that we often do not stop there. The desire to see ourselves positively is sometimes strong enough that it leads us to seek out, process, and remember information in a way that allows us to see ourselves even more positively.
Sanitioso, Kunda, and Fong (1990) had students read about a study that they were told had been conducted by psychologists at Stanford University (the study was actually fictitious). The students were randomly assigned to two groups: one group read that the results of the research had showed that extroverts did better than introverts in academic or professional settings after graduating from college; the other group read that introverts did better than extroverts on the same dimensions. The students then wrote explanations for why this might be true.
The experimenter then thanked the participants and led them to another room, where a second study was to be conducted (you will have guessed already that although the participants did not think so, the two experiments were really part of the same experiment). In the second experiment, participants were given a questionnaire that supposedly was investigating what different personality dimensions meant to people in terms of their own experience and behavior. The students were asked to list behaviors that they had performed in the past that related to the dimension of “shy” versus “outgoing”—a dimension that is very close in meaning to the introversion-extroversion dimension that they had read about in the first experiment.
Figure 3.9, “Enhancing the Self,” shows the number of students in each condition who listed an extroverted behavior first, and the number who listed an introverted behavior first. You can see that the first memory listed by participants in both conditions tended to reflect the dimension that they had read was related to success according to the research presented in the first experiment. In fact, 62% of the students who had just learned that extroversion was related to success listed a memory about an extroverted behavior first, whereas only 38% of the students who had just learned that introversion was related to success listed an extroverted behavior first.162 Chapter 3.
The Self Figure 3.9 Enhancing the Self Sanitioso, Kunda, and Fong (1990) found that students who had learned that extroverts did better than introverts after graduating from college tended to list extroverted memories about themselves, whereas those who learned that introverts did better than extroverts tended to list introverted memories. It appears that the participants drew from their memories those instances of their own behavior that reflected the trait that had the most positive implications for their self-esteem—either introversion or extroversion, depending on experimental condition. The desire for positive self-esteem made events that were consistent with a positive self-perception more accessible, and thus they were listed first on the questionnaire.
Other research has confirmed this general principle—people often attempt to create positive self- esteem whenever possible, even it if involves distorting reality. We tend to take credit for our successes, and to blame our failures on others. We remember more of our positive experiences and fewer of our negative ones.
As we saw in the discussion of the optimistic bias in the previous chapter about social cognition, we judge our likelihood of success and happiness as greater than our likelihood of failure and unhappiness. We think that our sense of humor and our honesty are above average, and that we are better drivers and less prejudiced than others. We also distort (in a positive way, of course) our memories of our grades, our performances on exams, and our romantic experiences.
And we believe that we can control the events that we will experience to a greater extent than we really can (Crocker & Park, 2004). Once again, though, there are some important cultural differences to note with people in individualistic cultures pursuing these self-enhancing strategies more vigorously and more often than those from more collectivistic backgrounds. Indeed, in a large-scale review of studies on self- enhancement, Heine (2004) concluded that these tactics are not typically used in cultures that value interdependence over dependence.
In cultures where high self-esteem is not as socially valued, people presumably do not feel the same need to distort their social realities to serve their self-worth. There is also considerable personal diversity in the tendency to use self-enhancement. Stable differences between individuals have been uncovered in many studies across a range of self-enhancing3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 163 strategies (Hepper, Gramzow, & Sedikides, 2010; John & Robins, 1994; Kwan, John, Kenny, Bond, & Robins, 2004).
Narcissism and the Limits of Self-Enhancement Our discussion to this point suggests that many people will generally try to view themselves in a positive light. We emphasize our positive characteristics, and we may even in some cases distort information—all to help us maintain positive self-esteem. There can be negative aspects to having too much self-esteem, however, particularly if that esteem is unrealistic and undeserved.
Narcissism is a personality trait characterized by overly high self-esteem, self-admiration, and self-centeredness. Narcissists tend to agree with statements such as the following: • “I know that I am good because everybody keeps telling me so.” • “I can usually talk my way out of anything.” • “I like to be the center of attention.” • “I have a natural talent for influencing people.” Narcissists can be perceived as charming at first, but often alienate others in the long run (Baumeister, Campbell, Krueger, & Vohs, 2003). They can also make bad romantic partners as they often behave selfishly and are always ready to look for someone else who they think will be a better mate, and they are more likely to be unfaithful than non-narcissists (Campbell & Foster, 2002; Campbell, Rudich, & Sedikides, 2002).
Narcissists are also more likely to bully others, and they may respond very negatively to criticism (Baumeister et al., 2003). People who have narcissistic tendencies more often pursue self- serving behaviors, to the detriment of the people and communities surrounding them (Campbell, Bush, Brunell, & Shelton, 2005). Perhaps surprisingly, narcissists seem to understand these things about themselves, although they engage in the behaviors anyway (Carlson, Vazire, & Oltmanns, 2011).
Interestingly, scores on measures of narcissistic personality traits have been creeping steadily upward in recent decades in some cultures (Twenge, Konrath, Foster, Campbell, & Bushman, 2008). Given the social costs of these traits, this is troubling news. What reasons might there be for these trends?
Twenge and Campbell (2009) argue that several interlocking factors are at work here, namely increasingly child-centered parenting styles, the cult of celebrity, the role of social media in promoting self- enhancement, and the wider availability of easy credit, which, they argue, has lead to more people being able to acquire status-related goods, in turn further fueling a sense of entitlement. As narcissism is partly about having an excess of self-esteem, it should by now come as no surprise that narcissistic traits are higher, on average, in people from individualistic versus collectivistic cultures (Twenge et al., 2008). The negative outcomes of narcissism raise the interesting possibility that high self-esteem in general may not always be advantageous to us or to the people around us.
One complication to the issue is that explicit self-report measures of self-esteem, like the Rosenberg scale, are not able to distinguish164 Chapter 3. The Self between people whose high self-esteem is realistic and appropriate and those whose self-esteem may be more inflated, even narcissistic (Baumeister et al., 2003). Implicit measures also do not provide a clear picture, but indications are that more narcissistic people score higher on implicit self-esteem in relation to some traits, including those relating to social status, and lower on others relating to relationships (Campbell, Bosson, Goheen, Lakey, & Kernis, 2007).
A key point is that it can be difficult to disentangle what the effects of realistic versus unrealistic high self-esteem may be. Nevertheless, it is to this thorny issue that we will now turn. Social Psychology in the Public Interest Does High Self-Esteem Cause Happiness or Other Positive Outcomes?
Teachers, parents, school counselors, and people in many cultures frequently assume that high self- esteem causes many positive outcomes for people who have it and therefore that we should try to increase it in ourselves and others. Perhaps you agree with the idea that if you could increase your self- esteem, you would feel better about yourself and therefore be able to work at a higher level, or attract a more desirable mate. If you do believe that, you would not be alone.
Baumeister and colleagues (2003) describe the origins and momentum of what they call the self-esteem movement, which has grown in influence in various countries since the 1970s. For example, in 1986, the state of California funded a task force under the premise that raising self-esteem would help solve many of the state’s problems, including crime, teen pregnancy, drug abuse, school underachievement, and pollution. Baumeister and colleagues (2003) conducted an extensive review of the research literature to determine whether having high self-esteem was as helpful as many people seem to think it is.
They began by assessing which variables were correlated with high self-esteem and then considered the extent to which high self-esteem caused these outcomes. They found that high self-esteem does correlate with many positive outcomes. People with high self-esteem get better grades, are less depressed, feel less stress, and may even live longer than those who view themselves more negatively.
The researchers also found that high self-esteem is correlated with greater initiative and activity; people with high self- esteem just do more things. They are also more more likely to defend victims against bullies compared with people with low self-esteem, and they are more likely to initiate relationships and to speak up in groups. High self-esteem people also work harder in response to initial failure and are more willing to switch to a new line of endeavor if the present one seems unpromising.
Thus, having high self-esteem seems to be a valuable resource—people with high self-esteem are happier, more active, and in many ways better able to deal with their environment. On the other hand, Baumeister and his colleagues also found that people with high self-esteem sometimes delude themselves. They tend to believe that they are more likable and attractive, have better relationships, and make better impressions on others than people with low self-esteem.
But objective measures show that these beliefs are often distortions rather than facts. Furthermore, people with overly high self-esteem, particularly when it is accompanied by narcissism, defensiveness, conceit, and the unwillingness to critically assess one’s potential negative qualities, have been found to engage in a variety of negative behaviors (Baumeister, Smart, & Boden, 1996). For example, people with high self-esteem are more likely to be bullies (despite also being more likely to defend victims) and to experiment with alcohol, drugs, and sex.
Todd Heatherton and Kathleen Vohs (2000) found that when people with extremely high self-esteem3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 165 were forced to fail on a difficult task in front of a partner, they responded by acting more unfriendly, rudely, and arrogantly than did those with lower self-esteem. And research has found that children who inflate their social self-worth—those who think that they are more popular than they really are and who thus have unrealistically high self-esteem—are also more aggressive than children who do not show such narcissistic tendencies (Sandstrom & Herlan, 2007; Thomaes, Bushman, Stegge, & Olthof, 2008). Such findings raise the interesting possibility that programs that increase the self-esteem of children who bully and are aggressive, based on the notion that these behaviors stem from low self-esteem, may do more harm than good (Emler, 2001).
If you are thinking like a social psychologist, these findings may not surprise you—narcissists tend to focus on their self-concerns, with little concern for others, and we have seen many times that other-concern is a necessity for satisfactory social relations. Furthermore, despite the many positive variables that relate to high self-esteem, when Baumeister and his colleagues looked at the causal role of self-esteem they found little evidence that high self-esteem caused these positive outcomes. For instance, although high self-esteem is correlated with academic achievement, it is more the result than the cause of this achievement.
Programs designed to boost the self-esteem of pupils have not been shown to improve academic performance, and laboratory studies have generally failed to find that manipulations of self-esteem cause better task performance. Baumeister and his colleagues concluded that programs designed to boost self-esteem should be used only in a limited way and should not be the only approach taken. Raising self-esteem will not make young people do better in school, obey the law, stay out of trouble, get along better with other people, or respect the rights of others.
And these programs may even backfire if the increased self-esteem creates narcissism or conceit. Baumeister and his colleagues suggested that attempts to boost self- esteem should only be carried out as a reward for good behavior and worthy achievements, and not simply to try to make children feel better about themselves. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 3 DRAG THE WORDS – OUTCOMES OF HIGH SELF-ESTEEM?
After reviewing the above summary of the findings reported by Baumeister et al., (2003), try this true/ false quiz. Drag true into the boxes if you think that there is strong evidence that having high self- esteem can cause each outcome, and false if you think there is not. 1.
Higher academic achievement 2. Greater persistence following failure 3. Higher relationship quality 4.
Reduced ingroup favoritism 5. Increased happiness 6. Reduced involvement in risk-taking behaviors 7.
Reduced involvement in cheating behavior 8. Reduced involvement in bullying behavior166 Chapter 3. The Self Although we naturally desire to have social status and high self-esteem, we cannot always promote ourselves without any regard to the accuracy of our self-characterizations.
If we consistently distort our capabilities, and particularly if we do this over a long period of time, we will just end up fooling ourselves and perhaps engaging in behaviors that are not actually beneficial to us. Most of us probably know someone who is convinced that he or she has a particular talent at a professional level, but we, and others, can see that this person is deluded (but perhaps we are too kind to say this). Some individuals who audition on television talent shows spring to mind.
Such self-delusion can become problematic because although this high self-esteem might propel people to work harder, and although they may enjoy thinking positively about themselves, they may be setting themselves up for long-term disappointment and failure. Their pursuit of unrealistic goals may also take valuable time away from finding areas they have more chance to succeed in. When we self-enhance too much, although we may feel good about it in the short term, in the longer term the outcomes for the self may not be positive.
The goal of creating and maintaining positive self- esteem (an affective goal) must be tempered by the cognitive goal of having an accurate self-view (Kirkpatrick & Ellis, 2001; Swann, Chang-Schneider, & Angulo, 2007). In some cases, the cognitive goal of obtaining an accurate picture of ourselves and our social world and the affective goal of gaining positive self-esteem work hand in hand. Getting the best grade in an important exam produces accurate knowledge about our skills in the domain as well as giving us some positive self-esteem.
In other cases, the two goals are incompatible. Doing more poorly on an exam than we had hoped produces conflicting, contradictory outcomes. The poor score provides accurate information about the self—namely, that we have not mastered the subject—but at the same time makes us feel bad.
Self- verification theory states that people often seek confirmation of their self-concept, whether it is positive or negative (Swann, 1983). This sets up a fascinating clash between our need to self-enhance against our need to be realistic in our views of ourselves. Delusion versus truth: which one wins out?
The answer, of course, as with pretty much everything to do with human social behavior, is that it depends. But on what does it depend? One factor is who the source is of the feedback about us: when we are seeking out close relationships, we more often form them with others who verify our self-views.
We also tend to feel more satisfied with interactions with self-verifying partners than those who are always positive toward us (Swann, De La Ronde, & Hixon, 1994; Swann & Pelham, 2002). Self-verification seems to be less important to us in more distant relationships, as in those cases we often tend to prefer self-enhancing feedback. Another related factor is the part of our self-concept we are seeking feedback about, coupled with who is providing this evaluation.
Let’s say you are in a romantic relationship and you ask your partner and your close friend about how physically attractive they think you are. Who would you want to give you self-enhancing feedback? Who would you want more honesty from?
The evidence suggests that most of us would prefer self-enhancing feedback from our partner, and accuracy from our friend (Swann, Bosson, & Pelham, 2002), as perceived physical attractiveness is more central to romance than friendship. Under certain conditions, verification prevails over enhancement. However, we should not underestimate the power of self-enhancement to often cloud our ability to be more realistic about ourselves.
For example, self-verification of negative aspects of our self-concept is more likely in situations where we are pretty sure of our faults (Swann & Pelham, 1988). If there is room for doubt, then enhancement tends to rule. Also, if we are confident that the consequences of getting innaccurate,3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 167 self-enhancing feedback about negative aspects ourselves are minimal, then we tend to welcome self- enhancement with open arms (Aronson, 1992).
Therefore, in those situations where the needs to enhance and to verify are in conflict, we must learn to reconcile our self-concept with our self-esteem. We must be able to accept our negative aspects and to work to overcome them. The ability to balance the cognitive and the affective features of the self helps us create realistic views of ourselves and to translate these into more efficient and effective behaviors.
There is one final cautionary note about focusing too much on self-enhancement, to the detriment of self-verification, and other-concern. Jennifer Crocker and Lora Park (2004) have identified another cost of our attempts to inflate our self-esteem: we may spend so much time trying to enhance our self- esteem in the eyes of others—by focusing on the clothes we are wearing, impressing others, and so forth—that we have little time left to really improve ourselves in more meaningful ways. In some extreme cases, people experience such strong needs to improve their self-esteem and social status that they act in assertive or dominant ways in order to gain it.
As in many other domains, then, having positive self-esteem is a good thing, but we must be careful to temper it with a healthy realism and a concern for others. The real irony here is that those people who do show more other- than self-concern, those who engage in more prosocial behavior at personal costs to themselves, for example, often tend to have higher self-esteem anyway (Leak & Leak, 2003). Key Takeaways • Self-esteem refers to the positive (high self-esteem) or negative (low self-esteem) feelings that we have about ourselves.
• Self-esteem is determined both by our own achievements and accomplishments and by how we think others are judging us. • Self-esteem can be measured using both direct and indirect measures, and both approaches find that people tend to view themselves positively. • Self-esteem shows important variations across different cultural, gender, and age groups.
• Because it is so important to have self-esteem, we may seek out, process, and remember information in a way that allows us to see ourselves even more positively. • High self-esteem is correlated with, but does not cause, a variety of positive outcomes. • Although high self-esteem does correlate with many positive outcomes in life, overly high self- esteem creates narcissism, which can lead to unfriendly, rude, and ultimately dysfunctional behaviors.168 Chapter 3.
The Self Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. In what ways do you attempt to boost your own self-esteem? Which strategies do you feel have been particularly effective and ineffective and why?
2. Do you know people who have appropriately high self-esteem? What about people who are narcissists?
How do these individual differences influence their social behavior in positive and negative ways? 3. “It is relatively easy to succeed in life with low self-esteem, but very difficult to succeed without self-control, self-discipline, or emotional resilience in the face of setbacks” (Twenge & Campbell, 2009, p.
295). To what extent do you agree with this quote and why? References Aronson, E.
(1992). The return of the repressed: Dissonance theory makes a comeback. Psychological Inquiry, 3(4), 303–311.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J.
I., & Vohs, K. D. (2003).
Does high self-esteem cause better performance, interpersonal success, happiness, or healthier lifestyles? Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(1), 1–44. Baumeister, R.
F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. M. (1996).
Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self-esteem. Psychological Review, 103(1), 5–34. Brown, J.
D. (2010). Across the (not so) great divide: Cultural similarities in self-evaluative processes.
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4, 318-330. Cai, H., Brown, J. D., Deng, C., & Oakes, M.
A. (2007). Self-esteem and culture: Differences in cognitive self-evaluations or affective self-regard?.
Asian Journal Of Social Psychology, 10(3), 162-170. doi:10.1111/j.1467-839X.2007.00222.x Campbell, J. D., Trapnell, P.
D., Heine, S. J., Katz, I. M., Lavallee, L.
F., & Lehman, D. R. (1996).
Self-concept clarity: Measurement, personality correlates, and cultural boundaries. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(1), 141-156. Campbell, W., Bosson, J.
K., Goheen, T. W., Lakey, C. E., & Kernis, M.
H. (2007). Do narcissists dislike themselves ‘deep down inside?’.
Psychological Science, 18(3), 227-229. doi:10.1111/ j.1467-9280.2007.01880.x Campbell, W., Bush, C., Brunell, A. B., & Shelton, J.
(2005). Understanding the Social Costs of Narcissism: The Case of the Tragedy of the Commons. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(10), 1358-1368.
doi:10.1177/0146167205274855 Campbell, W. K., & Foster, C. A.
(2002). Narcissism and commitment in romantic relationships: An investment model analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 484–495.3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 169 Campbell, W.
K., Rudich, E., & Sedikides, C. (2002). Narcissism, self-esteem, and the positivity of self-views: Two portraits of self-love.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 358–368. Carlson, E. N., Vazire, S., & Oltmanns, T.
F. (2011). You probably think this paper’s about you: Narcissists’ perceptions of their personality and reputation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101(1), 185–201. Crocker, J., & Park, L. E.
(2004). The costly pursuit of self-esteem. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 392–414.
Emler, N. (2001). Self esteem: The costs and causes of low self worth.
York: York Publishing Services. Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S.
D. (2000). Using the Implicit Association Test to measure self- esteem and self-concept.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6), 1022–1038. Heatherton, T. F., & Vohs, K.
D. (2000). Interpersonal evaluations following threats to self: Role of self-esteem.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 725–736. Heine, S. J.
(2004). Positive self-views: Understanding universals and variability. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology, 2, 109-122.
Heine, S. J., & Lehman, D. R.
(1999). Culture, self-discrepancies, and self-satisfaction. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin,25(8), 915-925.
doi:10.1177/01461672992511001 Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H.
R., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for positive self-regard?
Psychological Review, 106(4), 766-794. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.106.4.766 Held, B. S., (2002) The tyranny of the positive attitude in America: Observation and speculation.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 965-992. doi: 10.1002/jclp.10093 Helgeson, V. S., & Mickelson, K.
(2000). Coping with chronic illness among the elderly: Maintaining self-esteem. In S.
B. Manuck, R. Jennings, B.
S. Rabin, & A. Baum (Eds.), Behavior, health, and aging.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Hepper, E. G., Gramzow, R.
H., & Sedikides, C. (2010). Individual differences in self-enhancement and self-protection strategies: An integrative analysis.
Journal Of Personality, 78(2), 781-814. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2010.00633.x John, O. P., & Robins, R.
W. (1994). Accuracy and bias in self-perception: Individual differences in self-enhancement and the role of narcissism.
Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 66(1), 206-219. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.66.1.206 Kirkpatick, L. A., & Ellis, B.
J. (2001). Evolutionary perspectives on self-evaluation and self-esteem.
In M. Clark & G. Fletcher (Eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol.
2: Interpersonal processes (pp. 411–436). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Kling, K. C., Hyde, J., Showers, C. J., & Buswell, B.
N. (1999). Gender differences in self-esteem: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 125(4), 470-500. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.125.4.470 Kwan, V. Y., John, O.
P., Kenny, D. A., Bond, M. H., & Robins, R.
W. (2004). Reconceptualizing individual differences in self-enhancement bias: An interpersonal approach.
Psychological Review, 111(1), 94-110. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.111.1.94 Leak, G. K., & Leak, K.
C. (2003). Adlerian Social Interest and Positive Psychology: A Conceptual and Empirical Integration.
The Journal of Individual Psychology, 62(3), 207-223. Mead, G. H.
(1934). Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.170 Chapter 3.
The Self Robins, R. W., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tracy, J.
L., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2002).
Global self- esteem across the life span. Psychology and Aging, 17, 423-434. Rosenberg, M.
(1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rothermund, K., & Brandtstadter, J. (2003). Coping with deficits and loss in later life: From compensatory action to accommodation.
Psychology and Aging, 18, 896-905. Ryff, C. D.
(1991). Possible selves in adulthood and old age: A tale of shifting horizons. Psychology and Aging, 6, 286-295.
Sandstrom, M. J., & Herlan, R. D.
(2007). Threatened egotism or confirmed inadequacy? How children’s perceptions of social status influence aggressive behavior toward peers.
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 26(2), 240–267. Sanitioso, R., Kunda, Z., & Fong, G. T.
(1990). Motivated recruitment of autobiographical memories. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(2), 229–241.
Schlenker, B. R. (2003).
Self-presentation. In M. R.
Leary, J. P. Tangney, M.
R. E. Leary, & J.
P. E. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp.
492–518). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Sprecher, S., Brooks, J.
E., & Avogo, W. (2013). Self-esteem among young adults: Differences and similarities based on gender, race, and cohort (1990–2012).
Sex Roles, 69(5-6), 264-275. Swann, W. B., Jr.
(1983). Self-verification: Bringing social reality into harmony with the self. In J.
Suls & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on the self (Vol.
2, pp. 33–66), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlba Swann, W. B., Bosson, J.
K., & Pelham, B. W. (2002).
Different partners, different selves: Strategic verification of circumscribed identities. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(9), 1215-1228. doi:10.1177/01461672022812007 Swann, W.
B., Jr., Chang-Schneider, C., & Angulo, S. (2007). Self-verification in relationships as an adaptive process.
In J. Wood, A. Tesser, & J.
Holmes (Eds.), Self and relationships. New York, NY: Psychology Press. Swann, W.
B., Jr., De La Ronde, C., & Hixon, J. G. (1994).
Authenticity and positivity strivings in marriage and courtship. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 857–869. Swann, W.
B., Jr., & Pelham, B. W. (2002).
Who wants out when the going gets good? Psychological investment and preference for self-verifying college roommates. Journal of Self and Identity, 1, 219–233.
Tafarodi, R. W., & Swann, W. B., Jr.
(1995). Self-liking and self-competence as dimensions of global self-esteem: Initial validation of a measure. Journal of Personality Assessment, 65(2), 322–342.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Stegge, H., & Olthof, T. (2008).
Trumping shame by blasts of noise: Narcissism, self-esteem, shame, and aggression in young adolescents. Child Development, 79(6), 1792–1801. Tobin, Vanman, Verreynne, & Saeri, A.
K. (2014). Threats to belonging on Facebook: Lurking and ostracism.
Social Influence. doi:10.1080/15534510.2014.893924 Twenge J. (2011).
Narcissism and culture. The handbook of narcissism and narcissistic personality disorder: Theoretical approaches, empirical findings, and treatments [e-book]. Hoboken, NJ US: John Wiley & Sons Inc.3.2 The Feeling Self: Self-Esteem 171 Twenge, J., & Campbell, W.
K. (2009). The narcissism epidemic.
New York, NY: Free Press. Twenge, J. M., Konrath, S., Foster, J.
D., Campbell, W., & Bushman, B. J. (2008).
Egos inflating over time: A cross-temporal meta-analysis of the Narcissistic Personality Inventory. Journal Of Personality, 76(4), 875-902. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2008.00507.x Yamaguchi, S., Greenwald, A.
G., Banaji, M. R., Murakami, F., Chen, D., Shiomura, K., & … Krendl, A. (2007).
Apparent universality of positive implicit self-esteem. Psychological Science, 18(6), 498-500. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01928.x3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation Learning Objectives 1.
Describe the concept of the looking-glass self and how it affects our self-concept. 2. Explore the impact of the labeling bias, self-labeling, and internalized prejudice on people’s self- concepts, particularly in those from marginalized social groups.
3. Define social comparison, and summarize how people use it to define their self-concepts and self- esteem. 4.
Give examples of the use of upward and downward social comparison and their influences on social cognition and affect. 5. Explain the concept of social identity and why it is important to human behavior.
6. Describe how self-evaluation maintenance theory helps to explain how we react when other people’s behaviors threaten our sense of self. 7.
Describe the concept of self-presentation and the various strategies we use to portray ourselves to others. 8. Outline the concept of reputation management and how it relates to self-presentation.
9. Discuss the individual-difference variable of self-monitoring and how it relates to the ability and desire to self-present. To this point, we have seen, among other things, that human beings have complex and well-developed self-concepts and that they generally attempt to view themselves positively.
These more cognitive and affective aspects of ourselves do not, of course, occur in a vacuum. They are heavily influenced by the social forces that surround us. We have alluded to some of these forces already; for example, in our review of self-verification theory, we saw how feedback from others can affect our self-concept and esteem.
We also looked at ways that our sociocultural backgrounds can affect the content of our self- concept. In this section, we will consider in more detail these and other social aspects of the self by exploring the many ways that the social situation influences our self-concept and esteem. The self is not created in isolation; we are not born with perceptions of ourselves as shy, interested in jazz, or charitable to others, for example.
Rather, such beliefs are determined by our observations of and interactions with others. Are you rich or poor? Beautiful or ugly?
Smart or not? Good or bad at playing video games? And how do you know?
These questions can be answered only by looking at those around us. The self has meaning only within the social context, and it is not wrong to say that the social situation defines our self-concept and our self-esteem. We rely on others to provide a “social reality”—to help us determine what to think, feel, and do (Hardin & Higgins, 1996).
But what forms do these social influences take? It is to this question that we will now turn. 173174 Chapter 3.
The Self The Looking-Glass Self: Our Sense of Self is Influenced by Others’ Views of Us The concept of the looking-glass self states that part of how we see ourselves comes from our perception of how others see us (Cooley, 1902). We might feel that we have a great sense of humor, for example, because others have told us, and often laugh (apparently sincerely) at our jokes. Many studies have supported a basic prediction derived from the notion of the looking-glass self, namely that our self-concepts are often quite similar to the views that others have of us (Beer, Watson, & McDade- Montez, 2013).
This may be particularly so with people from our own families and culture. Perkins, Wiley, and Deaux (2014), for example, found that, in the United States, how members of ethnic minority groups believed other members of the same culture perceived them significantly correlated with their self-esteem scores. In contrast, their perceived appraisal of European Americans toward them was only weakly related to their self-esteem.
This evidence is merely correlational, though, so we cannot be sure which way the influence is working. Maybe we develop our self-concept quite independently of others, and they then base their views of us on how we see ourselves. The work of Mark Baldwin and colleagues has been particularly important in demonstrating that how we think we are being perceived by others really can affect how we see ourselves.
For example, Baldwin and Holmes (1987) conducted two experiments to test the hypothesis that our self-concepts derive partly from the way we imagine that we would be perceived by significant others. In the first study, 40 women were instructed to visualize the faces of either two acquaintances or two older members of their own family. Later they were asked to rate their perceived enjoyableness of a piece of fiction with sexual content, and they typically responded in keeping with the responses they perceived the people they had visualized would have had.
This effect was more pronounced when they sat in front of a mirror (remember the earlier discussion of self-awareness theory). In the second study, 60 men were exposed to a situation involving failure, and their self-evaluations to this setback were then measured. As with the women’s study, the men’s self-evaluations matched those they perceived that the people they were asked to visualize would have made, particularly when they were more self- aware.
At least some of the time, then, we end up evaluating ourselves as we imagine others would. Of course, it can work both ways, too. Over time, the people around us may come to accept the self- concept that we present to others (Yeung & Martin, 2003).
Sometimes, the influence of other people’s appraisals of ourselves on our self-concept may be so strong that we end up internalizing them. For example, we are often labeled in particular ways by others, perhaps informally in terms of our ethnic background, or more formally in terms of a physical or psychological diagnosis. The labeling bias occurs when we are labeled, and others’ views and expectations of us are affected by that labeling (Fox & Stinnett, 1996).
For example, if a teacher knows that a child has been diagnosed with a particular psychological disorder, that teacher may have different expectations and explanations of the child’s behavior than he or she would if not aware of that label. Where things get really interesting for our present discussion is when those expectations start to become self-fulfilling prophecies, and our self-concept and even our behavior start to align with them. For example, when children are labeled in special education contexts, these labels can then impact their self-esteem (Taylor, Hume, & Welsh, 2010).
If we are repeatedly labeled and evaluated by others, then self-labeling may occur, which happens when we adopt others’ labels explicitly into our self-concept. The effects of this self-labeling on our3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 175 self-esteem appear to depend very much on the nature of the labels. Labels used in relation to diagnosis of psychological disorders can be detrimental to people whom then internalize them.
For example, Moses (2009) found that adolescents who self-labeled according to diagnoses they had received were found to have higher levels of self-stigma in their self-concepts compared with those who described their challenges in non-pathological terms. In these types of situation, those who self-label may come to experience internalized prejudice, which occurs when individuals turn prejudice directed toward them by others onto themselves. Internalized prejudice has been found to predict more negative self- concept and poorer psychological adjustment in members of various groups, including sexual minorities (Carter, 2012) and racial minorities (Szymanski & Obiri, 2011).
In other cases, labels used by wider society to describe people negatively can be positively reclaimed by those being labeled. Galinsky and colleagues (2013) explored this use of self-labeling by members of oppressed groups to reclaim derogatory terms, including “queer” and “bitch,” used by dominant groups. After self-labeling, minority group members evaluated these terms less negatively, reported feeling more powerful, and were also perceived by observers as more powerful.
Overall, these results indicate that individuals who incorporate a formerly negative label into their self-concept in order to reclaim it can sometimes undermine the stigma attached to the label. Social Comparison Theory: Our Sense of Self Is Influenced by Comparisons with Others Self-concept and self-esteem are also heavily influenced by the process of social comparison (Buunk & Gibbons, 2007; Van Lange, 2008). Social comparison occurs when we learn about our abilities and skills, about the appropriateness and validity of our opinions, and about our relative social status by comparing our own attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors with those of others.
These comparisons can be with people who we know and interact with, with those whom we read about or see on TV, or with anyone else we view as important. However, the most meaningful comparisons we make tend to be with those we see as similar to ourselves (Festinger, 1954). Social comparison occurs primarily on dimensions on which there are no correct answers or objective benchmarks and thus on which we can rely only on the beliefs of others for information.
Answers to questions such as “What should I wear to the interview?” or “What kind of music should I have at my wedding?” are frequently determined at least in part by using the behavior of others as a basis of comparison. We also use social comparison to help us determine our skills or abilities—how good we are at performing a task or doing a job, for example. When students ask their teacher for the class average on an exam, they are also seeking to use social comparison to evaluate their performance.
Research Focus Affiliation and Social Comparison The extent to which individuals use social comparison to determine their evaluations of events was demonstrated in a set of classic research studies conducted by Stanley Schachter (1959). Schachter’s experiments tested the hypothesis that people who were feeling anxious would prefer to affiliate with176 Chapter 3. The Self others rather than be alone because having others around would reduce their anxiety.
Female college students at the University of Minnesota volunteered to participate in one of his experiments for extra credit in their introductory psychology class. They arrived at the experimental room to find a scientist dressed in a white lab coat, standing in front of a large array of electrical machinery. The scientist introduced himself as Dr.
Zilstein of the Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, and he told the women that they would be serving as participants in an experiment concerning the effects of electrical shock. Dr. Zilstein stressed how important it was to learn about the effects of shocks, since electroshock therapy was being used more and more commonly and because the number of accidents due to electricity was also increasing!
At this point, the experimental manipulation occurred. One half of the participants (those in the high- anxiety condition) were told that the shocks would be “painful” and “intense,” although they were assured that they could do no permanent damage. The other half of the participants (those in the low- anxiety condition) were also told that they would be receiving shocks but that they would in no way be painful—rather, the shocks were said to be mild and to resemble a “tickle” or a “tingle.” Of course, the respondents were randomly assigned to conditions to assure that the women in the two conditions were, on average, equivalent except for the experimental manipulation.
Each of the women was then told that before the experiment could continue the experimenter would have to prepare the equipment and that they would have to wait until he was finished. He asked them if they would prefer to wait alone or with others. The outcome of Schachter’s research was clear: while only 33% of the women who were expecting mild shocks preferred to wait with others, 63% of the women expecting to get painful shocks wanted to wait with others.
This was a statistically significant difference, and Schachter concluded that the women chose to affiliate with each other in order to reduce their anxiety about the upcoming shocks. In further studies, Schachter found that the research participants who were under stress did not want to wait with just any other people. They preferred to wait with other people who were expecting to undergo the same severe shocks that they were rather than with people who were supposedly just waiting to see their professor.
Schachter concluded that this was not just because being around other people might reduce our anxiety but because we also use others who are in the same situation as we are to help us determine how to feel about things. As Schachter (1959) put it, “Misery doesn’t just love any kind of company, it loves only miserable company” (p. 24).
In this case, the participants were expecting to determine from the other participants how afraid they should be of the upcoming shocks. In short, and as predicted by the idea of social comparison, the women in Schachter’s studies relied on each other to help them understand what was happening to them and to find out how they should feel and respond to their social situations. Again, the power of the social situation—in this case, in determining our beliefs and attitudes—is apparent.
Although Schachter’s studies were conducted in relatively artificial lab settings, similar effects have been found in field studies in more naturally occurring settings. For instance, Kulik, Mahler, and Moore (1996) found that hospital patients who were awaiting surgery preferred to talk to other individuals who were expecting to have similar procedures rather than to patients who were having different procedures, so that they could share information about what they might expect to experience. Furthermore, Kulik and his colleagues found that sharing information was helpful: people who were able to share more information had shorter hospital stays.3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 177 Upward and Downward Comparisons Influence Our Self-Esteem Although we use social comparison in part to develop our self-concept—that is, to form accurate conclusions about our attitudes, abilities, and opinions—social comparison has perhaps an even bigger impact on our self-esteem.
When we are able to compare ourselves favorably with others, we feel good about ourselves, but when the outcome of comparison suggests that others are better or better off than we are, then our self-esteem is likely to suffer. This is one reason why good students who attend high schools in which the other students are only average may suddenly find their self-esteem threatened when they move on to colleges and universities in which they are no longer better than the other students (Marsh, Kong, & Hau, 2000). Perhaps you’ve had the experience yourself of the changes in self-esteem that occur when you have moved into a new year in school, got a new job, or changed your circle of friends.
In these cases, you may have felt much better about yourself or much worse, depending on the nature of the change. You can see that in these cases the actual characteristics of the individual person have not changed at all; only the social situation and the comparison with others have changed. Because many people naturally want to have positive self-esteem, they frequently attempt to compare themselves positively with others.
Downward social comparison occurs when we attempt to create a positive image of ourselves through favorable comparisons with others who are worse off than we are. In one study Morse and Gergen (1970) had students apply for a job, and they also presented the students with another individual who was supposedly applying for the same job. When the other candidate was made to appear to be less qualified for the job, the downward comparison with the less- qualified applicant made the students feel better about their own qualifications.
As a result, the students reported higher self-esteem than they did when the other applicant was seen as a highly competent job candidate. Research has also found that people who are suffering from serious diseases prefer to compare their condition with other individuals whose current condition and likely prognosis is worse than their own (Buunk, Gibbons, & Visser, 2002). These comparisons make them feel more hopeful about their own possible outcomes.
More frequent use of downward than upward social comparison with similar others has been been shown to be a commonly used coping strategy for preserving self- esteem in the face of a wide variety of challenging life situations, including experiences of physical decline, rheumatoid arthritis, AIDS, occupational burnout, eating disorders, unemployment, educational difficulties, and intellectual disabilities (Buunk, Gibbons, & Buunk, 1997). Although downward comparison provides us with positive feelings, upward social comparison, which occurs when we compare ourselves with others who are better off than we are, is also common (Blanton, Buunk, Gibbons, & Kuyper, 1999; Vrugt & Koenis, 2002). Upward comparison may lower our self-esteem by reminding us that we are not as well off as others.
The power of upward social comparison to decrease self-esteem has been documented in many domains (Buunk, Gibbons, & Buunk, 1997). Thinking back to our case study at the beginning of this chapter, this power can sometimes be strongly felt when looking at social networking sites. Imagine someone who has had a bad day, or is generally unhappy with how life is going, then logs onto Facebook to see that most of his or her friends have posted very positive status updates about how happy they are, how well they are doing, or the wonderful vacations they are having.
What would your prediction be about how that person would feel? Would that person take pleasure from knowing that the friends were happy, or would the friends’ happiness make the person feel worse? The research on upward social comparisons to similar others would suggest the latter, and this has been demonstrated empirically.
Feinstein and colleagues (2013) investigated whether a tendency to make upward social comparisons on Facebook178 Chapter 3. The Self led to increased symptoms of depression over a three-week period. Sure enough, making more upward comparisons predicted increased rumination, which in turn was linked to increased depressive symptoms.
Despite these negative effects of upward comparisons, they can sometimes be useful because they provide information that can help us do better, help us imagine ourselves as part of the group of successful people that we want to be like (Collins, 2000), and give us hope (Snyder, Cheavens, & Sympson, 1997). The power of upward social comparison can also be harnessed for social good. When people are made aware that others are already engaging in particular prosocial behaviors, they often follow suit, partly because an upward social comparison is triggered.
This has been shown in relation to sustainable environmental practices, for example, with upward social comparisons helping to facilitate energy-saving behaviors in factory workers (Siero, Bakker, Dekker, & van den Berg, 1996) and hotel guests (Goldstein, Cialdini, & Griskevicius, 2008). As with downward comparisons, the effects of looking upward on our self-esteem tend to be more pronounced when we are comparing ourselves to similar others. If, for example, you have ever performed badly at a sport, the chances are that your esteem was more threatened when you compared yourselves to your teammates as opposed to the top professional athletes in that sport.
The outcomes of upward and downward social comparisons can have a substantial impact on our feelings, on our attempts to do better, and even on whether or not we want to continue performing an activity. When we compare positively with others and we feel that we are meeting our goals and living up to the expectations set by ourselves and others, we feel good about ourselves, enjoy the activity, and work harder at it. When we compare negatively with others, however, we are more likely to feel poorly about ourselves and enjoy the activity less, and we may even stop performing it entirely.
When social comparisons come up poorly for us, we may experience depression or anxiety, and these discrepancies are important determinants of our self-esteem (Higgins, Loeb, & Moretti, 1995; Strauman & Higgins, 1988). Although everyone makes social comparisons, both upward and downward, there are some sources of differences in how often we do so and which type we tend to favor. As downward social comparisons generally increase and upward ones generally decrease self-esteem, and the pursuit of high self-esteem, as we have seen, is more prominent in Western as opposed to Eastern cultures, then it should come as no surprise that there are cultural differences here.
White and Lehman (2005), for example, found that Asian Canadians made more upward social comparisons than did European Canadians, particularly following failures and when the opportunity to self-improve was made salient. These findings, the authors suggest, indicate that the Asian Canadians were using social comparisons more as a vehicle for self-improvement than self-enhancement. There are also some age-related trends in social comparison.
In general, older adults tend to make more downward comparisons than do younger adults, which is part of the reason why their self-esteem is typically higher (Helgeson & Mickelson, 2000). Older adults also use more downward social comparisons to cope with feelings of regret than do younger adults, and these comparisons are often more effective for them (Bauer, Wrosch, & Jobin, 2008). In addition to these cultural and age differences in social comparison processes, there are also individual differences.
People who score higher on a measure of social comparison orientation have been found to experience more positive affect following downward social comparisons and more negative affect following upward ones (Buunk, Zurriaga, Peiró, Nauta, & Gosalvez, 2005).3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 179 Social Identity Theory: Our Sense of Self Is Influenced by the Groups We Belong To In our discussion of social comparisons, we have seen that who we compare ourselves to can affect how we feel about ourselves, for better or worse. Another social influence on our self-esteem is through our group memberships. For example, we can gain self-esteem by perceiving ourselves as members of important and valued groups that make us feel good about ourselves.
Social identity theory asserts that we draw part of our sense of identity and self-esteem from the social groups that we belong to (Hogg, 2003; Oakes, Haslam, & Turner, 1994; Tajfel, 1981). Normally, group memberships result in positive feelings, which occur because we perceive our own groups and thus ourselves in a positive light. If you are an Arsenal F.C.
fan, or if you are an Australian, or if you are a Muslim, for example, then your membership in the group becomes part of what you are, and the membership often makes you feel good about yourself. The list that follows presents a measure of the strength of social identity with a group of university students. If you complete the measure for your own school, university, or college, the research evidence would suggest that you would agree mostly with the statements that indicate that you identify with the group.
Figure 3.10 A Measure of Social Identity This 10-item scale is used to measure identification with students at the University of Maryland, but it could be modified to assess identification with any group. The items marked with an R are reversed (so that low numbers become high numbers and vice versa) before the average of the scale is computed. The scale was originally reported by Luhtanen and Crocker (1992).
For each of the following items, please indicate your response on a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) by writing a number in the blank next to the question. 1. ___ I identify with the group of University of Maryland students.
2. ___ I am glad to belong to the group of University of Maryland students. 3.
___ I make excuses for belonging to the group of University of Maryland students. 4. ___ I consider the group of University of Maryland students to be important.
5. ___ I feel held back by the group of University of Maryland students. (R) 6.
___ I criticize the group of University of Maryland students. (R) 7. ___ I see myself as belonging to the group of University of Maryland students.
8. ___ I try to hide belonging to the group of University of Maryland students. (R) 9.
___ I feel strong ties with the group of University of Maryland students. 10. ___ I am annoyed to say that I am a member of the group of University of Maryland students.
(R) Kay Deaux and her colleagues (Deaux, Reid, Mizrahi, & Ethier, 1995) asked U.S. college students to list the groups that they identified with. As you can see in Table 3.1 ,”Varieties of Social Identities,” the180 Chapter 3.
The Self students reported belonging to a wide variety of groups and claimed that many of these groups provided them with social identities. The categories that they listed included ethnic and religious groups (e.g., Asian, Jewish), political affiliations (e.g., conservative, Democrat), occupations and hobbies (e.g., gardener, tennis player), personal relationships (e.g., husband, girlfriend), and marginalized groups (e.g., gay, homeless). You can see that these identities were likely to provide a lot of positive feelings for the individuals.
Table 3.1 Varieties of Social Identities Relationships Vocation/avocation Political affiliation Stigma Ethnicity/religion • Widow • Intellectual • Feminist • Welfare • Jewish recipient • Divorced • Bookworm • Political • Christian person independent • Unemployed • Military • Catholic person • Woman veteran • Democrat • Southerner • Homeless • Man • Student • Republican person • Lover • Collector • Old person • Retired • Friend • Musician • Fat person person • Girlfriend • Gardener • Deaf person • New Yorker • Boyfriend • Teacher • Person with • American AIDS • Homemaker • Supervisor • Hispanic • Lesbian • Head of • Secretary • Asian household • Gay American • Scientist • Teenager • Smoker • African • Psychologist American • Child • Alcoholic • Salesperson • Wife • Business • Husband person • Son • Athlete • Daughter • Sister • Brother • Grandmother • Grandfather • Uncle • Aunt • Mother/ Father This table represents some of the many social identities reported by a sample of college students. Data are from Deaux and colleagues (1995). Which of our many identities is most accessible for us will vary from day to day as a function of the3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 181 particular situation we are in (Yakushko, Davidson, & Williams, 2009).
Seeing our national flag outside a government office may remind of us our national identity, whereas walking past our local soccer stadium may remind us of our identification with our team. Identity can also be heightened when it is threatened by conflict with another group—such as during an important sports game with a rival team. We each have multiple social identities, and which of our identities we draw our self-esteem from at a given time will depend on the situation we are in, as well as the social goals we have.
Figure 3.11 Social identity refers to the positive emotions we experience as a member of an important social group. In particular, we use occasions when our social groups are successful in meeting their goals to fuel our self-worth. Robert Cialdini and his colleagues (Cialdini et al., 1976) studied the idea that we can sometimes enhance our self-esteem by basking in the reflected gloryof our ingroups, which occurs when we use and advertise our ingroups’ positive achievements to boost our self-esteem.
To test this idea, they observed the clothes and clothing accessories that students at different U.S. universities wore to classes on Mondays. They found that when the university’s football team had won its game on Saturday, students were likely to emphasize their university membership by wearing clothing, such as sweatshirts and hats with the symbols of the university on them.
However, they were significantly less likely to wear university clothing on the Mondays that followed a football loss. Furthermore, in a study in which students from a university were asked to describe a victory by their university team, they frequently used the term “we,” whereas when asked to describe a game in which their school lost, they used the term “we” significantly less frequently. Emphasizing that “we’re a good school” and “we beat them” evidently provided a social identity for these students, allowing them to feel good about themselves.182 Chapter 3.
The Self When people in our ingroups perform well, social identity theory suggests that we tend to make intergroup social comparisons, and by seeing our group as doing better than other groups, we come to feel better about ourselves. However, this is not generally what happens when we make intragroup comparisons—those between ourselves and other ingroup members. In this case it is often not advantageous to bask in the glory of others in our ingroups, because in some cases the other person’s successes may create an upward comparison and thus more negative emotions.
Self-evaluation maintenance theory (Tesser, 1988) asserts that our self-esteem can be threatened when someone else outperforms us, particularly if that person is close to us and the performance domain is central to our self-concept. This theory leads to the interesting implication that these threats will often occur in the context of our family relationships, and they have been shown to be an integral part of both family functioning in general (Tesser, 1980) and marital relationships in particular (Beach et al., 1996). When threats occur, the theory states that we will typically try to rebuild our self-esteem using one of three main strategies.
The first is distancing, where we redefine ourselves as less close to the person in question. For example, if a close friend keeps beating you at tennis, you may, over time, seek out another playing partner to protect your bruised ego. Interestingly, people who are more narcissistic are more likely to use this tactic than people who are lower in these characteristics (Nicholls & Stukas, 2011).
The second option is to redefine how important the trait or skill really is to your self-concept. For instance, you may decide that tennis ability just isn’t that important a part of who you are, and choose to take up another hobby instead. The third strategy is try to improve on the ability in question.
In the current example, this would mean practicing more often or hiring a coach to improve your tennis game. Notice the clear parallels between these strategies that occur in response to threats to our self- esteem posed by the behavior of others, and those that are triggered by feelings of self-discrepancy, discussed earlier in this chapter. In both cases, we seek to rebuild our self-esteem by redefining the aspect of ourself that has been diminished.
Self-Presentation: Our Sense of Self Is Influenced by the Audiences We Have It is interesting to note that each of the social influences on our sense of self that we have discussed can be harnessed as a way of protecting our self-esteem. The final influence we will explore can also be used strategically to elevate not only our own esteem, but the esteem we have in the eyes of others. Positive self-esteem occurs not only when we do well in our own eyes but also when we feel that we are positively perceived by the other people we care about.
Figure 3.12 Being seen positively by others helps us to feel positive about ourselves.3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 183 Because it is so important to be seen as competent and productive members of society, people naturally attempt to present themselves to others in a positive light. We attempt to convince others that we are good and worthy people by appearing attractive, strong, intelligent, and likable and by saying positive things to others (Jones & Pittman, 1982; Schlenker, 2003). The tendency to present a positive self- image to others, with the goal of increasing our social status, is known as self-presentation, and it is a basic and natural part of everyday life.
A big question in relation to self-presentation is the extent to which it is an honest versus more strategic, potentially dishonest enterprise. The sociologist Erving Goffman (1959) developed an influential theory of self-presentation and described it as a mainly honest process, where people need to present the parts of themselves required by the social role that they are playing in a given situation. If everyone plays their part according to accepted social scripts and conventions, then the social situation will run smoothly and the participants will avoid embarrassment.
Seen in this way, self-presentation is a transparent process, where we are trying to play the part required of us, and we trust that others are doing the same. Other theorists, though, have viewed self-presentation as a more strategic endeavor, which may involve not always portraying ourselves in genuine ways (e.g., Jones & Pittman, 1982). As is often the case with two seemingly opposing perspectives, it is quite likely that both are true in certain situations, depending on the social goals of the actors.
Different self-presentation strategies may be used to create different emotions in other people, and the use of these strategies may be evolutionarily selected because they are successful (Toma, Hancock, & Ellison, 2008). Edward Jones and Thane Pittman (1982) described five self-presentation strategies, each of which is expected to create a resulting emotion in the other person: 1. The goal of ingratiation is to create liking by using flattery or charm.
2. The goal of intimidation is to create fear by showing that you can be aggressive. 3.
The goal of exemplification is to create guilt by showing that you are a better person than the other. 4. The goal of supplication is to create pity by indicating to others that you are helpless and needy.
5. The goal of self-promotion is to create respect by persuading others that you are competent.184 Chapter 3. The Self Figure 3.13 Attempts to impress and intimidate others to gain status are not unique to humans.
No matter who is using it, self-presentation can easily be overdone, and when it is, it backfires. People who overuse the ingratiation technique and who are seen as obviously and strategically trying to get others to like them are often disliked because of this. Have you ever had a slick salesperson obviously try to ingratiate him- or herself with you just so you will buy a particular product, and you end up not liking the person and making a hasty retreat from the premises?
People who overuse the exemplification or self-promotion strategies by boasting or bragging, particularly if that boasting does not appear to reflect their true characteristics, may end up being perceived as arrogant and even self- deluded (Wosinska, Dabul, Whetstone-Dion, & Cialdini, 1996). Using intimidation can also often backfire; acting more modestly may be more effective. Again, the point is clear: we may want to self- promote with the goal of getting others to like us, but we must also be careful to consider the point of view of the other person.
Being aware of these strategies is not only useful for better understanding how to use them responsibly ourselves, it can also help us to understand that other people’s behaviors may often reflect their self-presentational concerns. This can, in turn, facilitate better empathy for3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 185 others, particularly when they are exhibiting challenging behaviors (Friedlander & Schwartz, 1985). For instance, perhaps someone’s verbally aggressive behavior toward you is more about that person being afraid rather than about his or her desire to do you harm.
—Now that we have explored some of the commonly used self-presentation tactics, let’s look at how they manifest in specific social behaviors. One concrete way to self-promote is to display our positive physical characteristics. A reason that many of us spend money on improving our physical appearance is the desire to look good to others so that they will like us.
We can also earn status by collecting expensive possessions such as fancy cars and big houses and by trying to associate with high-status others. Additionally, we may attempt to dominate or intimidate others in social interactions. People who talk more and louder and those who initiate more social interactions are afforded higher status.
A businessman who greets others with a strong handshake and a smile, and people who speak out strongly for their opinions in group discussions may be attempting to do so as well. In some cases, people may even resort to aggressive behavior, such as bullying, in attempts to improve their status (Baumeister, Smart, & Boden, 1996). Self-promotion can also be pursued in our online social behaviors.
For example, a study in Taiwan conducted by Wang and Stefanone (2013) used survey methodology to investigate the relationship between personality traits, self-presentation and the use of check-ins on Facebook. Interestingly, narcissism was found to predict scores on a measure of exhibitionistic, self-promoting use of Facebook check-ins, which included items like “I check in so people know that I am with friends,” and “I expect friends to like or leave comments on my check-in status on Facebook.” Other studies have also found associations between narcissistic traits and self-promotional activity on Facebook. Mehdizadeh (2010), for example, found that narcissistic personality scores were positively correlated with the amount of daily logins on Facebook and the duration of each login.
Furthermore, narcissistic traits were related to increased use of self-promotional material in the main photo, view photos, status updates, and notes sections of people’s Facebook pages. Analysis of the content and language used in Facebook postings has also revealed that they are sometimes used by individuals to self-promote. Bazarova, Taft, Choi, and Cosley (2013) explored self- presentation through language styles used in status updates, wall posts, and private messages from 79 participants.
The use of positive emotion words was correlated with self-reported self-presentation concern in status updates. This is consistent with the idea that people share positive experiences with Facebook friends partly as a self-enhancement strategy. Online self-presentation doesn’t seem to be limited to Facebook usage.
There is also evidence that self- promotional concerns are often a part of blogging behaviors, too. Mazur and Kozarian (2010), for example, analyzed the content of adolescents’ blog entries and concluded that a careful concern for self-presentation was more central to their blogging behavior than direct interaction with others. This often seems to apply to micro-blogging sites like Twitter.
Marwick and Boyd (2011) found that self- presentational strategies were a consistent part of celebrity tweeting, often deployed by celebrities to maintain their popularity and image. You might not be surprised to hear that men and women use different approaches to self-presentation. Men are more likely to present themselves in an assertive way, by speaking and interrupting others, by visually focusing on the other person when they are speaking, and by leaning their bodies into the conversation.
Women, on the other hand, are more likely to be modest; they tend to create status by186 Chapter 3. The Self laughing and smiling, and by reacting more positively to the statements of others (Dovidio, Brown, Heltman, Ellyson, & Keation, 1988). These gender differences are probably in large part socially determined as a result of the different reinforcements that men and women receive for using particular self-presentational strategies.
For example, self-promoting by speaking out and acting assertively can be more effective for men than it is for women, in part because cross-culturally consistent stereotypes tend to depict assertiveness as more desirable in men than in women. These stereotypes can have very important consequences in the real world. For instance, one of the reasons for the “glass ceiling” existing in some occupations (where women experience discrimination in reaching top positions in organizations) may be attributable to the more negative reactions that their assertive behaviors, necessary for career advancement, receive than those of their male colleagues (Eagly & Carli, 2007).
There are also some cultural differences in the extent to which people use self-presentation strategies in social contexts. For instance, when considering job interviews, Konig, Haftseinsson, Jansen, & Stadelmann (2011) found that individuals from Iceland and Switzerland used less self-presentational behavior than people from the United States. Differences in self-presentation have also been found in job interviews involving individuals from Ghana, Turkey, Norway, and Germany, with the former two groups showing higher impression management scores than the latter two (Bye et al., 2011).
So far we have been talking about self-presentation as it operates in particular situations in the short- term. However, we also engage in longer-term self-presentational projects, where we seek to build particular reputations with particular audiences. —Emler & Reicher (1995) describe the unique capacity humans have to know one another by repute and argue that, accordingly, we are often engaged in a process of reputation management, which is a form of long-term self-presentation, where individuals seek to build and sustain specific reputations with important audiences.
According to this perspective, our behaviors in current social situations may not only be to serve our self-presentational goals in that moment, but also be based on a consideration of their longer-term repercussions for our reputations. As many politicians, for example, know only too well, a poor decision from their past can come back to haunt them when their reputation is being assessed during a campaign. The concept of reputation management can be used to help explain a wide variety of social and antisocial behaviors, including corporate branding (Smith, Smith, & Wang, 2010), sociomoral debate (Emler, Tarry, & St.
James, 2007), and teenage criminal activity (Lopez-Romero & Romero, 2011). In the last example, it is argued that a lot of teenage antisocial behavior results from a desire to build a reputation for toughness and rebelliousness with like-minded peer audiences (Emler & Reicher, 1995). Similarly, antisocial and self-destructive online actions, like people posting to Facebook their involvement in illegal acts during riots, or individuals engaging in life-threatening activities in Internet crazes like Neknominate, may make more sense if they are considered partly as stemming from a desire to project a particular reputation to specific audiences.
Perhaps the perceived social kudos from doing these things outweighs the obvious personal risks in the individuals’ minds at the time. People often project distinct reputations to different social audiences. For example, adolescents who engage in antisocial activity to build reputations for rebelliousness among their peers will often seek to construct very different reputations when their parents are the audience (Emler & Reicher, 1995).
The desire to compartmentalize our reputations and audiences can even spill over into our online behaviors. Wiederhold (2012) found that, with some adolescents’ Facebook friends numbering in the hundreds or3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 187 thousands, increasing numbers are moving to Twitter in order to reach a more selective audience. One critical trigger for this has been that their parents are now often friends with them on Facebook, creating a need for young people to find a new space where they can build reputations that may not always be parent-friendly (Wiederhold, 2012).
Although the desire to present the self favorably is a natural part of everyday life, both person and situation factors influence the extent to which we do it. For one, we are more likely to self-present in some situations than in others. When we are applying for a job or meeting with others whom we need to impress, we naturally become more attuned to the social aspects of the self, and our self-presentation increases.
There are also individual differences. Some people are naturally better at self-presentation—they enjoy doing it and are good at it—whereas others find self-presentation less desirable or more difficult. An important individual-difference variable known as self-monitoring has been shown in many studies to have a major impact on self-presentation.
Self-monitoring refers to the tendency to be both motivated and capable of regulating our behavior to meet the demands of social situations (Gangestad & Snyder, 2000). High self-monitors are particularly good at reading the emotions of others and therefore are better at fitting into social situations—they agree with statements such as “In different situations and with different people, I often act like very different persons,” and “I guess I put on a show to impress or entertain people.” Low self-monitors, on the other hand, generally act on their own attitudes, even when the social situation suggests that they should behave otherwise. Low self-monitors are more likely to agree with statements such as “At parties and social gatherings, I do not attempt to do or say things that others will like,” and “I can only argue for ideas that I already believe.” In short, high self- monitors use self-presentation to try to get other people to like them by behaving in ways that the others find desirable, whereas low self-monitors tend to follow their internal convictions more than the demands of the social situation.
In one experiment that showed the importance of self-monitoring, Cheng and Chartrand (2003) had college students interact individually with another student (actually an experimental confederate) whom they thought they would be working with on an upcoming task. While they were interacting, the confederate subtly touched her own face several times, and the researchers recorded the extent to which the student participant mimicked the confederate by also touching his or her own face. The situational variable was the status of the confederate.
Before the meeting began, and according to random assignment to conditions, the students were told either that they would be the leader and that the other person would be the worker on the upcoming task, or vice versa. The person variable was self-monitoring, and each participant was classified as either high or low on self-monitoring on the basis of his or her responses to the self-monitoring scale. As you can see in Figure 3.14, “Self-Monitoring and Behavioral Mimicry,” Cheng and Chartrand found an interaction effect: the students who had been classified as high self-monitors were more likely to mimic the behavior of the confederate when she was described as being the leader than when she was described as being the worker, indicating that they were “tuned in” to the social situation and modified their behavior to appear more positively.
Although the low self-monitors did mimic the other person, they did not mimic her more when the other was high, versus low, status. This finding is consistent with the idea that the high self-monitors were particularly aware of the other person’s status and attempted to self-present more positively to the high-status leader. The low self-monitors, on the other188 Chapter 3.
The Self hand—because they feel less need to impress overall—did not pay much attention to the other person’s status. Figure 3.14: Self-Monitoring and Behavioral Mimicry High self-monitors imitated more when the person they were interacting with was of higher (versus lower) status. Low self-monitors were not sensitive to the status of the other.
Data are from Cheng and Chartrand (2003). This differential sensitivity to social dynamics between high and low self-monitors suggests that their self-esteem will be affected by different factors. For people who are high in self-monitoring, their self- esteem may be positively impacted when they perceive that their behavior matches the social demands of the situation, and negatively affected when they feel that it does not.
In contrast, low self-monitors may experience self-esteem boosts when they see themselves behaving consistently with their internal standards, and feel less self-worth when they feel they are not living up to them (Ickes, Holloway, Stinson, & Hoodenpyle, 2006). H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 3 DRAG THE WORDS – CLIMATE CHANGE AND SUSTAINABLE BEHAVIOR IN SOCIAL CONTEXT Social psychologists often use concepts from the study of the self to make sense of important social issues For example, many are interested in understanding sustainable behaviors in relation to climate change. To test your learning of some key concepts from this chapter, read through each of the following sustainability-related scenarios.
For each one, select the most relevant concept from chapter 3 by matching it with the correct scenarios. Concepts: self-affirmation, deindividuation, self-monitoring, basking in reflected glory, cognitive dissonance, social comparison, self-complexity, social identity theory, self-consciousness, self- presentation. Scenarios: 1.
Some politicians may change how much they publicly endorse sustainability initiatives3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 189 that may clash with economic concerns, depending on which groups of people they are meeting with. 2. Many people feel a sense of inconsistency because they think that tackling climate change is an important issue, but do not always practice sustainable behaviors.
3. Some activists for climate change see their activist identity as a large part of their self- concept, and may have relatively few other important identities. 4.
People may feel more judged on whether they practice sustainability in public, as opposed to more private settings. 5. Individuals may feel that their own commitments to sustainable behavior are inadequate if they see peers who are doing more.
6. Some people involved in climate change activism find that they draw self-esteem from the positive achievements of the relevant groups they belong to. 7.
Some individuals may claim to practice more sustainable behaviors than is accurate, in order to appear in a positive light in front of particular audiences. 8. A student at a school that receives an institutional award for their sustainable practices may feel good about this and talk about their membership of the school more regularly in the aftermath.
9. When someone is criticized for not pursuing sustainable behaviors, for example not regularly recycling, they may respond with a counter claim in a related area, such as by noting that they drive a hybrid vehicle. 10.
When people are in a large crowd, they may sometimes feel less personally accountable and practice less sustainable behaviors because of this. For instance when attendees at a music festival leave large amounts of litter behind. Key Takeaways • Our self-concepts are affected by others’ appraisals, as demonstrated by concepts including the looking-glass self and self-labeling.
• The self-concept and self-esteem are also often strongly influenced by social comparison. For example, we use social comparison to determine the accuracy and appropriateness of our thoughts, feelings, and behavior. • When we are able to compare ourselves favorably with others through downward social comparison, we feel good about ourselves.
Upward social comparison with others who are better off than we are leads to negative emotions. • Social identity refers to the positive emotions that we experience as a member of an important social group.190 Chapter 3. The Self • Normally, our group memberships result in positive feelings, which occur because we perceive our own groups, and thus ourselves, in a positive light.
• Which of our many category identities is most accessible for us will vary from day to day as a function of the particular situation we are in. • In the face of others’ behaviors, we may enhance our self-esteem by “basking in the reflected glory” of our ingroups or of other people we know. • If other people’s actions threaten our sense of self according to self-evaluation maintenance theory, we may engage in a variety of strategies aimed at redefining our self-concept and rebuilding our self-esteem.
• The tendency to present a positive self-image to others, with the goal of increasing our social status, is known as self-presentation, and it is a basic and natural part of everyday life. Different self-presentation strategies may be used to create different emotions in other people. • We often use self-presentation in the longer term, seeking to build and sustain particular reputations with specific social audiences.
• The individual-difference variable of self-monitoring relates to the ability and desire to self- present. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Describe some aspects of your self-concept that have been created through social comparison.
2. Describe times when you have engaged in downward and upward social comparison and the effects these comparisons have had on your self-esteem. To what extent do your experiences fit with the research evidence here?
3. What are your most salient social identities? How do they create positive feelings for you?
4. Outline a situation where someone else’s behavior has threatened your self-concept. Which of the strategies outlined in relation to self-evaluation maintenance theory did you engage in to rebuild your self-concept?
5. Identify a situation where you basked in the reflected glory of your ingroup’s behavior or peformance. What effect did this have on your self-esteem and why?
6. Describe some situations where people you know have used each of the self-presentation strategies that were listed in this section. Which strategies seem to be more and less effective in helping them to achieve their social goals, and why?
7. Consider your own level of self-monitoring. Do you think that you are more of a high or a low self-monitor, and why?
What do you see as the advantages and disadvantages for you of the level of self-monitoring that you have?3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 191 References Baldwin, M. W., & Holmes, J. O.
(1987). Salient private audiences and awareness of the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1087-1098.
Baumeister, R. F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. M.
(1996). Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self-esteem. Psychological Review, 103(1), 5-33.
doi:10.1037/ 0033-295X.103.1.5 Bauer, I., Wrosch, C., & Jobin, J. (2008). I’m better off than most other people: The role of social comparisons for coping with regret in young adulthood and old age.
Psychology And Aging, 23(4), 800-811. doi:10.1037/a0014180 Bazarova, N. N., Taft, J.
G., Choi, Y., & Cosley, D. (2013). Managing impressions and relationships on Facebook: Self-presentational and relational concerns revealed through the analysis of language style.
Journal Of Language And Social Psychology, 32(2), 121-141. doi:10.1177/ 0261927X12456384 Beach, S. H., Tesser, A., Mendolia, M., Anderson, P., Crelia, R., Whitaker, D., & Fincham, F.
D. (1996). Self-evaluation maintenance in marriage: Toward a performance ecology of the marital relationship.
Journal of Family Psychology, 10(4), 379-396. doi:10.1037/0893-3200.10.4.379 Beer, A., Watson, D., & McDade-Montez, E. (2013).
Self–other agreement and assumed similarity in neuroticism, extraversion, and trait affect: Distinguishing the effects of form and content. Assessment, 20(6), 723-737. doi:10.1177/1073191113500521 Blanton, H., Buunk, B.
P., Gibbons, F. X., & Kuyper, H. (1999).
When better-than-others compare upward: Choice of comparison and comparative evaluation as independent predictors of academic performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(3), 420–430. Buunk, A.
P., & Gibbons, F. X. (2007).
Social comparison: The end of a theory and the emergence of a field. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102(1), 3–21. Buunk, B.
P., Gibbons, F. X., & Buunk, A. P.
(1997). Health, coping and well-being: Perspectives from social comparison theory. Psychology Press.
Buunk, A. P., Gibbons, F. X., & Visser, A.
(2002). The relevance of social comparison processes for prevention and health care. Patient Education and Counseling, 47, 1–3.
Buunk, B. P., Zurriaga, R., Peiró, J. M., Nauta, A., & Gosalvez, I.
(2005). Social comparisons at work as related to a cooperative social climate and to individual differences in social comparison orientation. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 54(1), 61-80.
doi:10.1111/ j.1464-0597.2005.00196.x Bye, H., Sandal, G., van de Vijver, F. R., Sam, D., Çakar, N., & Franke, G. (2011).
Personal values and intended self‐presentation during job interviews: A cross‐cultural comparison. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 60(1), 160-182. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2010.00432.x Carter, L.
(2012). Locus of control, internalized heterosexism, experiences of prejudice, and the psychological adjustment of lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals. Dissertation Abstracts International, 73.
Cheng, C., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003).
Self-Monitoring Without Awareness: Using Mimicry as a192 Chapter 3. The Self Nonconscious Affiliation Strategy.Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 85(6), 1170-1179. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.85.6.1170 Cialdini, R.
B., Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M. R., Freeman, S., & Sloan, L.
R. (1976). Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 366–374. Collins, R. L.
(2000). Among the better ones: Upward assimilation in social comparison. In J.
Suls & L. Wheeler (Eds.), Handbook of social comparison (pp. 159–172).
New York, NY: Kulwer Academic/Plenum. Cooley, C. H.
(1902). Human nature and social order. New York: Scribner’s.
Deaux, K., Reid, A., Mizrahi, K., & Ethier, K. A. (1995).
Parameters of social identity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(2), 280–291. Dovidio, J.
F., Brown, C. E., Heltman, K., Ellyson, S. L., & Keating, C.
F. (1988). Power displays between women and men in discussions of gender-linked tasks: A multichannel study.
Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 55(4), 580-587. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.55.4.580 Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L.
L. (2007). Through the labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders.
Boston, MA, US: Harvard Business School Press. Emler, N. & Reicher, S.
(1995). Adolescence and delinquency: The collective management of reputation. Malden Blackwell Publishing.
Emler, N., Tarry, H. & St. James, A.
(2007). Postconventional moral reasoning and reputation. Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 76-89.
Feinstein, B. A., Hershenberg, R., Bhatia, V., Latack, J. A., Meuwly, N., & Davila, J.
(2013). Negative social comparison on Facebook and depressive symptoms: Rumination as a mechanism. Psychology Of Popular Media Culture, 2(3), 161-170.
doi:10.1037/a003311 Festinger, L. U. (1954).
A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117-140. doi: 10.1177/001872675400700202 Fox, J.
D., & Stinnett, T. A. (1996).
The effects of labeling bias on prognostic outlook for children as a function of diagnostic label and profession. Psychology In The Schools, 33(2), 143-152. Friedlander, M.
L., & Schwartz, G. S. (1985).
Toward a theory of strategic self-presentation in counseling and psychotherapy. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 32(4), 483-501. doi: 10.10370022-0167.32.4.483 Galinsky, A.
D., Wang, C. S., Whitson, J. A., Anicich, E.
M., Hugenberg, K., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2013).
The reappropriation of stigmatizing labels: The reciprocal relationship between power and self-labeling. Psychological Science, 24(10), 2020-2029. doi:10.1177/0956797613482943 Gangestad, S.
W., & Snyder, M. (2000). Self-monitoring: Appraisal and reappraisal.
Psychological Bulletin, 126(4), 530-555. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.126.4.530 Goffman, E. (1959).
The presentation of self in everyday life. Oxford, England: Doubleday. Goldstein, N.
J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008).
A room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research, 35(3), 472-482. Hardin, C., & Higgins, T.
(1996). Shared reality: How social verification makes the subjective3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 193 objective. In R.
M. Sorrentino & E. T.
Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 3, pp. 28–84).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Helgeson, V. S., & Mickelson, K.
(2000). Coping with chronic illness among the elderly: Maintaining self-esteem. In S.
B. Manuck, R. Jennings, B.
S. Rabin, & A. Baum (Eds.), Behavior, health, and aging.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Higgins, E. T., Loeb, I., & Moretti, M.
(Eds.). (1995). Self-discrepancies and developmental shifts in vulnerability: Life transitions in the regulatory significance of others.
Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. Hogg, M. A.
(2003). Social identity. In M.
R. Leary, J. P.
Tangney, M. R. E.
Leary, & J. P. E.
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 462–479). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Ickes, W., Holloway, R., Stinson, L. L., & Hoodenpyle, T. (2006).
Self-Monitoring in Social Interaction: The Centrality of Self-Affect.Journal Of Personality, 74(3), 659-684. doi:10.1111/ j.1467-6494.2006.00388.x Jones, E. E., & Pittman, T.
S. (1982). Toward a general theory of strategic self presentation.
In J. Suls (Ed.), Psychological perspectives on the self. Hillsdale, NJ:Erlbaum König, C.
J., Hafsteinsson, L. G., Jansen, A., & Stadelmann, E. H.
(2011). Applicants’ self‐presentational behavior across cultures: Less self‐presentation in Switzerland and Iceland than in the United States. International Journal Of Selection And Assessment,19(4), 331-339.
Kulik, J. A., Mahler, H. I.
M., & Moore, P. J. (1996).
Social comparison and affiliation under threat: Effects on recovery from major surgery. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71(5), 967–979. López-Romero, L., & Romero, E.
(2011). Reputation management of adolescents in relation to antisocial behavior. The Journal of Genetic Psychology: Research And Theory On Human Development, 172(4), 440-446.
doi:10.1080/00221325.2010.549156 Luhtanen, R., & Crocker, J. (1992). A collective self-esteem scale: Self-evaluation of one’s social identity.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 302–318. Marsh, H. W., Kong, C.-K., & Hau, K-T.
(2000). Longitudinal multilevel models of the big-fish-little- pond effect on academic self-concept: Counterbalancing contrast and reflected-glory effects in Hong Kong schools. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 337–349.
Marwick, A. E., & Boyd, D. (2011).
I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience.New Media & Society, 13(1), 114-133. doi:10.1177/ 1461444810365313 Mazur, E., & Kozarian, L. (2010).
Self-presentation and interaction in blogs of adolescents and young emerging adults. Journal Of Adolescent Research, 25(1), 124-144. doi:10.1177/0743558409350498 Mehdizadeh, S.
(2010). Self-presentation 2.0: Narcissism and self-esteem on Facebook. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, And Social Networking, 13(4), 357-364.
doi:10.1089/ cyber.2009.0257 Morse, S., & Gergen, K. (1970). Social comparison, self-consistency, and the concept of self.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16(1), 148–156. Moses, T. (2009).
Self-labeling and its effects among adolescents diagnosed with mental disorders. Social Science and Medicine, 68(3), 570-578.194 Chapter 3. The Self Nicholls, E., & Stukas, A.
A. (2011). Narcissism and the self-evaluation maintenance model: Effects of social comparison threats on relationship closeness.
The Journal of Social Psychology, 151(2), 201-212. doi:10.1080/00224540903510852 Oakes, P. J., Haslam, S.
A., & Turner, J. C. (1994).
Sterotyping and social reality. Oxford, England: Blackwell. Perkins, K., Wiley, S., & Deaux, K.
(2014). Through which looking glass? Distinct sources of public regard and self-esteem among first- and second-generation immigrants of color.
Cultural Diversity And Ethnic Minority Psychology, 20(2), 213-219. doi:10.1037/a0035435 Schachter, S. (1959).
The psychology of affiliation. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Schlenker, B.
R. (2003). Self-presentation.
In M. R. Leary, J.
P. Tangney, M. R.
E. Leary, & J. P.
E. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 492–518).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Siero, F. W., Bakker, A.
B., Dekker, G. B., & van den Berg, M. T.
(1996). Changing organizational energy consumption behavior through comparative feedback. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 16, 235-246.
Smith, K., Smith, M., & Wang, K. (2010). Does brand management of corporate reputation translate into higher market value?.
Journal of Strategic Marketing, 18(3), 201-221. doi:10.1080/ 09652540903537030 Snyder, C., Cheavens, J., & Sympson, S. (1997).
Hope: An individual motive for social commerce. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 1, 107–118. Strauman, T.
J., & Higgins, E. T. (1988).
Self-discrepancies as predictors of vulnerability to distinct syndromes of chronic emotional distress. Journal of Personality, 56(4), 685–707. Szymanski, D.
M., & Obiri, O. (2011). Do religious coping styles moderate or mediate the external and internalized racism-distress links?
The Counseling Psychologist, 39(3), 438-462. doi:10.1177/ 0011000010378895 Tajfel, H. (1981).
Human groups and social categories: Studies in social psychology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Taylor, L.M., Hume, I.R., and Welsh, N.
(2010) Labelling and Self-esteem: The impact of using specific versus generic labels. Educational Psychology, 1, 1-12 Tesser, A. (1980) Self–esteem maintenance in family dynamics.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1980, 39(1), Tesser, A. (1988). Toward a self-evaluation maintenance model of social behavior.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 21, 181–227. Toma, C. L., Hancock, J.
T., & Ellison, N. B. (2008).
Separating fact from fiction: An examination of deceptive self-presentation in online dating profiles. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(8), 1023-1036. doi:10.1177/0146167208318067 Van Lange, P.
A. M. (2008).
Social comparison is basic to social psychology. American Journal of Psychology, 121(1), 169–172. Vrugt, A., & Koenis, S.
(2002). Perceived self-efficacy, personal goals, social comparison, and scientific productivity. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 51(4), 593–607.3.3 The Social Self: The Role of the Social Situation 195 Wang, S., & Stefanone, M.
A. (2013). Showing off?
Human mobility and the interplay of traits, self- disclosure, and Facebook check-ins.Social Science Computer Review, 31(4), 437-457. White, K., & Lehman, D. R.
(2005). Culture and social comparison seeking: The role of self-motives. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 232-242.
Wiederhold, B. K. (2012).
As parents invade Faceboo, teens tweet more. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15(8), 385-386. Wosinska, W., Dabul, A.
J., Whetstone-Dion, R., & Cialdini, R. B. (1996).
Self-presentational responses to success in the organization: The costs and benefits of modesty. Basic And Applied Social Psychology, 18(2), 229-242. doi:10.1207/s15324834basp1802_8 Yakushko, O., Davidson, M., & Williams, E.N.
(2009). Identity Salience Model: A paradigm for integrating multiple identities in clinical practice. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training 46, 180-192.
doi: 10.1037/a0016080 Yeung, K., & Martin, J. (2003). The Looking Glass Self: An empirical test and elaboration.
Social Forces, 81(3), 843-879. doi:10.1353/sof.2003.0048 Media Attributions • “Students rushing renovated Kinnick Stadium” by Foxhunt king is licensed under a CC BY- SA 3.0 licence. • “Ralph Lauren getting in his orange 997 GT3 RS” by Damian Morys is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “Helping the homeless” by Ed Yourdon is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “Angry Old Lion 50D” by koorosh B is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “Brazilian Federal Highway Police” by Fabio Pozzebom is licensed under a CC BY 3.0 BR licence.
• “Mad dog” by U.S. Air Force Photo by Josh Plueger is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence. • “angry man 1” by Chris Gallagher is licensed under a CC BY-ND 2.0 licence.3.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about the Self Social psychologists think about the self in the same way that they think about any other social phenomenon—in terms of affect, behavior, and cognition, and in terms of the person-situation interaction.
Our focus in this chapter has been on the cognitive, affective, and social aspects of the self and on the remarkable extent to which the self is created by the social situation in which we find ourselves. Take a moment and use this new knowledge about how social psychologists think about the self to consider your own self. Think carefully (and as fairly as you can) about how you think and feel about yourself.
What constructs did you list when you tried the Twenty Statements Test in section 10, “The Cognitive Self: The Self-Concept”? Which of your physical characteristics were most accessible for you? And what about your social identities and your traits?
Do you now have a better insight into the characteristics that are most important to you? Now consider the complexity and consistency of your self-concept. Do you think it would be better if it was more complex or consistent?
Do you think you should seek out more dimensions to round it out? Or perhaps you feel that you already have a healthy and complex self-concept. In any case, you might want to keep this concept in mind as you think about yourself in the future.
Self-esteem is one of the most important aspects of the self. Do you feel that you have relatively high or low self-esteem? What about other people you know?
Does their level of self-esteem influence how you relate to them? And how do the aspects of your own self help (or potentially harm) your relations with others? And what about your relations with the social groups you belong to?
Do you derive a lot of your self- esteem from your group memberships? Which groups provide you with social identities, and are there group memberships that may potentially not provide you with high social identity? When and how do you use self-presentation and reputation management in your daily life?
Finally, take a moment and consider your online behavior. How do you think it both reflects, and influences how you see yourself? In sum, the self is the fundamental part of human psychology and will form the basis of all our analyses of social behavior.
We have already seen this in previous topics, and will continue to see it going forward. H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 3 True or False Quiz 197198 Chapter 3. The Self How well do you now understand the topic of the self?
One way to find out is to take this brief true or false quiz. Good luck! 1.
Priya’s self-complexity is high, so when she fails in one area, it is less likely to affect her overall self-esteem. 2. Different aspects of our identities can become more salient in different social situations.
3. Sierra often compares her performance on exams to other students who have done worse than she has, This is an example of upward social comparison. 4.
The self-presentational strategy where we try to make others like us is called self- promotion. 5. Having higher rather than lower levels of self-esteem causes more positive outcomes.3.5 Chapter Summary The many and varied thoughts that we have about ourselves are stored in the variety of self-schemas that make up the cognitive part of the self—the self-concept.
The self-concept is the most complex of all our schemas because it includes all of the images, desires, beliefs, feelings, and hopes that we have for and about ourselves. The self-concept can be measured by simply asking people to list the things that come to mind when they think about themselves or by using other techniques such as asking people to remember information related to the self. Research has found that some people have more complex and consistent selves than others do, and that having a variety of self-schemas is useful because the various aspects of the self help to improve our responses to the events that we experience.
The self-concept can vary in its current accessibility. When the self-concept is highly accessible and therefore becomes the focus of our attention, the outcome is known as self-awareness or self- consciousness. Private self-consciousness occurs when we are introspective about our inner thoughts and feelings, whereas public self-consciousness occurs when we focus on our public image.
It is important to be aware of variation in the accessibility of the aspects of the self-concept because the changes in our thoughts about the self have an important influence on our behavior. Increased self- awareness, for instance, can lead to increased perceptions of self-discrepancy, which occurs when we see our current self as not matching our ideal self. Self-esteem refers to the positive (high self-esteem) or negative (low self-esteem) evaluations that we make of ourselves.
When we feel that we are viewed positively and held in esteem by others, we say that we have high social status. Having high social status creates positive self-esteem. The desire to see ourselves positively leads us to seek out, process, and remember information in a way that allows us to see ourselves even more positively.
However, although the desire to self-enhance is a powerful motive, it is not the same in all cultures, and increases in self-esteem do not necessarily make us better or more effective people. An effective life involves an appropriate balance between the feeling and the cognitive parts of the self: we must always consider not only the positivity of our self-views but also the accuracy of our self-characterizations and the strength of our relationships with others. Although we learn about ourselves in part by examining our own behaviors, the self-concept and self- esteem are also determined through our interactions with others.
The looking-glass self reflects how others’ views of us feed into the way we see ourselves. Social comparison occurs when we learn about our abilities and skills, about the appropriateness and validity of our opinions, and about our relative social status by comparing our own attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors with those of others. We use downward social comparison to create a positive image of ourselves through favorable comparisons with others who are worse off than we are.
Through upward social comparison, we compare ourselves with others who are better off than we are. In some cases, we can bask in the reflected glory of others that we care about, but in other cases, upward comparison makes us feel inadequate. An important aspect of the self-concept that is derived from our social experiences is our 199200 Chapter 3.
The Self social identity, which is turn is derived from our membership in social groups and our attachments to those groups. The tendency to attempt to present a positive image to others and thereby attempt to increase our social status is known as self-presentation, and it is a basic and natural part of everyday life. In the longer term, our concern to present ourselves in particular ways can become a more ongoing reputation management project, and we may end up building different reputations with different audiences.
Some people are high self-monitors, more able and willing to self-present than are other people, and will shift their behavior across situations and audiences more often than low self-monitors, who try to act more consistently with their internal values. H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 3 Multiple-Choice Quiz As you have reached the end of this chapter, consider taking this multiple-choice quiz to review what you have learned about some key concepts. As always, you can check the correct answers as you go, or wait for overall feedback at the end.
1. Javier has an interdependent self-concept, which means that he most likely _____. a.
focuses on the welfare of himself more than that of others b. defines individuals as embedded in their ingroups c. defines individuals as being fully autonomous d.
emphasizes outgroup loyalty 2. Aima is a professional chef, and sees this as the central part of her self-concept. She rarely thinks of herself in other ways.
Which concept is she showing here? a. low self-complexity b.
high self-complexity c. high self-concept clarity d. low self-concept clarity 3.
Sharan is someone who is often willing and able to regulate her behavior in response to the demands of the social situation. Which concept does this tendency best fit with? a.
self-monitoring b. self-esteem c. self-ingratiation d.
self-efficacy 4. Grace is having a conversation with her grandmother about her school, friends, and various activities and interests. Grace also says, “Grandma, I think that I’m a good person.
I like making other people feel happy!” Grace’s feeling that she is worthy and good reflects her _____.3.5 Chapter Summary 201 a. self-schema b. self-concept c.
self-esteem d. self-monitoring 5. Damon has dreamed of playing for the Vancouver Whitecaps soccer team for many years.
He gets close when he joins one of their youth teams, but he realizes that he is not quite as good as many of the players around him. Here, he is making a(n) _____ social comparison that will likely _____ his self-esteem. a.
upward; increase b. downward; decrease c. upward; decrease d.
downward; not affectChapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Exploring Attitudes • Define the concept of an attitude and explain why it is of such interest to social psychologists.
• Review the variables that determine attitude strength. • Outline the factors that affect the strength of the attitude-behavior relationship. 2.
Changing Attitudes through Persuasion • Outline how persuasion is determined by the choice of effective communicators and effective messages. • Review the conditions under which attitudes are best changed using spontaneous versus thoughtful strategies. • Summarize the variables that make us more or less resistant to persuasive appeals.
3. Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior • Outline the principles of self-perception and explain how they can account for the influences of behavior on attitude. • Outline the principles of cognitive dissonance and explain how they can account for the influences of behavior on attitude.
The Effective Use of Persuasion by Apple to Drive Sales On January 9, 2007, Steve Jobs, the enigmatic co-founder and CEO of Apple, Inc., introduced the first iPhone to the world. The device quickly revolutionized the smartphone industry and changed what consumers came to expect from their phones. In the years since, smartphones have changed from being regarded as status symbols (Apple sold close to 1.4 million iPhones during their first year on the market) to fairly commonplace and essential tools.
One out of every five people in the world now owns a smartphone, there are more smartphones in use in the world than PCs, and it is difficult for many young people to imagine how anyone ever managed to function without them. If you consider the relatively high cost of these devices, this transformation has been truly remarkable. 203204 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Figure 4.1 Steve Jobs introduces the iPhone 4 Much of this shift in attitude can be credited to the impressive use of tactics of persuasion employed by smartphone manufacturers like Apple and Samsung. The typical marketing campaign for a new model of an iPhone delivers a carefully crafted message that cleverly weaves together stories, visuals, and music to create an emotional experience for the viewing public. These messages are often designed to showcase the range of uses of the device and to evoke a sense of need.
Apple also strives to form relationships with its customers, something that is illustrated by the fact that 86 percent of those who purchased the iPhone 5S were upgrading from a previous model. This strategy has benefited Apple tremendously as it has sold over 400 million iPhones since 2007, making it one of the wealthiest companies in the world. Sources: Borchers, T.
A. (2013). Persuasion in the media age (3rd ed.).
Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press. Global Apple iPhone sales in the fiscal years 2007 to 2013 (in million units). (2014).
In Statista. Retrieved from http://www.statista.com/statistics/276306/global-apple-iphone-sales-since-fiscal- year-2007/ Heggestuen, J. (2013).
One in every 5 people in the world own a smartphone, one in every 17 own a tablet. Business insider. Retrieved from http://www.businessinsider.com/smartphone-and-tablet- penetration-2013-10 iPhone 5S sales statistics.
(2013). In Statistic brain. Retrieved from http://www.statisticbrain.com/ iphone-5s-sales-statistics/Principles of Social Psychology 205 One of the most central concepts in social psychology is that of attitudes (Banaji & Heiphetz, 2010).
In this chapter, we will focus on attitude formation, attitude change, and the influence of attitudes on behavior. We will see that attitudes are an essential component of our lives because they play a vital role in helping us effectively interact with our environment. Our attitudes allow us to make judgments about events (e.g., “I don’t mind waiting in a queue for these concert tickets”), individuals (e.g., “I really admire the Dalai Lama”), social groups (e.g., “I love my university”), and many other things.
We will begin our discussion by looking at how attitudes are defined by the ABCs of social psychology—affect, behavior, and cognition—noting that some attitudes are more affective in nature, some more cognitive in nature, and some more behavioral in nature. We will see that attitudes vary in terms of their strength such that some attitudes are stronger and some are weaker. And we will see that the strength of our attitudes is one of the determinants of when our attitudes successfully predict our behaviors.
Then we will explore how attitudes can be created and changed—the basic stuff of persuasion, advertising, and marketing. We will look at which types of communicators can deliver the most effective messages to which types of message recipients. And we will see that the same message can be more effective for different people in different social situations.
We will see that persuasive messages may be processed either automatically (i.e., in a rather cursory or superficial way) or thoughtfully (with a greater focus on the argument presented) and that the amount and persistence of persuasion will vary on the processing route that we use. Most generally, we will see that persuasion is effective when the communication resonates with the message recipient’s motivations, desires, and goals (Kruglanski & Stroebe, 2005). Because the ABCs of social psychology tend to be consistent, persuasive appeals that change our thoughts and feelings will be effective in changing our behavior as well.
This attitude consistency means that if a company can make you think and feel more positively about its product, then you will be more likely to buy it. But attitude consistency works in the other direction too, such that when our behaviors change, our thoughts and beliefs about the attitude object may also change. Once we buy a product, we will find even more things to like about it, and our attitudes toward the company behind the product will become even more positive.
Although this possibility is less intuitive and therefore may seem more surprising, it also follows from the basic consistencies among affect, cognition, and behavior. We will discuss two theories—self-perception theory and cognitive dissonance theory—each of which makes this prediction but for different reasons. References Banaji, M.
R., & Heiphetz, L. (2010). Attitudes.
In S. T. Fiske, D.
T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol.
1, pp. 353–393). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Stroebe, W. (2005).
The influence of beliefs and goals on attitudes: Issues of206 Dr. Hammond Tarry structure, function, and dynamics. In D.
Albarracín, B. T. Johnson, & M.
P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of attitudes (pp. 323–368).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.4.1 Exploring Attitudes Learning Objectives 1. Define the concept of an attitude and explain why it is of such interest to social psychologists. 2.
Review the variables that determine attitude strength. 3. Outline the factors that affect the strength of the attitude-behavior relationship.
Although we might use the term in a different way in our everyday life (e.g., “Hey, he’s really got an attitude!”), social psychologists reserve the term attitude to refer to our relatively enduring evaluation of something, where the something is called the attitude object. The attitude object might be a person, a product, or a social group (Albarracín, Johnson, & Zanna, 2005; Wood, 2000). In this section, we will consider the nature and strength of attitudes and the conditions under which attitudes best predict our behaviors.
Attitudes Are Evaluations When we say that attitudes are evaluations, we mean that they involve a preference for or against the attitude object, as commonly expressed in terms such as prefer, like, dislike, hate, and love. When we express our attitudes—for instance, when we say, “I like swimming,” “I hate snakes,” or “I love my parents” —we are expressing the relationship (either positive or negative) between the self and an attitude object. Statements such as these make it clear that attitudes are an important part of the self- concept.
Every human being holds thousands of attitudes, including those about family and friends, political figures, abortion rights, terrorism, preferences for music, and much more. Each of our attitudes has its own unique characteristics, and no two attitudes come to us or influence us in quite the same way. Research has found that some of our attitudes are inherited, at least in part, via genetic transmission from our parents (Olson, Vernon, Harris, & Jang, 2001).
Other attitudes are learned mostly through direct and indirect experiences with the attitude objects (De Houwer, Thomas, & Baeyens, 2001). We may like to ride roller coasters in part because our genetic code has given us a thrill-loving personality and in part because we’ve had some really great times on roller coasters in the past. Still other attitudes are learned via the media (Hargreaves & Tiggemann, 2003; Levina, Waldo, & Fitzgerald, 2000) or through our interactions with friends (Poteat, 2007).
Some of our attitudes are shared by others (most of us like sugar, fear snakes, and are disgusted by cockroaches), whereas other attitudes—such as our preferences for different styles of music or art—are more individualized. Table 4.1, “Heritability of Some Attitudes,” shows some of the attitudes that have been found to be the 207208 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion most highly heritable (i.e., most strongly determined by genetic variation among people).
These attitudes form earlier and are stronger and more resistant to change than others (Bourgeois, 2002), although it is not yet known why some attitudes are more genetically determined than are others.4.1 Exploring Attitudes 209 Table 4.1 Heritability of Some Attitudes Attitude Heritability Abortion on demand 0.54 Roller coaster rides 0.52 Death penalty for murder 0.5 Organized religion 0.45 Doing athletic activities 0.44 Voluntary euthanasia 0.44 Capitalism 0.39 Playing chess 0.38 Reading books 0.37 Exercising 0.36 Education 0.32 Big parties 0.32 Smoking 0.31 Being the center of attention 0.28 Getting along well with other people 0.28 Wearing clothes that draw attention 0.24 Sweets 0.22 Public speaking 0.2 Castration as punishment for sex crimes 0.17 Loud music 0.11 Looking my best at all times 0.1 Doing crossword puzzles 0.02 Separate roles for men and women 0 Making racial discrimination illegal 0 Playing organized sports 0 Easy access to birth control 0 Being the leader of groups 0 Being assertive 0210 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Attitude Heritability Ranked from most heritable to least heritable. Data are from Olson, Vernon, Harris, and Jang (2001).
Olson, J. M., Vernon, P. A., Harris, J.
A., Harris, J.A., & Jang, K. L. (2001).
The heritability of attitudes: A study of twins. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(6), 845–860. Our attitudes are made up of cognitive, affective, and behavioral components.
Consider an environmentalist’s attitude toward recycling, which is probably very positive: • In terms of affect: They feel happy when they recycle. • In terms of behavior: They regularly recycle their bottles and cans. • In terms of cognition: They believe recycling is the responsible thing to do.
Although most attitudes are determined by affect, behavior, and cognition, there is nevertheless variability in this regard across people and across attitudes. Some attitudes are more likely to be based on feelings, some are more likely to be based on behaviors, and some are more likely to be based on beliefs. For example, your attitude toward chocolate ice cream is probably determined in large part by affect—although you can describe its taste, mostly you may just like it.
Your attitude toward your toothbrush, on the other hand, is probably more cognitive (you understand the importance of its function). Still other of your attitudes may be based more on behavior. For example, your attitude toward note-taking during lectures probably depends, at least in part, on whether or not you regularly take notes.
Different people may hold attitudes toward the same attitude object for different reasons. For example, some people vote for politicians because they like their policies, whereas others vote for (or against) politicians because they just like (or dislike) their public persona. Although you might think that cognition would be more important in this regard, political scientists have shown that many voting decisions are made primarily on the basis of affect.
Indeed, it is fair to say that the affective component of attitudes is generally the strongest and most important (Abelson, Kinder, Peters, & Fiske, 1981; Stangor, Sullivan, & Ford, 1991). Human beings hold attitudes because they are useful. Particularly, our attitudes enable us to determine, often very quickly and effortlessly, which behaviors to engage in, which people to approach or avoid, and even which products to buy (Duckworth, Bargh, Garcia, & Chaiken, 2002; Maio & Olson, 2000).
You can imagine that making quick decisions about what to avoid or approach has had substantial value in our evolutionary experience. For example: • Snake = bad ⟶ run away • Blueberries = good ⟶ eat Because attitudes are evaluations, they can be assessed using any of the normal measuring techniques used by social psychologists (Banaji & Heiphetz, 2010). Attitudes are frequently assessed using self- report measures, but they can also be assessed more indirectly using measures of arousal and facial expressions (Mendes, 2008) as well as implicit measures of cognition, such as the Implicit Association Test (IAT).
Attitudes can also be seen in the brain by using neuroimaging techniques. This research has found that our attitudes, like most of our social knowledge, are stored primarily in the prefrontal cortex4.1 Exploring Attitudes 211 but that the amygdala is important in emotional attitudes, particularly those associated with fear (Cunningham, Raye, & Johnson, 2004; Cunningham & Zelazo, 2007; van den Bos, McClure, Harris, Fiske, & Cohen, 2007). Attitudes can be activated extremely quickly—often within one-fifth of a second after we see an attitude object (Handy, Smilek, Geiger, Liu, & Schooler, 2010).
Some Attitudes Are Stronger Than Others Some attitudes are more important than others because they are more useful to us and thus have more impact on our daily lives. The importance of an attitude, as assessed by how quickly it comes to mind, is known as attitude strength (Fazio, 1990; Fazio, 1995; Krosnick & Petty, 1995). Some of our attitudes are strong attitudes, in the sense that we find them important, hold them with confidence, do not change them very much, and use them frequently to guide our actions.
These strong attitudes may guide our actions completely out of our awareness (Ferguson, Bargh, & Nayak, 2005). Other attitudes are weaker and have little influence on our actions. For instance, John Bargh and his colleagues (Bargh, Chaiken, Raymond, & Hymes, 1996) found that people could express attitudes toward nonsense words such as juvalamu (which people liked) and chakaka (which they did not like).
The researchers also found that these attitudes were very weak. Strong attitudes are more cognitively accessible—they come to mind quickly, regularly, and easily. We can easily measure attitude strength by assessing how quickly our attitudes are activated when we are exposed to the attitude object.
If we can state our attitude quickly, without much thought, then it is a strong one. If we are unsure about our attitude and need to think about it for a while before stating our opinion, the attitude is weak. Attitudes become stronger when we have direct positive or negative experiences with the attitude object, and particularly if those experiences have been in strong positive or negative contexts.
Russell Fazio and his colleagues (Fazio, Powell, & Herr, 1983) had people either work on some puzzles or watch other people work on the same puzzles. Although the people who watched ended up either liking or disliking the puzzles as much as the people who actually worked on them, Fazio found that attitudes, as assessed by reaction time measures, were stronger (in the sense of being expressed quickly) for the people who had directly experienced the puzzles. Because attitude strength is determined by cognitive accessibility, it is possible to make attitudes stronger by increasing the accessibility of the attitude.
This can be done directly by having people think about, express, or discuss their attitudes with others. After people think about their attitudes, talk about them, or just say them out loud, the attitudes they have expressed become stronger (Downing, Judd, & Brauer, 1992; Tesser, Martin, & Mendolia, 1995). Because attitudes are linked to the self-concept, they also become stronger when they are activated along with the self-concept.
When we are looking into a mirror or sitting in front of a TV camera, our attitudes are activated and we are then more likely to act on them (Beaman, Klentz, Diener, & Svanum, 1979). Attitudes are also stronger when the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition all align. As an example, many people’s attitude toward their own nation is universally positive.
They have strong positive feelings about their country, many positive thoughts about it, and tend to engage in behaviors that support it. Other attitudes are less strong because the affective, cognitive, and behavioral components are each somewhat different (Thompson, Zanna, & Griffin, 1995). Your cognitions toward physical212 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion exercise may be positive—you believe that regular physical activity is good for your health. On the other hand, your affect may be negative—you may resist exercising because you prefer to engage in tasks that provide more immediate rewards. Consequently, you may not exercise as often as you believe you ought to.
These inconsistencies among the components of your attitude make it less strong than it would be if all the components lined up together. When Do Our Attitudes Guide Our Behavior? Social psychologists (as well as advertisers, marketers, and politicians) are particularly interested in the behavioral aspect of attitudes.
Because it is normal that the ABCs of our attitudes are at least somewhat consistent, our behavior tends to follow from our affect and cognition. If I determine that you have more positive cognitions about and more positive affect toward waffles than French toast, then I will naturally predict (and probably be correct when I do so) that you’ll be more likely to order waffles than French toast when you eat breakfast at a restaurant. Furthermore, if I can do something to make your thoughts or feelings toward French toast more positive, then your likelihood of ordering it for breakfast will also increase.
The principle of attitude consistency (that for any given attitude object, the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition are normally in line with each other) thus predicts that our attitudes (for instance, as measured via a self-report measure) are likely to guide behavior. Supporting this idea, meta-analyses have found that there is a significant and substantial positive correlation among the different components of attitudes, and that attitudes expressed on self-report measures do predict behavior (Glasman & Albarracín, 2006). However, our attitudes are not the only factor that influence our decision to act.
The theory of planned behavior, developed by Martin Fishbein and Izek Ajzen (Ajzen, 1991; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), outlines three key variables that affect the attitude-behavior relationship: (a) the attitude toward the behaviour (the stronger the better), (b) subjective norms (the support of those we value), and (c) perceived behavioral control (the extent to which we believe we can actually perform the behavior). These three factors jointly predict our intention to perform the behavior, which in turn predicts our actual behavior (Figure 4.2, “Theory of Planned Behavior”). To illustrate, imagine for a moment that your friend Sharina is trying to decide whether to recycle her used laptop batteries or just throw them away.
We know that her attitude toward recycling is positive—she thinks she should do it—but we also know that recycling takes work. It’s much easier to just throw the batteries away. But if Sharina feels strongly about the importance of recycling, if her family and friends are also in favor of recycling, and if she has easy access to a battery recycling facility, then she will develop a strong intention to perform the behavior and likely follow through on it.
Since it was first proposed, the theory of planned behavior has grown to become an extremely influential model for predicting human social behavior. However, although it has been used to study virtually every kind of planned behavior, a recent meta-analysis of 206 articles found that this model was especially effective at predicting physical activity and dietary behaviors (McEachan, Conner, Taylor, & Lawton, 2011).4.1 Exploring Attitudes 213 Figure 4.2 Theory of Planned Behavior [Image description] More generally, research has also discovered that attitudes predict behaviors well only under certain conditions and for some people. These include: • When the attitude and the behavior both occur in similar social situations • When the same components of the attitude (either affect or cognition) are accessible when the attitude is assessed and when the behavior is performed • When the attitudes are measured at a specific, rather than a general, level • For low self-monitors (rather than for high self-monitors) The extent of the match between the social situations in which the attitudes are expressed and the behaviors are engaged in is important; there is a greater attitude-behavior correlation when the social situations match.
Imagine for a minute the case of Magritte, a 16-year-old high school student. Magritte tells her parents that she hates the idea of smoking cigarettes. Magritte’s negative attitude toward smoking seems to be a strong one because she’s thought a lot about it—she believes that cigarettes are dirty, expensive, and unhealthy.
But how sure are you that Magritte’s attitude will predict her behavior? Would you be willing to bet that she’d never try smoking when she’s out with her friends? You can see that the problem here is that Magritte’s attitude is being expressed in one social situation (when she is with her parents), whereas the behavior (trying a cigarette) is going to occur in a very different social situation (when she is out with her friends).
The relevant social norms are of course much different in the two situations. Magritte’s friends might be able to convince her to try smoking, despite her initial negative attitude, when they entice her with peer pressure. Behaviors are more likely to be consistent with attitudes when the social situation in which the behavior occurs is similar to the situation in which the attitude is expressed (Ajzen, 1991; LaPiere, 1936).214 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Research Focus Attitude-Behavior Consistency Another variable that has an important influence on attitude-behavior consistency is the current cognitive accessibility of the underlying affective and cognitive components of the attitude. For example, if we assess the attitude in a situation in which people are thinking primarily about the attitude object in cognitive terms, and yet the behavior is performed in a situation in which the affective components of the attitude are more accessible, then the attitude-behavior relationship will be weak. Wilson and Schooler (1991) showed a similar type of effect by first choosing attitudes that they expected would be primarily determined by affect—attitudes toward five different types of strawberry jam.
They asked a sample of college students to taste each of the jams. While they were tasting, one-half of the participants were instructed to think about the cognitive aspects of their attitudes to these jams—that is, to focus on the reasons they held their attitudes—whereas the other half of the participants were not given these instructions. Then all the students completed measures of their attitudes toward each of the jams.
Wilson and his colleagues then assessed the extent to which the attitudes expressed by the students correlated with taste ratings of the five jams as indicated by experts at Consumer Reports. They found that the attitudes expressed by the students correlated significantly higher with the expert ratings for the participants who had not listed their cognitions first. Wilson and his colleagues argued that this occurred because our liking of jams is primarily affectively determined—we either like them or we don’t.
And the students who simply rated the jams used their feelings to make their judgments. On the other hand, the students who were asked to list their thoughts about the jams had some extra information to use in making their judgments, but it was information that was not actually useful. Therefore, when these students used their thoughts about the jam to make the judgments, their judgments were less valid.
MacDonald, Zanna, and Fong (1996) showed male college students a video of two other college students, Mike and Rebecca, who were out on a date. According to random assignment to conditions, half of the men were shown the video while sober and the other half viewed the video after they had had several alcoholic drinks. In the video, Mike and Rebecca go to the campus bar and drink and dance.
They then go to Rebecca’s room, where they end up kissing passionately. Mike says that he doesn’t have any condoms, but Rebecca says that she is on the pill. At this point the film clip ends, and the male participants are asked about their likely behaviors if they had been Mike.
Although all men indicated that having unprotected sex in this situation was foolish and irresponsible, the men who had been drinking alcohol were more likely to indicate that they would engage in sexual intercourse with Rebecca even without a condom. One interpretation of this study is that sexual behavior is determined by both cognitive factors (e.g., “I know that it is important to practice safe sex and so I should use a condom”) and affective factors (e.g., “Sex is enjoyable, I don’t want to wait”). When the students were intoxicated at the time the behavior was to be performed, it seems likely the affective component of the attitude was a more important determinant of behavior than was the cognitive component.
One other type of match that has an important influence on the attitude-behavior relationship concerns how we measure the attitude and behavior. Attitudes predict behavior better when the attitude is measured at a level that is similar to the behavior to be predicted. Normally, the behavior is specific, so4.1 Exploring Attitudes 215 it is better to measure the attitude at a specific level too.
For instance, if we measure cognitions at a very general level (e.g., “Do you think it is important to use condoms?”; “Are you a religious person?”) we will not be as successful at predicting actual behaviors as we will be if we ask the question more specifically, at the level of behavior we are interested in predicting (e.g., “Do you think you will use a condom the next time you have sex?”; “How frequently do you expect to attend church in the next month?”). In general, more specific questions are better predictors of specific behaviors, and thus if we wish to accurately predict behaviors, we should remember to attempt to measure specific attitudes. One example of this principle is shown in Figure 4.3, “Predicting Behavior from Specific and Nonspecific Attitude Measures.” Davidson and Jaccard (1979) found that they were much better able to predict whether women actually used birth control when they assessed the attitude at a more specific level.
Figure 4.3 Predicting Behavior from Specific and Nonspecific Attitude Measures. Attitudes that are measured using more specific questions are more highly correlated with behavior than are attitudes measured using less specific questions. [Image descriptions] Attitudes also predict behavior better for some people than for others.
As we saw in Chapter 3, self- monitoring refers to individual differences in the tendency to attend to social cues and to adjust one’s behavior to one’s social environment. To return to our example of Magritte, you might wonder whether she is the type of person who is likely to be persuaded by peer pressure because she is particularly concerned with being liked by others. If she is, then she’s probably more likely to want to fit in with whatever her friends are doing, and she might try a cigarette if her friends offer her one.
On the other hand, if Magritte is not particularly concerned about following the social norms of her friends, then she’ll more likely be able to resist the persuasion. High self-monitors are those who tend to attempt to blend into the social situation in order to be liked; low self-monitors are those who are less likely to do so. You can see that, because they allow the social situation to influence their behaviors, the relationship between attitudes and behavior will be weaker for high self-monitors than it is for low self- monitors (Kraus, 1995).216 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Key Takeaways • The term attitude refers to our relatively enduring evaluation of an attitude object. • Our attitudes are inherited and also learned through direct and indirect experiences with the attitude objects. • Some attitudes are more likely to be based on beliefs, some are more likely to be based on feelings, and some are more likely to be based on behaviors.
• Strong attitudes are important in the sense that we hold them with confidence, we do not change them very much, and we use them frequently to guide our actions. • Although there is a general consistency between attitudes and behavior, the relationship is stronger in some situations than in others, for some measurements than for others, and for some people than for others. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Describe an example of a behavior that you engaged in that might be explained by the theory of planned behavior. Include each of the components of the theory in your analysis. 2.
Consider a time when you acted on your own attitudes and a time when you did not act on your own attitudes. What factors do you think determined the difference? References Abelson, R.
P., Kinder, D. R., Peters, M. D., & Fiske, S.
T. (1981). Affective and semantic components in political person perception.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 619–630. Ajzen, I. (1991).
The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179–211. Albarracín, D., Johnson, B.
T., & Zanna, M. P. (Eds.).
(2005). The handbook of attitudes (pp. 223–271).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Banaji, M. R., & Heiphetz, L.
(2010). Attitudes. In S.
T. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp.
353–393). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.4.1 Exploring Attitudes 217 Bargh, J. A., Chaiken, S., Raymond, P., & Hymes, C.
(1996). The automatic evaluation effect: Unconditional automatic attitude activation with a pronunciation task. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32(1), 104–128.
Beaman, A. L., Klentz, B., Diener, E., & Svanum, S. (1979).
Self-awareness and transgression in children: Two field studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(10), 1835–1846. Bourgeois, M.
J. (2002). Heritability of attitudes constrains dynamic social impact.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(8), 1063–1072. Cunningham, W. A., & Zelazo, P.
D. (2007). Attitudes and evaluations: A social cognitive neuroscience perspective.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(3), 97–104; Cunningham, W. A., Raye, C. L., & Johnson, M.
K. (2004). Implicit and explicit evaluation: fMRI correlates of valence, emotional intensity, and control in the processing of attitudes.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(10), 1717–1729; Davidson, A. R., & Jaccard, J. J.
(1979). Variables that moderate the attitude-behavior relation: Results of a longitudinal survey. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(8), 1364–1376.
De Houwer, J., Thomas, S., & Baeyens, F. (2001). Association learning of likes and dislikes: A review of 25 years of research on human evaluative conditioning.
Psychological Bulletin, 127(6), 853-869. Downing, J. W., Judd, C.
M., & Brauer, M. (1992). Effects of repeated expressions on attitude extremity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63(1), 17–29; Tesser, A., Martin, L., & Mendolia, M. (Eds.). (1995).
The impact of thought on attitude extremity and attitude-behavior consistency. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Duckworth, K.
L., Bargh, J. A., Garcia, M., & Chaiken, S. (2002).
The automatic evaluation of novel stimuli. Psychological Science, 13(6), 513–519. Fazio, R.
H. (1990). The MODE model as an integrative framework.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 75–109. Fazio, R. H.
(1995). Attitudes as object-evaluation associations: Determinants, consequences, and correlates of attitude accessibility. In Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp.
247–282). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; Fazio, R. H., Powell, M.
C., & Herr, P. M. (1983).
Toward a process model of the attitude-behavior relation: Accessing one’s attitude upon mere observation of the attitude object. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(4), 723–735. Ferguson, M.
J., Bargh, J. A., & Nayak, D. A.
(2005). After-affects: How automatic evaluations influence the interpretation of subsequent, unrelated stimuli. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41(2), 182–191.
doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2004.05.008 Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: An introduction to theory and research.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Glasman, L. R., & Albarracín, D.
(2006). Forming attitudes that predict future behavior: A meta- analysis of the attitude-behavior relation. Psychological Bulletin, 132(5), 778–822.
Handy, T. C., Smilek, D., Geiger, L., Liu, C., & Schooler, J. W.
(2010). ERP evidence for rapid hedonic evaluation of logos. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(1), 124–138.
doi: 10.1162/ jocn.2008.21180218 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Hargreaves, D. A., & Tiggemann, M.
(2003). Female “thin ideal” media images and boys’ attitudes toward girls. Sex Roles, 49(9–10), 539–544.
Kraus, S. J. (1995).
Attitudes and the prediction of behavior: A meta-analysis of the empirical literature. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21(1), 58–75. Krosnick, J.
A., & Petty, R. E. (1995).
Attitude strength: An overview. In Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 1–24).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. LaPiere, R. T.
(1936). Type rationalization of group antipathy. Social Forces, 15, 232–237.
Levina, M., Waldo, C. R., & Fitzgerald, L. F.
(2000). We’re here, we’re queer, we’re on TV: The effects of visual media on heterosexuals’ attitudes toward gay men and lesbians. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30(4), 738–758.
MacDonald, T. K., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G.
T. (1996). Why common sense goes out the window: Effects of alcohol on intentions to use condoms.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22(8), 763–775. Maio, G. R., & Olson, J.
M. (Eds.). (2000).
Why we evaluate: Functions of attitudes. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. doi:10.1080/17437199.2010.521684 McEachan, R.
R. C., Conner, M., Taylor, N. J., & Lawton, R.
J. (2011) Prospective prediction of health-related behaviours with the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-analysis, Health Psychology Review, 5(2), 97-144. Mendes, W.
B. (2008). Assessing autonomic nervous system reactivity.
In E. Harmon-Jones & J. Beer (Eds.), Methods in the neurobiology of social and personality psychology (pp.
118–147). New York, NY: Guilford Press. Olson, J.
M., Vernon, P. A., Harris, J. A., & Jang, K.
L. (2001). The heritability of attitudes: A study of twins.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(6), 845–860. Poteat, V. P.
(2007). Peer group socialization of homophobic attitudes and behavior during adolescence. Child Development, 78(6), 1830–1842.
Stangor, C., Sullivan, L. A., & Ford, T. E.
(1991). Affective and cognitive determinants of prejudice. Social Cognition, 9(4), 359–380.
Tesser, A., Martin, L., & Mendolia, M. (1995). The impact of thought on attitude extremity and attitude-behavior consistency.
In R. E. Petty & J.
A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences. Ohio State University series on attitudes and persuasion (4th ed., pp.
73-92). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Thompson, M.
M., Zanna, M. P., & Griffin, D. W.
(1995). Let’s not be indifferent about (attitudinal) ambivalence. In Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp.
361–386). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. van den Bos, W., McClure, S.
M., Harris, L. T., Fiske, S. T., & Cohen, J.
D. (2007). Dissociating affective evaluation and social cognitive processes in the ventral medial prefrontal cortex.
Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(4), 337–346. Wilson, T. D., & Schooler, J.
W. (1991). Thinking too much: Introspection can reduce the quality of preferences and decisions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(2), 181–192. Wood, W. (2000).
Attitude change: Persuasion and social influence. Annual Review of Psychology, 539–570.4.1 Exploring Attitudes 219 Image Descriptions Figure 4.2 Theory of Planned Behavior A flow chart explaining the theory of planned behavior. It starts with 3 types of beliefs that are connected by arrows: • Behavioural beliefs – attitude towards the behaviour • Normative beliefs – subjective norm • Control beliefs – perceived behavioural control The beliefs leads to intention, along with the actual behavioural control that is derived from the perceived behavioural control, then leads to behaviour.
[Return to Figure 4.2] Figure 4.3 Predicting Behavior from Specific and Nonspecific Attitude Measures A a bar graph with correlation on the y-axis, and attitude question on the x-axis. The attitude questions with the lowest to high correlation are: attitude toward birth control, attitude toward birth control pills, attitude toward using birth control pills, attitude toward using birth control pills during the next 2 years. [Return to Figure 4.3] Media Attributions • “Theory of Planned Behavior” is adapted by Hilda Aggregani and licensed under a CC BY 4.0 licence.
• “Predicting Behavior from Specific and Nonspecific Attitude Measures” is based on data from Davidson and Jaccard (1979).Davidson, A. R., & Jaccard, J. J.
(1979). Variables that moderate the attitude-behavior relation: Results of a longitudinal survey. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(8), 1364–1376.4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion Learning Objectives 1.
Outline how persuasion is determined by the choice of effective communicators and effective messages. 2. Review the conditions under which attitudes are best changed using spontaneous versus thoughtful strategies.
3. Summarize the variables that make us more or less resistant to persuasive appeals. Every day we are bombarded by advertisements of every sort.
The goal of these ads is to sell us cars, computers, video games, clothes, and even political candidates. The ads appear on billboards, website popup ads, buses, TV infomercials, and…well, you name it! It’s been estimated that over $500 billion is spent annually on advertising worldwide (Johnson, 2013).
There is substantial evidence that advertising is effective in changing attitudes. After the R. J.
Reynolds Company started airing its Joe Camel ads for cigarettes on TV in the 1980s, Camel’s share of cigarette sales to children increased dramatically. But persuasion can also have more positive outcomes. For instance, a review of the research literature indicates that mass-media anti-smoking campaigns are associated with reduced smoking rates among both adults and youth (Friend & Levy, 2001).
Persuasion is also used to encourage people to donate to charitable causes, to volunteer to give blood, and to engage in healthy behaviors. If you think that advertisers and marketers have too much influence, then this section will help you understand how to resist such attempts at persuasion. Following the approach used by some of the earliest social psychologists and that still forms the basis of thinking about the power of communication, we will consider which communicators can deliver the most effective messages to which types of message recipients (Hovland, Lumsdaine, & Sheffield (1949).
Choosing Effective Communicators In order to be effective persuaders, we must first get people’s attention, then send an effective message to them, and then ensure that they process the message in the way we would like them to. Furthermore, to accomplish these goals, persuaders must consider the cognitive, affective, and behavioral aspects of their methods. Persuaders also must understand how the communication they are presenting relates to the message recipient—his or her motivations, desires, and goals.
Research has demonstrated that the same message will be more effective if is delivered by a more 221222 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion persuasive communicator. In general, we can say that communicators are more effective when they help their recipients feel good about themselves—that is, by appealing to self-concern.
For instance, attractive communicators are frequently more effective persuaders than are unattractive communicators. Attractive communicators create a positive association with the product they are trying to sell and put us in a good mood, which makes us more likely to accept their messages. And as the many marketers who include free gifts, such as mailing labels or small toys, in their requests for charitable donations well know, we are more likely to respond to communicators who offer us something personally beneficial.
We’re also more persuaded by people who are similar to us in terms of opinions and values than by those whom we perceive as being different. This is of course why advertisements targeted at teenagers frequently use teenagers to present the message, and why advertisements targeted at the elderly use older communicators. When communicators are perceived as attractive and similar to us, we tend to like them.
And we also tend to trust the people that we like. The success of Tupperware parties, in which friends get together to buy products from other friends, may be due more to the fact that people like the “salesperson” than to the nature of the product. People such as the media mogul Oprah Winfrey, tennis star Roger Federer, and the musician Bono have been used as communicators for products in part because we see them as trustworthy and thus likely to present an unbiased message.
Trustworthy communicators are effective because they allow us to feel good about ourselves when we accept their message, often without critically evaluating its content (Priester & Petty, 2003). Figure 4.4 Expert communicators may sometimes be perceived as trustworthy because they know a lot about the product they are selling. When a doctor recommends that we take a particular drug, we are likely to be influenced because we know that he or she has expertise about the effectiveness of drugs.
It is no surprise that advertisers use race car drivers to sell cars and basketball players to sell athletic shoes. Although expertise comes in part from having knowledge, it can also be communicated by how one presents a message. Communicators who speak confidently, quickly, and in a straightforward way are seen as more expert than those who speak in a more hesitating and slower manner.
Taking regular4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 223 speech and speeding it up by deleting very small segments of it, so that it sounds the same but actually goes faster, makes the same communication more persuasive (MacLachlan & Siegel, 1980; Moore, Hausknecht, & Thamodaran, 1986). This is probably in part because faster speech makes the communicator seem more like an expert but also because faster speech reduces the listener’s ability to come up with counterarguments as he or she listens to the message (Megehee, Dobie, & Grant, 2003). Effective speakers frequently use this technique, and some of the best persuaders are those who speak quickly.
Expert communicators are expected to know a lot about the product they are endorsing, but they may not be seen as trustworthy if their statements seem to be influenced by external causes. People who are seen to be arguing in their own self-interest (e.g., an expert witness who is paid by the lawyers in a case; a celebrity who is paid to endorse a product) may be ineffective because we may discount their communications (Eagly, Wood, & Chaiken, 1978; Wood & Eagly, 1981). On the other hand, when a person presents a message that goes against external causes, for instance, by arguing in favor of an opinion to a person who is known to disagree with it, we see the internal states (that the individual really believes in the message he or she is expressing) as even more powerful.
Communicators also may be seen as biased if they present only one side of an issue while completely ignoring the potential problems or counterarguments to the message. In these cases, people who are informed about both sides of the topic may see the communicator as attempting to unfairly influence them. Although we are generally very aware of the potential that communicators may deliver messages that are inaccurate or designed to influence us, and we are able to discount messages that come from sources that we do not view as trustworthy, there is one interesting situation in which we may be fooled by communicators.
This occurs when a message is presented by someone whom we perceive as untrustworthy. When we first hear that person’s communication, we appropriately discount it, and it therefore has little influence on our opinions. However, over time there is a tendency to remember the content of a communication to a greater extent than we remember the source of the communication.
As a result, we may forget over time to discount the remembered message. This attitude change that occurs over time is known as the sleeper effect (Kumkale & Albarracín, 2004).224 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Figure 4.5 The Sleeper Effect.
The sleeper effect occurs when we initially discount the message given by an untrustworthy or nonexpert communicator but, over time, we remember the content of the message and forget its source. The result is an attitude change in the direction of the initially discounted message. Perhaps you’ve experienced the sleeper effect.
During high-profile election campaigns, candidates sometimes produce advertisements that attack their opponents. These kinds of communications occasionally stretch the truth in order to win public favor, which is why many people listen to them with a grain of salt. The trouble occurs, however, when people remember the claims made but forget the source of the communication.
The sleeper effect is diagrammed in Figure 4.5, “The Sleeper Effect.” Creating Effective Communications Once we have chosen a communicator, the next step is to determine what type of message we should have him or her deliver. Neither social psychologists nor advertisers are so naïve as to think that simply4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 225 presenting a strong message is sufficient. No matter how good the message is, it will not be effective unless people pay attention to it, understand it, accept it, and incorporate it into their self-concept.
This is why we attempt to choose good communicators to present our ads in the first place, and why we tailor our communications to get people to process them the way we want them to. Figure 4.6 Spontaneous attitude change occurs as a direct or affective response to the message, whereas thoughtful attitude change is based on our cognitive elaboration of the message. The messages that we deliver may be processed either spontaneously (other terms for this include peripherally or heuristically—Chen & Chaiken, 1999; Petty & Wegener, 1999) or thoughtfully (other terms for this include centrally or systematically).
Spontaneous processing is direct, quick, and often involves affective responses to the message. Thoughtful processing, on the other hand, is more controlled and involves a more careful cognitive elaboration of the meaning of the message (Figure 4.6). The route that we take when we process a communication is important in determining whether or not a particular message changes attitudes.
Spontaneous Message Processing Because we are bombarded with so many persuasive messages—and because we do not have the time, resources, or interest to process every message fully—we frequently process messages spontaneously. In these cases, if we are influenced by the communication at all, it is likely that it is the relatively unimportant characteristics of the advertisement, such as the likeability or attractiveness of the communicator or the music playing in the ad, that will influence us. If we find the communicator cute, if the music in the ad puts us in a good mood, or if it appears that other people around us like the ad, then we may simply accept the message without thinking about it very much (Giner-Sorolla & Chaiken, 1997).
In these cases, we engage in spontaneous message processing, in which we accept a persuasion attempt because we focus on whatever is most obvious or enjoyable, without much attention to the message itself. Shelley Chaiken (1980) found that students who were not highly involved in a topic because it did not affect them personally, were more persuaded by a likeable communicator than by an unlikeable one, regardless of whether the communicator226 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion presented a good argument for the topic or a poor one.
On the other hand, students who were more involved in the decision were more persuaded by the better message than by the poorer one, regardless of whether the communicator was likeable or not—they were not fooled by the likeability of the communicator. You might be able to think of some advertisements that are likely to be successful because they create spontaneous processing of the message by basing their persuasive attempts around creating emotional responses in the listeners. In these cases, the advertisers use associational learning to associate the positive features of the ad with the product.
Television commercials are often humorous, and automobile ads frequently feature beautiful people having fun driving beautiful cars. The slogans “I’m lovin’ it,” “Life tastes good,” and “Good to the last drop” are good ads in part because they successfully create positive affect in the listener. In some cases emotional ads may be effective because they lead us to watch or listen to the ad rather than simply change the channel or do something else.
The clever and funny TV ads that are broadcast during the Super Bowl every year are likely to be effective because we watch them, remember them, and talk about them with others. In this case, the positive affect makes the ads more salient, causing them to grab our attention. But emotional ads also take advantage of the role of affect in information processing.
We tend to like things more when we are in a good mood, and—because positive affect indicates that things are okay—we process information less carefully when we are in a good mood. Thus the spontaneous approach to persuasion is particularly effective when people are happy (Sinclair, Mark, & Clore, 1994), and advertisers try to take advantage of this fact. Another type of ad that is based on emotional response is one that uses fear appeals, such as ads that show pictures of deadly automobile accidents to encourage seatbelt use or images of lung cancer surgery to decrease smoking.
By and large, fearful messages are persuasive (Das, de Wit, & Stroebe, 2003; Perloff, 2003; Witte & Allen, 2000). Again, this is due in part to the fact that the emotional aspects of the ads make them salient and lead us to attend to and remember them. And fearful ads may also be framed in a way that leads us to focus on the salient negative outcomes that have occurred for one particular individual.
When we see an image of a person who is jailed for drug use, we may be able to empathize with that person and imagine how we would feel if it happened to us. Thus this ad may be more effective than more “statistical” ads stating the base rates of the number of people who are jailed for drug use every year. Fearful ads also focus on self-concern, and advertisements that are framed in a way that suggests that a behavior will harm the self are more effective than those framed more positively.
Banks, Salovey, Greener, and Rothman (1995) found that a message that emphasized the negative aspects of not getting a breast cancer screening mammogram (e.g., “Not getting a mammogram can cost you your life”) was more effective than a similar message that emphasized the positive aspects of having a mammogram (e.g., “Getting a mammogram can save your life”) in convincing women to have a mammogram over the next year. These findings are consistent with the general idea that the brain responds more strongly to negative affect than it does to positive affect (Ito, Larsen, Smith, & Cacioppo, 1998). Although laboratory studies generally find that fearful messages are effective in persuasion, they may be less useful in real-world advertising campaigns (Hastings, Stead, & Webb, 2004).
Fearful messages may create a lot of anxiety and therefore turn people off to the message (Shehryar & Hunt, 2005). For instance, people who know that smoking cigarettes is dangerous but who cannot seem to quit may4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 227 experience particular anxiety about their smoking behaviors. Fear messages are more effective when people feel that they know how to rectify the problem, have the ability to actually do so, and take responsibility for the change.
Without some feelings of self-efficacy, people do not know how to respond to the fear (Aspinwall, Kemeny, Taylor, & Schneider, 1991). Thus if you want to scare people into changing their behavior, it may be helpful if you also give them some ideas about how to do so, so that they feel like they have the ability to take action to make the changes (Passyn & Sujan, 2006). Figure 4.7 Thoughtful Message Processing When we process messages only spontaneously, our feelings are more likely to be important, but when we process messages thoughtfully, cognition prevails.
When we care about the topic, find it relevant, and have plenty of time to think about the communication, we are likely to process the message more deliberatively, carefully, and thoughtfully (Petty & Briñol, 2008). In this case we elaborate on the communication by considering the pros and cons of the message and questioning the validity of the communicator and the message. Thoughtful message processing occurs when we think about how the message relates to our own beliefs and goals and involves our careful consideration of whether the persuasion attempt is valid or invalid.
When an advertiser presents a message that he or she hopes will be processed thoughtfully, the goal is to create positive cognitions about the attitude object in the listener. The communicator mentions positive features and characteristics of the product and at the same time attempts to downplay the228 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion negative characteristics.
When people are asked to list their thoughts about a product while they are listening to, or right after they hear, a message, those who list more positive thoughts also express more positive attitudes toward the product than do those who list more negative thoughts (Petty & Briñol, 2008). Because the thoughtful processing of the message bolsters the attitude, thoughtful processing helps us develop strong attitudes, which are therefore resistant to counterpersuasion (Petty, Cacioppo, & Goldman, 1981). Which Route Do We Take: Thoughtful or Spontaneous?
Both thoughtful and spontaneous messages can be effective, but it is important to know which is likely to be better in which situation and for which people. When we can motivate people to process our message carefully and thoughtfully, then we are going to be able to present our strong and persuasive arguments with the expectation that our audience will attend to them. If we can get the listener to process these strong arguments thoughtfully, then the attitude change will likely be strong and long lasting.
On the other hand, when we expect our listeners to process only spontaneously—for instance, if they don’t care too much about our message or if they are busy doing other things—then we do not need to worry so much about the content of the message itself; even a weak (but interesting) message can be effective in this case. Successful advertisers tailor their messages to fit the expected characteristics of their audiences. In addition to being motivated to process the message, we must also have the ability to do so.
If the message is too complex to understand, we may rely on spontaneous cues, such as the perceived trustworthiness or expertise of the communicator (Hafer, Reynolds, & Obertynski, 1996), and ignore the content of the message. When experts are used to attempt to persuade people—for instance, in complex jury trials—the messages that these experts give may be very difficult to understand. In these cases, the jury members may rely on the perceived expertise of the communicator rather than his or her message, being persuaded in a relatively spontaneous way.
In other cases, we may not be able to process the information thoughtfully because we are distracted or tired—in these cases even weak messages can be effective, again because we process them spontaneously (Petty, Wells & Brock, 1976). Petty, Cacioppo, and Goldman (1981) showed how different motivations may lead to either spontaneous or thoughtful processing. In their research, college students heard a message suggesting that the administration at their college was proposing to institute a new comprehensive exam that all students would need to pass in order to graduate, and then rated the degree to which they were favorable toward the idea.
The researchers manipulated three independent variables: • Message strength. The message contained either strong arguments (persuasive data and statistics about the positive effects of the exams at other universities) or weak arguments (relying only on individual quotations and personal opinions). • Source expertise.
The message was supposedly prepared either by an expert source (the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education, which was chaired by a professor of education at Princeton University) or by a nonexpert source (a class at a local high school). • Personal relevance. The students were told either that the new exam would begin before they graduated (high personal relevance) or that it would not begin until after they had already graduated (low personal relevance).4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 229 As you can see in Figure 4.8, Petty and his colleagues found two interaction effects.
The top panel of the figure shows that the students in the high personal relevance condition (left side) were not particularly influenced by the expertise of the source, whereas the students in the low personal relevance condition (right side) were. On the other hand, as you can see in the bottom panel, the students who were in the high personal relevance condition (left side) were strongly influenced by the quality of the argument, but the low personal involvement students (right side) were not. These findings fit with the idea that when the issue was important, the students engaged in thoughtful processing of the message itself.
When the message was largely irrelevant, they simply used the expertise of the source without bothering to think about the message. Figure 4.8 Personal involvement as a determinant of argument-based persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(5), 847–855.
Petty, Cacioppo, and Goldman (1981) found that students for whom an argument was not personally relevant based their judgments on the expertise of the source (spontaneous processing), whereas students for whom the decision was more relevant were more influenced by the quality of the message (thoughtful processing). Because both thoughtful and spontaneous approaches can be successful, advertising campaigns, such as those used by Apple, carefully make use of both spontaneous and thoughtful messages. For example, the ad may showcase the new and useful features of a device like the iPad amid scenes of happy, creative, or productive people and an inspiring soundtrack.230 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Preventing Persuasion To this point, we have focused on techniques designed to change attitudes. But it is also useful to develop techniques that prevent attitude change. If you are hoping that Magritte will never puff that first cigarette, then you might be interested in knowing what her parents might be able to do to prevent that from happening.
One approach to improving an individual’s ability to resist persuasion is to help the person create a strong attitude. Strong attitudes are more difficult to change than are weak attitudes, and we are more likely to act on our strong attitudes. This suggests that Magritte’s parents might want help Magritte consider all the reasons that she should not smoke and develop strong negative affect about smoking.
As Magritte’s negative thoughts and feelings about smoking become more well defined and more integrated into the self-concept, they should have a greater influence on her behavior. One method of increasing attitude strength involves forewarning: giving people a chance to develop a resistance to persuasion by reminding them that they might someday receive a persuasive message, and allowing them to practice how they will respond to influence attempts (Sagarin & Wood, 2007). Magritte’s parents might want to try the forewarning approach.
After the forewarning, when Magritte hears the smoking message from her peers, she may be less influenced by it because she was aware ahead of time that the persuasion would likely occur and had already considered how to resist it. Forewarning seems to be particularly effective when the message that is expected to follow attacks an attitude that we care a lot about. In these cases, the forewarning prepares us for action—we bring up our defenses to maintain our existing beliefs.
When we don’t care much about the topic, on the other hand, we may simply change our belief before the appeal actually comes (Wood & Quinn, 2003). Forewarning can be effective in helping people respond to persuasive messages that they will receive later. A similar approach is to help build up the cognitive component of the attitude by presenting a weak attack on the existing attitude with the goal of helping the person create counterarguments about a persuasion attempt that is expected to come in the future.
Just as an inoculation against the flu gives us a small dose of the influenza virus that helps prevent a bigger attack later, giving Magritte a weak argument to persuade her to smoke cigarettes can help her develop ways to resist the real attempts when they come in the future. This procedure—known as inoculation—involves building up defenses against persuasion by mildly attacking the attitude position (Compton & Pfau, 2005; McGuire, 1961). We would begin by telling Magritte the reasons that her friends might think that she should smoke (for instance, because everyone is doing it and it makes people look “cool”), therefore allowing her to create some new defenses against persuasion.
Thinking about the potential arguments that she might receive and preparing the corresponding counterarguments will make the attitude stronger and more resistant to subsequent change attempts. One difficulty with forewarning and inoculation attempts is that they may boomerang. If we feel that another person—for instance, a person who holds power over us—is attempting to take away our freedom to make our own decisions, we may respond with strong emotion, completely ignore the persuasion attempt, and perhaps even engage in the opposite behavior.
Perhaps you can remember a4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 231 time when you felt like your parents or someone else who had some power over you put too much pressure on you, and you rebelled against them. The strong emotional response that we experience when we feel that our freedom of choice is being taken away when we expect that we should have choice is known as psychological reactance (Brehm, 1966; Miron & Brehm, 2006). If Magritte’s parents are too directive in their admonitions about not smoking, she may feel that they do not trust her to make her own decisions and are attempting to make them for her.
In this case, she may experience reactance and become more likely to start smoking. Erceg-Hurn and Steed (2011) found that the graphic warning images that are placed on cigarette packs could create reactance in people who viewed them, potentially reducing the warnings’ effectiveness in convincing people to stop smoking. Given the extent to which our judgments and behaviors are frequently determined by processes that occur outside of our conscious awareness, you might wonder whether it is possible to persuade people to change their attitudes or to get people to buy products or engage in other behaviors using subliminal advertising.
Subliminal advertising occurs when a message, such as an advertisement or another image of a brand, is presented to the consumer without the person being aware that a message has been presented—for instance, by flashing messages quickly in a TV show, an advertisement, or a movie (Theus, 1994). Social Psychology in the Public Interest Does Subliminal Advertising Work? If it were effective, subliminal advertising would have some major advantages for advertisers because it would allow them to promote their product without directly interrupting the consumer’s activity and without the consumer knowing that he or she is being persuaded (Trappey, 1996).
People cannot counterargue with, or attempt to avoid being influenced by, messages that they do not know they have received and this may make subliminal advertising particularly effective. Due to fears that people may be influenced to buy products out of their awareness, subliminal advertising has been legally banned in many countries, including Australia, Great Britain, and the United States. Some research has suggested that subliminal advertising may be effective.
Karremans, Stroebe, and Claus (2006) had Dutch college students view a series of computer trials in which a string of letters such as BBBBBBBBB or BBBbBBBBB was presented on the screen and the students were asked to pay attention to whether or not the strings contained a small b. However, immediately before each of the letter strings, the researchers presented either the name of a drink that is popular in Holland (“Lipton Ice”) or a control string containing the same letters as Lipton Ice (“Npeic Tol”). The priming words were presented so quickly (for only about 1/50th of a second) that the participants could not see them.
Then the students were asked to indicate their intention to drink Lipton Ice by answering questions such as “If you would sit on a terrace now, how likely is it that you would order Lipton Ice?” and also to indicate how thirsty they were at this moment. The researchers found that the students who had been exposed to the Lipton Ice primes were significantly more likely to say that they would drink Lipton Ice than were those who had been exposed to the control words, but that this was only true for the participants who said that they were currently thirsty. On the other hand, other research has not supported the effectiveness of subliminal advertising.
Charles232 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Trappey (1996) conducted a meta-analysis in which he combined 23 research studies that had tested the influence of subliminal advertising on consumer choice. The results showed that subliminal advertising had a negligible effect on consumer choice.
Saegert (1987) concluded that “marketing should quit giving subliminal advertising the benefit of the doubt” (p. 107), arguing that the influences of subliminal stimuli are usually so weak that they are normally overshadowed by the person’s own decision making about the behavior. Even if a subliminal or subtle advertisement is perceived, previous experience with the product or similar products—or even unrelated, more salient stimuli at the moment—may easily overshadow any effect the subliminal message would have had (Moore, 1988).
That is, even if we do perceive the “hidden” message, our prior attitudes or our current situation will likely have a stronger influence on our choices, potentially nullifying any effect the subliminal message would have had. Taken together, the evidence for the effectiveness of subliminal advertising is weak and its effects may be limited to only some people and only some conditions. You probably don’t have to worry too much about being subliminally persuaded in your everyday life even if subliminal ads are allowed in your country.
Of course, although subliminal advertising is not that effective, there are plenty of other indirect advertising techniques that are. Many ads for automobiles and alcoholic beverages have sexual connotations, which indirectly (even if not subliminally) associate these positive features with their products. And there are the ever more frequent “product placement” techniques, where images of brands (cars, sodas, electronics, and so forth) are placed on websites and in popular TV shows and movies.
Key Takeaways • Advertising is effective in changing attitudes, and principles of social psychology can help us understand when and how advertising works. • Social psychologists study which communicators can deliver the most effective messages to which types of message recipients. • Communicators are more effective when they help their recipients feel good about themselves.
Attractive, similar, trustworthy, and expert communicators are examples of effective communicators. • Attitude change that occurs over time, particularly when we no longer discount the impact of a low-credibility communicator, is known as the sleeper effect. • The messages that we deliver may be processed either spontaneously or thoughtfully.
When we are processing messages only spontaneously, our feelings are more likely to be important, but when we process the message thoughtfully, cognition prevails. • Both thoughtful and spontaneous messages can be effective, in different situations and for different people. • One approach to improving an individual’s ability to resist persuasion is to help the person create a strong attitude.
Procedures such as forewarning and inoculation can help increase attitude strength and thus reduce subsequent persuasion.4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 233 • Taken together, the evidence for the effectiveness of subliminal advertising is weak, and its effects may be limited to only some people and only some conditions. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Reconsider the effectiveness of Apple’s marketing campaign for the latest iPhone in terms of the principles of persuasion that we have discussed.
2. Find and discuss examples of web or TV ads that make use of the principles discussed in this section. 3.
Visit the Joe Chemo site, designed to highlight and counterargue the negative effects of the Joe Camel cigarette ads. Create a presentation that summarizes the influence of cigarette ads on children. 4.
Based on our discussion of resistance to persuasion, what techniques would you use to help a child resist the pressure to start smoking or start using recreational drugs? References Aspinwall, L. G., Kemeny, M.
E., Taylor, S. E., & Schneider, S. G.
(1991). Psychosocial predictors of gay men’s AIDS risk-reduction behavior. Health Psychology, 10(6), 432–444.
Banks, S. M., Salovey, P., Greener, S., & Rothman, A. J.
(1995). The effects of message framing on mammography utilization. Health Psychology, 14(2), 178–184.
Brehm, J. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance.
New York, NY: Academic Press; Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of source versus message cues in persuasion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(5), 752–766. Chen, S., & Chaiken, S. (1999).
The heuristic-systematic model in its broader context. In Dual- process theories in social psychology (pp. 73–96).
New York, NY: Guilford Press; Compton, J. A., & Pfau, M. (2005).
Inoculation theory of resistance to influence at maturity: Recent progress in theory development and application and suggestions for future research. Communication Yearbook, 29, 97–145; Das, E. H.
H. J., de Wit, J. B.
F., & Stroebe, W. (2003). Fear appeals motivate acceptance of action recommendations: Evidence for a positive bias in the processing of persuasive messages.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(5), 650–664; Eagly, A. H., Wood, W., & Chaiken, S. (1978).
Causal inferences about communicators and their effect on opinion change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(4), 424–435;234 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Erceg-Hurn, D.
M., & Steed, L. G. (2011).
Does exposure to cigarette health warnings elicit psychological reactance in smokers? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41(1), 219–237. Friend, K., & Levy, D.
T. (2001). Reductions in smoking prevalence and cigarette consumption associated with mass-media campaigns.
Health Education Research, 17(1), 85-98. Giner-Sorolla, R., & Chaiken, S. (1997).
Selective use of heuristic and systematic processing under defense motivation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(1), 84–97. Hafer, C.
L., Reynolds, K. L., & Obertynski, M. A.
(1996). Message comprehensibility and persuasion: Effects of complex language in counterattitudinal appeals to laypeople. Social Cognition, 14, 317–337.
Hastings, G., Stead, M., & Webb, J. (2004). Fear appeals in social marketing: Strategic and ethical reasons for concern.
Psychology and Marketing, 21(11), 961–986. doi: 10.1002/mar.20043 Hovland, C. I., Lumsdaine, A.
A., & Sheffield, F. D. (1949).
Experiments on mass communication. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Ito, T.
A., Larsen, J. T., Smith, N. K., & Cacioppo, J.
T. (1998). Negative information weighs more heavily on the brain: The negativity bias in evaluative categorizations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(4), 887–900. Johnson, B. (2013).
10 things you should know about the global ad market. Ad Age. Retrieved from http://adage.com/article/global-news/10-things-global-ad-market/245572/ Karremans, J.
C., Stroebe, W., & Claus, J. (2006). Beyond Vicary’s fantasies: The impact of subliminal priming and brand choice.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42(6), 792–798. Kumkale, G. T., & Albarracín, D.
(2004). The sleeper effect in persuasion: A meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 130(1), 143–172.
doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.130.1.143 MacLachlan, J. H., & Siegel, M. H.
(1980). Reducing the costs of TV commercials by use of time compressions. Journal of Marketing Research, 17(1), 52–57; McGuire, W.
J. (1961). The effectiveness of supportive and refutational defenses in immunizing defenses.
Sociometry, 24, 184–197. Megehee, C. M., Dobie, K., & Grant, J.
(2003). Time versus pause manipulation in communications directed to the young adult population: Does it matter? Journal of Advertising Research, 43(3), 281–292.
Miron, A. M., & Brehm, J. W.
(2006). Reaktanz theorie—40 Jahre spärer. Zeitschrift fur Sozialpsychologie, 37(1), 9–18.
doi: 10.1024/0044-3514.37.1.9 Moore, D. L., Hausknecht, D., & Thamodaran, K. (1986).
Time compression, response opportunity, and persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 13(1), 85–99. Moore, T.
E. (1988). The case against subliminal manipulation.
Psychology and Marketing, 5(4), 297–316. Passyn, K., & Sujan, M. (2006).
Self-accountability emotions and fear appeals: Motivating behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 32(4), 583–589. doi: 10.1086/500488 Perloff, R.
M. (2003). The dynamics of persuasion: Communication and attitudes in the 21st century (2nd ed.).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; Petty, R. E., & Briñol, P. (2008).
Persuasion: From single to multiple to metacognitive4.2 Changing Attitudes through Persuasion 235 processes. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(2), 137–147. doi: 10.1111/ j.1745-6916.2008.00071.x Petty, R.
E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Goldman, R. (1981).
Personal involvement as a determinant of argument-based persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(5), 847–855. Petty, R.
E., & Wegener, D. T. (1999).
The elaboration likelihood model: Current status and controversies. In S. Chaiken & Y.
Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 37-72). New York: Guilford Press.
Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T.
C. (1976). Distraction can enhance or reduce yielding to propaganda: Thought disruption versus effort justification.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34(5), 874–884. Priester, J. R., & Petty, R.
E. (2003). The influence of spokesperson trustworthiness on message elaboration, attitude strength, and advertising effectiveness.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13(4), 408–421. Saegert, J. (1987).
Why marketing should quit giving subliminal advertising the benefit of the doubt. Psychology and Marketing, 4(2), 107–121. Sagarin, B.
J., & Wood, S. E. (2007).
Resistance to influence. In A. R.
Pratkanis (Ed.), The science of social influence: Advances and future progress (pp. 321–340). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Shehryar, O., & Hunt, D. M. (2005).
A terror management perspective on the persuasiveness of fear appeals. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15(4), 275–287. doi: 10.1207/s15327663jcp1504_2 Sinclair, R.
C., Mark, M. M., & Clore, G. L.
(1994). Mood-related persuasion depends on (mis)attributions. Social Cognition, 12(4), 309–326.
Theus, K. T. (1994).
Subliminal advertising and the psychology of processing unconscious stimuli: A review of research. Psychology and Marketing, 11(3), 271–291. Trappey, C.
(1996). A meta-analysis of consumer choice and subliminal advertising. Psychology and Marketing, 13(5), 517–531.
Witte, K., & Allen, M. (2000). A meta-analysis of fear appeals: Implications for effective public health campaigns.
Health Education & Behavior, 27(5), 591–615. Wood, W., & Eagly, A. (1981).
Stages in the analysis of persuasive messages: The role of causal attributions and message comprehension. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40(2), 246–259. Wood, W., & Quinn, J.
M. (2003). Forewarned and forearmed?
Two meta-analysis syntheses of forewarnings of influence appeals. Psychological Bulletin, 129(1), 119–138. Media Attributions • “Oprah Winfrey at 2011 TCA” by Greg Hernandez is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “Federer WM16 (37) (28136155830)” by si.robi is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “Bono at the 2009 Tribeca Film Festival” by David Shankbone is licensed under a CC BY 3.0 licence. • “Cigarettes brazil” by Brazilian Health Ministry (MS) – Instituto Nacional do Câncer (INCA)236 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion is licensed under a Public domain licence. • “Figure 4.8 Personal involvement as a determinant of argument-based persuasion” is based on data from Petty, Cacioppo, and Goldman (1981). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(5), 847–855.4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior Learning Objectives 1.
Outline the principles of self-perception and explain how they can account for the influences of behavior on attitude. 2. Outline the principles of cognitive dissonance and explain how they can account for the influences of behavior on attitude.
Although it might not have surprised you to hear that we can often predict people’s behaviors if we know their thoughts and their feelings about the attitude object, you might be surprised to find that our actions also have an influence on our thoughts and feelings. It makes sense that if I like strawberry jam, I’ll buy it, because my thoughts and feelings about a product influence my behavior. But will my attitudes toward orange marmalade become more positive if I decide—for whatever reason—to buy it instead of jam?
It turns out that if we engage in a behavior, and particularly one that we had not expected that we would have, our thoughts and feelings toward that behavior are likely to change. This might not seem intuitive, but it represents another example of how the principles of social psychology—in this case, the principle of attitude consistency—lead us to make predictions that wouldn’t otherwise be that obvious. Imagine that one Tuesday evening in the middle of the semester you see your friend Joachim.
He’s just finished his dinner and tells you that he’s planning to head home to study and work on a term paper. When you see him the next day, however, he seems a bit shaken. It turns out that instead of going home to study, Joachim spent the entire evening listening to music at a rock club in town.
He says that he had a great time, stayed up late to watch the last set, and didn’t get home until the crack of dawn. And he woke up so late this morning that he missed his first two classes. You might imagine that Joachim might be feeling some uncertainty and perhaps some regret about his unexpected behavior the night before.
Although he knows that it is important to study and to get to his classes on time, he nevertheless realizes that, at least in this case, he neglected his schoolwork in favor of another activity. Joachim seems to be wondering why he, who knows how important school is, engaged in this behavior after he promised himself that he was going home to study. Let’s see if we can use the principles of attitude consistency to help us understand how Joachim might respond to his unexpected behavior and how his attitudes toward listening to music and studying might follow from it.
237238 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Self-Perception Involves Inferring Our Beliefs from Our Behaviors People have an avid interest in understanding the causes of behavior, both theirs and others, and doing so helps us meet the important goals of other-concern and self-concern. If we can better understand how and why the other people around us act the way they do, then we will have a better chance of avoiding harm from others and a better chance of getting those other people to cooperate with and like us.
And if we have a better idea of understanding the causes of our own behavior, we can better work to keep that behavior in line with our preferred plans and goals. In some cases, people may be unsure about their attitudes toward different attitude objects. For instance, perhaps Joachim is a bit unsure about his attitude toward schoolwork versus listening to music (and this uncertainty certainly seems to be increasing in light of his recent behavior).
Might Joachim look at his own behavior to help him determine his thoughts and feelings, just as he might look at the behavior of others to understand why they act the way that they do? Self-perception occurs when we use our own behavior as a guide to help us determine our own thoughts and feelings (Bem, 1972; Olson & Stone, 2005). Research Focus Looking at Our Own Behavior to Determine Our Attitudes Eliot Aronson and J.
Merrill Carlsmith (1963) conducted an experiment to determine whether young children might look at their own behavior to help determine their attitudes toward toys. In their research, they first had the children rate the attractiveness of several toys. They then chose a toy that a child had just indicated he or she really wanted to play with and—this was rather mean—told that child he or she could not play with that toy.
Furthermore, and according to random assignment to conditions, half of the children were threatened with mild punishment if they disobeyed and the other half were threatened with severe punishment. In the mild threat condition the experimenter said, “I don’t want you to play with the toy. If you play with it, I would be annoyed,” whereas in the harsh threat condition the experimenter said, “I don’t want you to play with the toy.
If you play with it, I would be very angry. I would have to take all of my toys and go home and never come back again.” The experimenter then left the room for a few minutes to give the children the time and opportunity to play with the other toys and to resist the temptation of playing with the forbidden toy, while watching the children through a one-way mirror. It turned out that both the harsh and the mild threat were sufficient to prevent the children from playing with the forbidden toy—none of the children actually did so.
Nevertheless, when the experimenter returned to the room and asked each child to again rate how much he or she liked the forbidden toy, the children who had received the harsh threat rated the toy significantly more positively than the children who had received the mild threat. Furthermore, the children who had only received the mild threat actually rated the forbidden toy less positively than they had at the beginning of the experiment. And this change was long lasting.
Even when tested several weeks later, children still showed these changes (Freedman, 1965). The results of this study indicate that the children’s self-perceptions of their behaviors influenced their attitudes toward the toys. Assume for a moment that the children were a bit unsure about how much4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 239 they liked the toy that they did not play with and that they needed some information to determine their beliefs.
The children in the harsh threat condition had a strong external reason for not having played with the toy—they were going to get into really big trouble if they did. Because these children likely saw the social situation as the cause of their behavior, they found it easy to believe that they still liked the toy a lot. For the children in the mild threat condition, however, the external reasons for their behavior were not so apparent—they had only been asked not to play with the toy.
These children were more likely to conclude that their behavior was caused by internal, personal factors—that they did not play with the toy simply because they did not like it that much. We can use the principles of self-perception to help understand how Joachim is interpreting his behavior of staying out all night at the club rather than studying. When Joachim looks at this behavior, he may start to wonder why he engaged in it.
One answer is that the social situation caused the behavior; that is, he might decide that the band he heard last night was so fantastic that he simply had to go hear them and could not possibly have left the club early. Blaming the situation for the behavior allows him to avoid blaming himself for it and to avoid facing the fact that he found listening to music more important than his schoolwork. But the fact that Joachim is a bit worried about his unusual behavior suggests that he, at least in part, might be starting to wonder about his own motivations.
Perhaps you have experienced the effects of self-perception. Have you ever found yourself becoming more convinced about an argument you were making as you heard yourself making it? Or did you ever realize how thirsty you must have been as you quickly drank a big glass of water?
Research has shown that self-perception occurs regularly and in many different domains. For instance, Gary Wells and Richard Petty (1980) found that people who were asked to shake their heads up and down rather than sideways while reading arguments favoring or opposing tuition increases at their school ended up agreeing with the arguments more, and Daryl Bem (1965) found that when people were told by the experimenter to say that certain cartoons were funny, they ended up actually finding those cartoons funnier. It appears in these cases that people looked at their own behavior: if they moved their head up and down or said that the cartoons were funny, they figured that they must agree with the arguments and like the cartoon.
Creating Insufficient Justification and Overjustification You may recall that one common finding in social psychology is that people frequently do not realize the extent to which behavior is influenced by the social situation. Although this is particularly true for the behavior of others, in some cases it may apply to understanding our own behavior as well. This means that, at least in some cases, we may believe that we have chosen to engage in a behavior for personal reasons, even though external, situational factors have actually led us to it.
Consider again the children who did not play with the forbidden toy in the Aronson and Carlsmith study, even though they were given only a mild reason for not doing so. Although these children were actually led to avoid the toy by the power of the situation (they certainly would have played with it if the experimenter hadn’t told them not to), they frequently concluded that the decision was a personal choice and ended up believing that the toy was not that fun after all. When the social situation actually causes our behavior, but we do not realize that the social situation was the cause, we call the phenomenon insufficient240 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion justification. Insufficient justification occurs when the threat or reward is actually sufficient to get the person to engage in or to avoid a behavior, but the threat or reward is insufficient to allow the person to conclude that the situation caused the behavior. Although insufficient justification may lead people to like something less because they (incorrectly) infer that the reason they did not engage in a behavior was due to internal reasons, it is also possible that the opposite may occur.
People may in some cases come to like a task less when they perceive that they did engage in it for external reasons. Overjustification occurs when we view our behavior as caused by the situation, leading us to discount the extent to which our behavior was actually caused by our own interest in it (Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 1999; Lepper & Greene, 1978). Mark Lepper and his colleagues (Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 1973) studied the overjustification phenomenon by leading some children to think that they engaged in an activity for a reward rather than because they simply enjoyed it.
First, they placed some fun felt-tipped markers into the classroom of the children they were studying. The children loved the markers and played with them right away. Then, the markers were taken out of the classroom and the children were given a chance to play with the markers individually at an experimental session with the researcher.
At the research session, the children were randomly assigned to one of three experimental groups. One group of children (the expected reward condition) was told that if they played with the markers they would receive a good- drawing award. A second group (the unexpected reward condition) also played with the markers and got the award—but they were not told ahead of time that they would be receiving the award (it came as a surprise after the session).
The third group (the no reward condition) played with the markers too but got no award. Then, the researchers placed the markers back in the classroom and observed how much the children in each of the three groups played with them. The results are shown in Figure 4.9, “Undermining Initial Interest in an Activity.” The fascinating result was that the children who had been led to expect a reward for playing with the markers during the experimental session played with the markers less at the second session than they had at the first session.
Expecting to receive the award at the session had undermined their initial interest in the markers. Figure 4.9 Undermining Initial Interest in an Activity. Children who had been expecting to receive a reward when they played with the fun markers played less with them in their free play period than did children who received no reward or an unexpected reward—their initial interest had been undermined by the expected reward.4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 241 Although this might not seem logical at first, it is exactly what is expected on the basis of the principle of overjustification.
When the children had to choose whether to play with the markers when the markers reappeared in the classroom, they based their decision on their own prior behavior. The children in the no reward condition group and the children in the unexpected reward condition group realized that they played with the markers because they liked them. Children in the expected award condition group, however, remembered that they were promised a reward for the activity before they played with the markers the last time.
These children were more likely to infer that they play with the markers mostly for the external reward, and because they did not expect to get any reward for playing with the markers in the classroom, they discounted the possibility that they enjoyed playing the markers because they liked them. As a result, they played less frequently with the markers compared with the children in the other groups. This research suggests that, although giving rewards may in many cases lead us to perform an activity more frequently or with more effort, reward may not always increase our liking for the activity.
In some cases, reward may actually make us like an activity less than we did before we were rewarded for it. And this outcome is particularly likely when the reward is perceived as an obvious attempt on the part of others to get us to do something. When children are given money by their parents to get good grades in school, they may improve their school performance to gain the reward.
But at the same time their liking for school may decrease. On the other hand, rewards that are seen as more internal to the activity, such as rewards that praise us, remind us of our achievements in the domain, and make us feel good about ourselves as a result of our accomplishments, are more likely to be effective in increasing not only the performance of, but also the liking of, the activity (Deci & Ryan, 2002; Hulleman, Durik, Schweigert, & Harackiewicz, 2008). In short, when we use harsh punishments we may prevent a behavior from occurring.
However, because the person sees that it is the punishment that is controlling the behavior, the person’s attitudes may not change. Parents who wish to encourage their children to share their toys or to practice the piano therefore would be wise to provide “just enough” external incentive. Perhaps a consistent reminder of the appropriateness of the activity would be enough to engage the activity, making a stronger reprimand or other punishment unnecessary.
Similarly, when we use extremely positive rewards, we may increase the behavior but at the same time undermine the person’s interest in the activity. The problem, of course, is finding the right balance between reinforcement and overreinforcement. If we want our child to avoid playing in the street, and if we provide harsh punishment for disobeying, we may prevent the behavior but not change the attitude.
The child may not play in the street while we are watching but may do so when we leave. Providing less punishment is more likely to lead the child to actually change his or her beliefs about the appropriateness of the behavior, but the punishment must be enough to prevent the undesired behavior in the first place. The moral is clear: if we want someone to develop a strong attitude, we should use the smallest reward or punishment that is effective in producing the desired behavior.
The Experience of Cognitive Dissonance Can Create Attitude Change Let’s return once more to our friend Joachim and imagine that we now discover that over the next two weeks he has spent virtually every night at clubs listening to music rather than studying. And these behaviors are starting to have some severe consequences: he just found out that he’s failed his biology242 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion midterm.
How will he ever explain that to his parents? What were at first relatively small discrepancies between self-concept and behavior are starting to snowball, and they are starting to have more affective consequences. Joachim is realizing that he’s in big trouble—the inconsistencies between his prior attitudes about the importance of schoolwork and his behavior are creating some significant threats to his positive self-esteem.
As we saw in our discussion of self-awareness theory, this discomfort that occurs when we behave in ways that we see as inconsistent, such as when we fail to live up to our own expectations, is called cognitive dissonance (Cooper, 2007; Festinger, 1957; Harmon-Jones & Mills, 1999). The discomfort of cognitive dissonance is experienced as pain, showing up in a part of the brain that is particularly sensitive to pain—the anterior cingulate cortex (van Veen, Krug, Schooler, & Carter, 2009). Leon Festinger and J.
Merrill Carlsmith (1959) conducted an important study designed to demonstrate the extent to which behaviors that are discrepant from our initial beliefs can create cognitive dissonance and can influence attitudes. College students participated in an experiment in which they were asked to work on a task that was incredibly boring (such as turning pegs on a peg board) and lasted for a full hour. After they had finished the task, the experimenter explained that the assistant who normally helped convince people to participate in the study was unavailable and that he could use some help persuading the next person that the task was going to be interesting and enjoyable.
The experimenter explained that it would be much more convincing if a fellow student rather than the experimenter delivered this message and asked the participant if he would be willing do to it. Thus with his request the experimenter induced the participants to lie about the task to another student, and all the participants agreed to do so. The experimental manipulation involved the amount of money the students were paid to tell the lie.
Half of the students were offered a large payment ($20) for telling the lie, whereas the other half were offered only a small payment ($1) for telling the lie. After the participants had told the lie, an interviewer asked each of them how much they had enjoyed the task they had performed earlier in the experiment. As you can see in Figure 4.10, “Employment of Task,” Festinger and Carlsmith found that the students who had been paid $20 for saying the tasks had been enjoyable rated the task as very boring, which indeed it was.
In contrast, the students who were paid only $1 for telling the lie changed their attitude toward the task and rated it as significantly more interesting. Festinger explained the results of this study in terms of consistency and inconsistency among cognitions. He hypothesized that some thoughts might be dissonant, in the sense that they made us feel uncomfortable, while other thoughts were more consonant, in the sense that they made us feel good.
He argued that people may feel an uncomfortable state (which he called cognitive dissonance) when they have many dissonant thoughts—for instance, between the idea that (a) they are smart and decent people and (b) they nevertheless told a lie to another student for only a small payment. Festinger argued that the people in his experiment who had been induced to lie for only $1 experienced more cognitive dissonance than the people who were paid $20 because the latter group had a strong external justification for having done it whereas the former did not. The people in the $1 condition, Festinger argued, needed to convince themselves that that the task was actually interesting to reduce the dissonance they were experiencing.4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 243 Figure 4.10 Festinger and Carlsmith.
Participants who had engaged in a boring task and then told another student it was interesting experienced cognitive dissonance, leading them to rate the task more positively in comparison to those who were paid $20 to do the same. Although originally considered in terms of the inconsistency among different cognitions, Festinger’s theory has also been applied to the negative feelings that we experience when there is inconsistency between our attitudes and our behavior, and particularly when the behavior threatens our perceptions of ourselves as good people (Aronson, 1969). Thus Joachim is likely feeling cognitive dissonance because he has acted against his better judgment and these behaviors are having some real consequences for him.
The dissonant thoughts involve (a) his perception of himself as a hardworking student, compared with (b) his recent behaviors that do not support that idea. Our expectation is that Joachim will not enjoy these negative feelings and will attempt to get rid of them. We Reduce Dissonance by Decreasing Dissonant or by Increasing Consonant Cognitions Because Joachim’s perception of himself as a hardworking student is now in jeopardy, he is feeling cognitive dissonance and will naturally try to reduce these negative emotions.
He can do so in a number of ways. One possibility is that Joachim could simply change his behavior by starting to study more and go out less. If he is successful in doing this, his dissonance will clearly be reduced and he can again feel good about himself.
But it seems that he has not been very successful in this regard—over the past weeks he has continually put off studying for listening to music. A second option is to attempt to reduce his dissonant cognitions—those that threaten his self-esteem. Perhaps he might try to convince himself that he has failed only one test and that he didn’t expect to do very well in biology anyway.
If he can make the negative behaviors seem less important, dissonance will be reduced. But Joachim has a third option: even if he cannot change his behavior and even if he knows that what he’s doing has negative consequences, he can create new consonant cognitions to counteract the dissonant cognitions. For instance, Joachim might try to convince himself that he is going to become an important record producer some day and that it is therefore essential that he attend many concerts.
When Joachim takes this route he changes his beliefs to be more in line with his behavior, and the outcome is that he has now restored attitude consistency. His behaviors no longer seem as discrepant from his attitudes as they were before, and when consistency is restored, dissonance is reduced. What the principles of cognitive dissonance suggest, then, is that we may frequently spend more energy244 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion convincing ourselves that we are good people than we do thinking of ourselves accurately. Of course we do this because viewing ourselves negatively is painful. Cognitive Dissonance in Everyday Life Cognitive dissonance is an important social psychological principle that can explain how attitudes follow behavior in many domains of our everyday life.
For instance, people who try but fail to quit smoking cigarettes naturally suffer lowered self-esteem (Gibbons, Eggleston, & Benthin, 1997). But rather than accepting this negative feeling, they frequently attempt to engage in behaviors that reduce dissonance. They may try to convince themselves that smoking is not that bad: “My grandmother smoked but lived to be 93 years old!” “I’m going to quit next year!” Or they may try to add new consonant cognitions: “Smoking is fun; it relaxes me.” You can see that these processes, although making us feel better about ourselves at least in the short run, may nevertheless have some long-term negative outcomes.
Elliot Aronson and Judson Mills (1959) studied whether the cognitive dissonance created by an initiation process could explain how much commitment students felt to a group they were part of. In their experiment, female college students volunteered to join a group that would be meeting regularly to discuss various aspects of the psychology of sex. According to random assignment, some of the women were told that they would be required to perform an embarrassing procedure before they could join the group (they were asked to read some obscene words and some sexually oriented passages from a novel in public), whereas other women did not have to go through this initiation.
Then all the women got a chance to listen to the group’s conversation, which turned out to be very boring. Aronson and Mills found that the women who had gone through the embarrassing experience subsequently reported more liking for the group than those who had not, and Gerard and Matthewson (1966) found that having to take some electrical shocks as part of an initiation process had the same effect. Aronson and Mills argued that the more effort an individual expends to become a member of the group (e.g., a severe initiation), the more he or she will become committed to the group in order to justify the effort put in during the initiation.
The idea is that the effort creates dissonant cognitions (e.g., “I did all this work to join the group”), which are then justified by creating more consonant ones (e.g., “Okay, this group is really pretty fun”). The women who spent little effort to get into the group were able to see the group as the dull and boring conversation that it was. The women who went through the more severe initiation, however, succeeded in convincing themselves that the same discussion was a worthwhile experience.
When we put in effort for something—an initiation, a big purchase price, or even some of our precious time—we will likely end up liking the activity more than we would have if the effort had been less. Even the effort of having to fill out a purchase agreement for a product, rather than having the salesperson do it for you, creates commitment to the purchase and a greater likelihood of staying in the deal (Cialdini, 2001). Another time you may have experienced the negative affective state of cognitive dissonance is after you have made an important and irrevocable decision.
Imagine that you are about to buy a new car and you have narrowed your search to a small new car and a larger (but much cheaper) used car. The problem is that you can see advantages and disadvantages to each. For instance, the smaller car would get better gas mileage, but the larger car—because it is used—is cheaper.
Imagine, however, that you finally decide to buy the larger car because you feel that you really don’t have enough money for the new car.4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 245 That night, you’re lying in bed and wondering about your decision. Although you’ve enjoyed driving the big car that you have just purchased, you’re worried about rising gas costs, the negative impact of the big car on the environment, and the possibility that the car might need a lot of repairs. Have you made the right decision?
This “buyer’s remorse” can be interpreted in terms of postdecisional dissonance—the feeling of regret that may occur after we make an important decision (Brehm, 1956). However, the principles of dissonance predict that once you make the decision—and regardless of which car you choose—you will convince yourself that you made the right choice. Since you have chosen the larger car, you will likely begin to think more about the positive aspects of the choice that you have made (what you are going to be able to do with the money you saved, rather than how much more it is going to cost to fill up the gas tank), and at the same time you will likely downplay the values of the smaller car.
Jack Brehm (1956) posed as a representative of a consumer testing service and asked women to rate the attractiveness and desirability of several kinds of appliances, such as toasters and electric coffee makers. Each woman was told that as a reward for having participated in the survey, she could have one of the appliances as a gift. She was given a choice between two of the products she had rated as being about equally attractive.
After she made her decision, her appliance was wrapped up and given to her. Then, 20 minutes later, each woman was asked to re-rate all the products. As you can see in Figure 4.11, “Postdecisional Dissonance,” Brehm found that the women rated the appliance that they had chosen and been given as a gift higher than they had the first time.
And the women also lowered their rating of the appliance they might have chosen but decided to reject. These results are of course consistent with the principles of cognitive dissonance—postdecisional dissonance is reduced by focusing on the positive aspects of the chosen product and the negative aspects of the rejected product. Figure 4.11 Postdecisional Dissonance.
As predicted by the desire to reduce postdecisional dissonance, participants increased the perceived desirability of a product they had chosen and decreased the perceived desirability of a product they did not choose. What research on cognitive dissonance suggests, then, is that people who are experiencing dissonance will generally try to reduce it. If we fail to lose the weight we wanted to lose, we decide that we look good anyway.
If we cheat on an exam, we decide that cheating is okay or common. If we hurt other people’s feelings, we may even decide that they are bad people who deserve our negative behavior. To escape from feeling poorly about themselves, people will engage in quite extraordinary rationalizing.
No wonder that most of us believe the statement, “If I had it all to do over again, I would not change anything important.”246 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Of course, the tendency to justify our past behavior has positive outcomes for our affect. If we are able to convince ourselves that we can do no wrong, we will be happier—at least for today.
But the desire to create positive self-esteem can lead to a succession of self-justifications that ultimately result in a chain of irrational actions. The irony is that to avoid thinking of ourselves as bad or immoral, we may set ourselves up for more immoral acts. Once Joachim has convinced himself that his schoolwork is not important, it may be hard to pick it up again.
Once a smoker has decided it is okay to smoke, she may just keep smoking. If we spend too much time thinking positively about ourselves we will not learn from our mistakes; nor will we grow or change. In order to learn from our behavior, it would be helpful to learn to tolerate dissonance long enough to examine the situation critically and dispassionately.
We then stand a chance of breaking out of the cycle of action followed by justification, followed by more action. There is still another potential negative outcome of dissonance: when we have to make choices we may feel that we have made poor ones. Barry Schwartz (2004) has argued that having too many choices can create dissonance and thus the opportunity for regret.
When we go to the store and have to pick only one out of 30 different types of chocolates, we have more opportunities for postdecisional dissonance. Although it seems like being allowed to choose would be a good thing, people report being happier when they are given a free gift than when they are given a choice between two similar gifts and have to reject one of them (Hsee & Hastie, 2006). Positive Self-Esteem Reduces Dissonance We have seen that the experience of cognitive dissonance can influence our thoughts and feelings about an attitude object by making us feel uncomfortable about our own behaviors.
The discrepant behavior causes our sense of self-worth to be lowered, which then causes us to change our attitudes to feel better about ourselves. • Discrepant behavior ⟶ lowered self-worth ⟶ changes in thoughts and feelings Imagine that immediately after you did something dishonest, but before you had a chance to try to reduce the dissonance you were experiencing, you were able to remind yourself of the fact that you had recently done something else very positive—perhaps you had recently spent some time volunteering at a homeless shelter or gotten a really high score on an important exam. Would the possibility of boosting your self-esteem in this other, but unrelated, domain make it unnecessary for you to engage in dissonance reduction?
Could you say, “Well, it’s true that I cheated, but I’m really a fine, intelligent, and generous person.” Research has demonstrated that this is the case. If we can affirm our self-worth, even on dimensions that are not related to the source of the original dissonance, the negative feelings we experience are reduced and so is the tendency to justify our attitudes (Steele, 1988). Just as finding ways to affirm our self-esteem should reduce cognitive dissonance, threats to our self- esteem should increase it.
Because cognitive dissonance poses a threat to one’s self-esteem, people who are more motivated by self-concern should show bigger changes in their thoughts and feelings after they engage in a discrepant behavior than should those who are less motivated by self-concern. Following the research of Brehm (1956), Heine and Lehman (1997) conducted an experiment to determine if threats to self-esteem would increase the magnitude of the dissonance-reduction effect, and if dissonance reduction would also occur for Japanese students as they had previously been found4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 247 in students from Western samples. They expected that there would be less need for dissonance reduction in the Japanese than in Western students because the Japanese (and other Easterners) were less motivated overall to maintain a positive self-image.
In their study, 71 Canadian and 71 Japanese participants were first asked to take a personality test. According to random assignment to conditions, one-third of the sample in each country were led to believe that they had scored much higher on the test than did the other participants and thus that they had “positive” personalities (the positive feedback condition). Another third of the sample (the negative feedback condition) were led to believe that they had scored more poorly on the test than average, and the final third (the control condition) were not given any feedback on their personality test scores.
Then all participants rated the desirability of 10 compact discs (which were known to be popular in both Canada and Japan) and were asked to choose between their fifth- and sixth-rated CDs as compensation for their participation. Finally, after choosing one of the CDs, the participants were asked to again rate their liking for the CDs. The change in the ratings from before choice to after choice, which would have occurred if the participants increased their liking of the CD they had chosen or decreased their liking of the CD they had rejected, was the dependent measure in the study.
As you can see in Figure 4.12, “Spread of Alternatives by Culture and Feedback Condition,” the researchers found a significant interaction between culture and personality feedback. The pattern of means showed that the feedback mattered for the Canadian participants—the difference in the ratings of the chosen versus the rejected CD (the “spread of alternatives”) increased from the positive to the control to the negative feedback conditions. However, there was no significant simple effect of feedback for the Japanese students, nor did they show a significant spread of alternatives in any feedback condition.
Figure 4.12 Spread of Alternatives by Culture and Feedback Condition. The Canadian participants showed a greater spread of alternatives when their self-esteem was threatened, but Japanese participants did not. However, other researchers have found that individuals from collectivistic cultures do show dissonance effects when they are focused on their relationships with others.
For instance, Kitayama, Snibbe, Markus, and Suzuki (2004) found that East Asian participants experienced dissonance particularly when they were asked to think about a close friend who had made a dissonance-creating decision. Such248 Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion a result would be expected because behaviors that involve more other-oriented, collectivistic outcomes should be more important for these people.
Indeed, research has found that advertisements that are framed in terms of personal benefits (e.g., “Use this breath mint!”) are more persuasive in individualistic cultures, whereas ads that emphasize family or ingroup benefits (e.g., “Share this breath mint with your friends!”) are more persuasive in collectivistic cultures (Han & Shavitt, 1994). Although dissonance is most likely when our behavior violates our positive self-concept, attitude change can occur whenever our thoughts and behaviors are inconsistent, even if the self-concept is not involved. For instance, Harmon-Jones and his colleagues (Harmon-Jones, Brehm, Greenberg, Simon, & Nelson, 1996) had people drink an unpleasant-tasting beverage (Kool-Aid made with vinegar instead of sugar) and then write down on a small slip of paper, which they then immediately crumpled up and threw away, a statement saying that they really liked the drink.
Harmon-Jones and his colleagues found that even though the lie could not possibly harm anyone, the act of lying nevertheless made the participants express more positive attitudes toward the drink. It appears that even lying to oneself about something relatively unimportant can produce dissonance and change attitudes (Prislin & Pool, 1996; Stone, 1999). Salespeople make use of psychological principles, including self-perception and cognitive dissonance, to encourage people to buy their products, often in ways that seem less than completely open and ethical.
Informed consumers are aware of such techniques, including the foot-in-the-door technique, the low-ball technique, and the bait-and-switch technique. Let’s consider in the next section how these strategies might work. Social Psychology in the Public Interest How Salespeople Use Principles of Persuasion The research that we have discussed in this chapter reveals some of the many ways that we can persuade people to buy our products, to vote for our candidates, and to engage in other behaviors that we would like them to engage in.
We have seen that we will be more successful if we use the right communicators and if we present the right messages under the right conditions. But it must also be kept in mind that a full understanding of the techniques used by persuaders may also be useful to help us avoid being persuaded by others. Salespeople sometimes make use of the Behavior ⟶ Attitude relationship to attempt to persuade others.
Regardless of whether the change is due to the cognitive principles of self-perception or the more affective principles of dissonance reduction, the attitude change that follows behavior can be strong and long lasting. This fact creates some very interesting opportunities for changing attitudes. One approach based on this idea is to get people to move slowly in the desired direction, such that they commit to a smaller act first.
The idea is that it will be relatively easy to get people to engage in a small behavior after which their perceptions of this initial behavior will change their attitudes, making it more likely for them to engage in a more costly behavior later. The foot-in-the-door technique refers to a persuasion attempt in which we first get the target to accept a rather minor request, and then we ask for a larger request. Freedman and Fraser (1966) asked homeowners if they would be willing to place a small sticker in the window of their house that said “Be a safe driver.” Many of the homeowners agreed to this small request.
Then several weeks later, the researchers came back and asked these same homeowners to put a big, ugly “DRIVE CAREFULLY” sign on their lawns. Almost 80% of the4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 249 homeowners who had agreed to put the sticker in their window later agreed to put the sign up, in comparison to only about 20% who agreed when they were asked about the sign without having been asked about the sticker first. In a more recent study, Nicolas Guéguen (2002) found that students in a computer discussion group were more likely to volunteer to complete a 40-question survey on their food habits (which required 15 to 20 minutes of their time) if they had already, a few minutes earlier, agreed to help the same requestor with a simple computer-related question (about how to convert a file type) than if they had not first been given the smaller opportunity to help.
You can see that the foot-in-the-door technique is a classic case of self-perception and commitment—once people label themselves as the kind of person who conforms to the requests of others in the relevant domain (e.g., “I volunteer to help safe driving campaigns,” “I help people in my discussion group”), it is easier to get them to conform later. Similarly, imagine a restaurant owner who has problems with people who make table reservations but then don’t call to cancel when they can’t come at the appointed time. The restaurant owner could try to reduce the problem by first getting a small commitment.
Instead of having the people who take the reservations say, “Please call if you change your plans,” they could instead ask, “Will you call us if you change your plans?” and then wait for the person to say yes. The act of saying yes to a simple request creates commitment to the behavior, and not following through on the promise would be likely to create cognitive dissonance. Since people don’t want to feel that they have violated their commitment, this should reduce the no-show rate.
Another approach based on the attitudes-follow-behavior idea, and which can be used by unscrupulous salespeople, is known as the low-ball technique. In this case, the salesperson promises the customer something desirable, such as a low price on a car, with the intention of getting the person to imagine himself or herself engaging in the desired behavior (in this case, purchasing the car). After the customer has committed to purchasing the car at a low price, the salesperson then indicates that he or she cannot actually sell the car at that price.
In this case, people are more likely to buy the car at the higher price than they would have been if the car had first been offered at the higher price. Backing out on a commitment seems wrong and may threaten self-esteem, even if the commitment was obtained in an unethical way. In testing the low-ball effect, Guéguen, Pascual, and Dagot (2002) asked people to watch a dog for them while they visited someone in the hospital.
Some participants were told that they would need to watch the dog for 30 minutes. Other participants were first asked simply to commit to watching the dog, and then only later informed that they would have to watch it for 30 minutes. The latter group had been low-balled, and they complied more often with the request.
A close alternative to low-balling is known as the bait-and-switch technique, which occurs when someone advertises a product at a very low price. When you visit the store to buy the product, however, you learn that the product you wanted at the low price has been sold out. An example is a car dealership that advertises a low-priced car in a newspaper ad but doesn’t have that car available when you visit the dealership to purchase it.
Again, people are more likely to buy an alternative higher-priced product after they have committed themselves to the purchase than they would have been without the original information. Once you imagine yourself owning the car, your attitude toward the car becomes more positive, making the idea of giving it up more costly and also making it more likely that you will buy it. Finally, although the foot-in-the-door, low-balling, and bait-and-switch tactics take advantage of the250 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion principles of commitment and consistency, it is important to be aware that there are several other paths to persuasion (see Table 4.2, “Potential Paths to Persuasion”). One such path is to rely on the norm of reciprocity—that is, the general expectation that people should return a favor. The door-in-the-face technique begins by making an unreasonably large request; for example, asking a fellow student if he or she would be willing to take notes on your behalf for the entire semester.
Assuming the student declines, you might then suggest a compromise by requesting that the student only shares his or her notes from the most recent class. In this case, your fellow student is likely to consent to the second request largely because the student feels that he or she should mirror the concession you have offered. The pre-giving technique also relies on the norm of reciprocity.
In this case, a charitable organization might mail you a small, unsolicited gift, followed by a request for a monetary donation. Having received the gift, many people feel a sense of obligation to support the organization in return, which is, of course, what they are counting on! Table 4.2 Potential Paths to Persuasion Commitment and We are more likely to honor a commitment if we commit to it orally, in writing, Consistency or in public.
Reciprocity We feel obligated to return a favor. Social Proof We tend to follow what others are doing. Authority We tend to obey authority figures.
Liking We are more easily persuaded by people that we like. Scarcity Opportunities are more valuable to us when they are less available. Source: Cialdini, R.
B. (2001). Influence: Science and practice (4th ed.).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Key Takeaways • As predicted by the principle of attitude consistency, if we engage in an unexpected or unusual behavior, our thoughts and feelings toward that behavior are likely to change. • Self-perception occurs when we use our own behavior as a guide to help us determine our thoughts and feelings.
• Self-perception can lead to either insufficient justification—the perception that there was not enough external threat to avoid engaging in a behavior—or overjustification—the perception that our behavior was caused primarily by external factors. • Principles of self-perception suggest that to create true attitude change we should avoid using too much punishment or too much reward. • Cognitive dissonance refers to the discomfort that occurs when we behave in ways that we see as inappropriate, such as when we fail to live up to our own expectations.4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 251 • Dissonance is reduced by changing behavior, by reducing dissonant cognitions, or by creating new consonant cognitions to counteract the dissonant cognitions.
• Dissonance is observed in many everyday experiences, including initiation and the experience of postdecisional dissonance. • Engaging in dissonance reduction has many positive outcomes for our affect but may lead to harmful self-justifications and irrational actions. • Because dissonance involves self-concern, it is stronger when we do not feel very positively about ourselves and may be stronger in Western than in Eastern cultures.
• Marketers use the principles of dissonance in their attempts at persuasion. Examples are the foot- in-the-door technique, low-balling, and the bait-and-switch technique. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Describe a time when your attitudes changed on the basis of your observation of your behaviors. 2. Describe a time when you behaved in a way that was inconsistent with your self-concept and which led you to experience cognitive dissonance.
How did you reduce the dissonance? 3. Did you ever buy a product or engage in an activity as the result of the foot-in-the-door technique, door-in-the-face, low-balling, or the bait-and-switch technique?
If so, describe your experience. References Aronson, E. (1969).
The theory of cognitive dissonance: A current perspective. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.).
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 1–34).
New York, NY: Academic Press. Aronson, E., & Carlsmith, J. M.
(1963). Effect of the severity of threat on the devaluation of forbidden behavior. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 66(6), 584–588.
Aronson, E., & Mills, J. (1959). The effect of severity of initiation on liking for a group.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59, 171–181. Bem, D. J.
(1965). An experimental analysis of self-persuasion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1(3), 199–218; Bem, D.
J. (1972). Self-perception theory.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 6, 1-62. Brehm, J. W.
(1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 52(3), 384–389.252 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Cialdini, R. (2001). Influence: Science and practice (4th ed.).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Cooper, J. M.
(2007). Cognitive dissonance: 50 years of a classical theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Deci, E.
L., & Ryan, R. M. (2002).
Self-determination research: Reflections and future directions. In E. L.
Deci & R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-determination research (pp.
431–441). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. Deci, E.
L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999).
A meta-analytic review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 627–668. Festinger, L.
(1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson; Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J.
M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced compliance.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58, 203–210. Freedman, J. L.
(1965). Long-term behavioral effects of cognitive dissonance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1(2), 145–155.
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C.
(1966). Compliance without pressure: The foot-in-the-door technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4(2), 195–202.
Gerard, H. B., & Matthewson, G. C.
(1966). The effects of severity of initiation on liking for a group: A replication. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 2, 278–287.
Gibbons, F. X., Eggleston, T. J., & Benthin, A.
C. (1997). Cognitive reactions to smoking relapse: The reciprocal relation between dissonance and self-esteem.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72(1), 184–195. Guéguen, N. (2002).
Foot-in-the-door technique and computer-mediated communication. Computers in Human Behavior, 18(1), 11–15. doi: 10.1016/s0747-5632(01)00033-4 Guéguen, N., Pascual, A., & Dagot, L.
(2002). Low-ball and compliance to a request: An application in a field setting. Psychological Reports, 91(1), 81–84.
doi: 10.2466/pr0.91.5.81-84 Han, S., & Shavitt, S. (1994). Persuasion and culture: Advertising appeals in individualistic and collectivistic societies.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 30(4), 326–350. Harmon-Jones, E., & Mills, J. (1999).
Cognitive dissonance: Progress on a pivotal theory in social psychology. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Harmon-Jones, E., Brehm, J.
W., Greenberg, J., Simon, L., & Nelson, D. E. (1996).
Evidence that the production of aversive consequences is not necessary to create cognitive dissonance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(1), 5–16. Heine, S.
J., & Lehman, D. R. (1997).
Culture, dissonance, and self-affirmation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 389-400. doi:10.1177/0146167297234005.
Hsee, C. K., & Hastie, R. (2006).
Decision and experience: Why don’t we choose what makes us happy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(1), 31–37. Hulleman, C.
S., Durik, A. M., Schweigert, S. B., & Harackiewicz, J.
M. (2008). Task values, achievement goals, and interest: An integrative analysis.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(2), 398–416. doi: 10.1037/0022-0663.100.2.398 Kitayama, S., Snibbe, A. C., Markus, H.
R., & Suzuki, T. (2004). Is there any “free” choice?: Self and dissonance in two cultures.
Psychological Science, 15(8), 527–535.4.3 Changing Attitudes by Changing Behavior 253 Lepper, M. R., & Greene, D. (1978).
The hidden costs of reward: New perspectives on the psychology of human motivation. Oxford, England: Lawrence Erlbaum. Lepper, M.
R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973).
Undermining children’s intrinsic interest with extrinsic reward: A test of the “overjustification” hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 129–137. Olson, J.
M., & Stone, J. (2005). The influence of behavior on attitudes.
In D. Albarracín, B. T.
Johnson, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The handbook of attitudes (pp.
223–271). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Prislin, R., & Pool, G.
J. (1996). Behavior, consequences, and the self: Is all well that ends well?
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22(9), 933–948; Schwartz, B. (2004). The paradox of choice: Why more is less.
New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers. Steele, C. M.
(1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 21, 261–302.
Stone, J. (Ed.). (1999).
What exactly have I done? The role of self-attribute accessibility in dissonance. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
van Veen, V., Krug, M. K., Schooler, J. W., & Carter, C.
S. (2009). Neural activity predicts attitude change in cognitive dissonance.
Nature Neuroscience, 12(11), 1469–1474. Wells, G. L., & Petty, R.
E. (1980). The effects of overt head movements on persuasion: Compatibility and incompatibility of responses.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 1(3), 219–230. Media Attributions • “Figure 4.9 Undermining Initial Interest in an Activity” is based on data from Lepper, Greene, and Nisbett (1973). Lepper, M.
R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973).
Undermining children’s intrinsic interest with extrinsic reward: A test of the “overjustification” hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 129–137. • “Figure 4.10 Festinger and Carlsmith” is based on data from Festinger and Carlsmith (1959).
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959).
Cognitive consequences of forced compliance. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58, 203–210. • “Figure 4.11 Postdecisional Dissonance” is based on data from Brehm (1956).
Brehm, J. W. (1956).
Postdecision changes in the desirability of alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 52(3), 384–389. • “Figure 4.12 Spread of Alternatives by Culture and Feedback Condition” is based on data from Heine and Lehman (1997).
Heine, S. J., & Lehman, D. R.
(1997). Culture, dissonance, and self-affirmation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 389-400.
doi:10.1177/ 0146167297234005.4.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion Now that we have discussed the concept of attitudes more fully, we hope you can better understand how they fit into the bigger picture of social psychology. Attitudes are central because they provide an organizing principle that helps us understand when and how our beliefs, feelings, and behaviors work together. We hope you can now see some of the many ways that your attitudes toward people, social groups, products, and many other objects help you make sense of your environment and react quickly to it.
Hopefully this chapter has also given you more insight into the many techniques that advertisers use to persuade people, and perhaps given you ideas about how to prevent that persuasion from occurring. You may now have a better understanding of the remarkable success of Apple’s iPhone as well as the techniques used in other advertising campaigns. Can you see how the features of the iPhone (e-mail and calendar management, social media integration, music storage, etc.) have had such an impact on consumers?
Can you see that the iPhone’s marketing campaign messages created very strong attitudes on the part of technologically savvy consumers, which made them likely to act on these attitudes? Perhaps you might see how the processes of self-perception and cognitive dissonance were important in making and keeping the momentum of the iPhone sales. Perhaps, once people bought and started to use their iPhones their perceptions of their own behavior drove their attitudes to be even more positive.
Think about some of the other ads that you have seen recently and consider the principles of persuasion that they used. Were the ads effective in matching the communicator, the message, and the message recipient? You may also want to consider the principles of self-perception and cognitive dissonance as you analyze your own behavior.
Can you remember times when your behavior influenced your attitudes? Were the attitudes changed as a result of self-perception or cognitive dissonance? Do you remember feeling the negative emotions associated with dissonance?
Perhaps you realize that the rationalizations that you make to relieve your dissonance might not always have such positive outcomes in the long term. 2554.5 Chapter Summary Attitudes are our positive or negative evaluations of an attitude object. Our attitudes are based on the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition.
Some attitudes are more important than others because they are more useful to us and thus have more impact on our daily lives. The importance of an attitude, as assessed by how quickly it comes to mind, is known as attitude strength. The affective, behavioral, and cognitive components of attitudes normally line up or match—this is the idea of attitude consistency.
Because of this consistency, our attitudes (as assessed on self-report measures) normally predict our behavior. We may be able to change attitudes by using persuasive communicators who deliver persuasive messages to message recipients. In general, persuasion will be greater when the communicator appeals to our self-interest.
Thus attractive, trustworthy, and expert communicators, who present their messages confidently and fairly and who do not appear to be influenced by situational forces, are most effective. Persuasive messages may be processed either spontaneously or thoughtfully. In some cases, the spontaneous and emotional processing of messages may be effective because the positive or negative affect makes the message more salient, causing it to grab our attention.
We are more willing and able to process information thoughtfully when the information allows us to meet underlying goals—for instance, when the message is personally relevant to us. We also process more thoughtfully when we have the ability and motivation to do so. We may be able to help people develop a resistance to persuasion by reminding them that a persuasive message will be coming and having them practice how they will respond to influence attempts.
These techniques are called forewarning and inoculation, respectively. Persuasion attempts may sometimes create reactance and thus be ineffective. Self-perception occurs when individuals use their own behavior to help them determine their attitudes toward an attitude object.
That is, we may use our own behavior as a guide to help us determine our own thoughts and feelings, based on the assumption that our thoughts and feelings should be consistent with our behaviors. When the social situation actually causes a behavior but the individual does not realize that the social situation was the cause, we call the phenomenon insufficient justification. Overjustification occurs when we view our behavior as caused by the situation, leading us to discount the extent to which our behavior was actually caused by our own interest in it.
The discomfort that occurs when we behave in ways that we see as inappropriate, such as when we fail to live up to our own expectations, is called cognitive dissonance. Dissonance can be reduced by changing behavior, by convincing ourselves that the behavior was not so negative, or by creating new consonant cognitions. Persuaders may use principles of attitude-behavior consistency to create attitude change, for instance, 257258 Chapter 4.
Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion through techniques such as the foot-in-the-door technique, the low-ball technique, and the bait-and- switch technique.Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Initial Impression Formation • Describe how people use behaviors and traits to form perceptions of others.
• Explore research about forming impressions from thin slices of information. • Summarize the role of nonverbal behaviors in person perception. • Review research about detecting deception.
2. Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution • Review the fundamental principles of causal attribution. • Explore the tendency to make personal attributions for unusual events.
• Review the main components of the covariation principle. • Outline Weiner’s model of success and failure. 3.
Biases in Attribution • Review a variety of common attibutional biases, outlining cultural diversity in these biases where indicated. • Explore the related concepts of the fundamental attribution error and correspondence bias. • Describe the actor-observer bias.
• Outline self-serving attributional biases. • Explore group-serving biases in attribution. • Describe victim-blaming attributional biases.
4. Individual Differences in Person Perception • Outline some important individual differences factors that influence people’s causal attributions. • Explain the ways that attributions can influence mental health and the ways that mental health can affect attributions.
• Explore how and why people engage in self-handicapping attributions and behaviors. 259260 Dr. Hammond Tarry Trying to explain murders: Do people from different cultures see things the same way?
In 1991, Gang Lu was a 28-year-old Chinese former graduate physics student at the University of Iowa, in the United States. He had recently lost a competition for an academic award. He then unsuccessfully appealed the decision, and afterward he was unable to find an academic job.
On November 1, he entered the University of Iowa Physics Department and shot his advisor, the person who handled his appeal, several fellow students and bystanders, and then himself. In all, Gang Lu killed five other people besides himself that day: four faculty members and one student—and he seriously injured another student. Figure 5.1 University of Iowa, Van Allen Building.
These tragic events prompted a lot of people in the communities affected and in the press to discuss the reasons for the killings. Michael Morris, at the time a graduate student at the University of Michigan, became interested in these discussions. He noticed that the reports on the English-language campus newspapers focused mainly on Gang Lu’s perceived internal characteristics, making claims about him having had a bad temper and a disturbed personality, for example.
Morris then consulted with a fellow graduate student who was Chinese, Kaiping Peng, to see how Chinese newspapers were covering the same event. Peng said that in contrast to the English-languagePrinciples of Social Psychology 261 campus papers Morris had read, the explanations in the Chinese papers often centered on the social circumstances in the killer’s life; for instance, that he did not get along with his supervisor and on the relatively easy availability of guns in the United States. Peng and Morris were curious about whether the differences they had observed reflected a wider trend in how Gang Lu’s crimes had been explained.
In an attempt to answer that question, they conducted an analysis of the content of the reports about the killings in the New York Times and the Chinese- language newspaper, the World Journal. Sure enough, they found that the differences in the types of explanations offered for the murders were very different. Whereas the New York Times described them mainly in reference to Lu’s internal characteristics, noting things like a “sinister edge to Mr.
Lu’s character well before the shootings,” the World Journal reporters tended to focus mainly on social factors leading up to the crimes, for example, arguing that the “tragedy reflects the lack of religion in Chinese culture.” Why did these two newspapers report on the same events in such different ways? There are many possible reasons. One particularly relevant topic to social psychologists is that of person perception, which is the study of how we perceive and explain other people’s behavior.
Could it be that the different focus of each newspaper was in part due to the contrasting ways that people from the different cultures tend to try to explain human behavior? It is to these and other related topics that we will now turn, coming back to try to shed light on this tragic case study along the way. Sources: Morris, M.
W., & Peng, K. (1994). Culture and cause: American and Chinese attributions for social and physical events.
Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 67(6), 949-971. Nisbett, R. E.
(2003). The geography of thought. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster Inc.
Although mass killings like these are mercifully rare events, how we try to explain them illustrates many of the processes that we go through in trying to figure out the causes of more everyday behaviors, too. Why did my boss shout at me today? Why is my partner so quiet tonight?
Why is that couple arguing in the street? Why did I agree to go to that party? Whenever we are curious about why people, including ourselves, behave in the ways that they do, we engage in an activity that social psychologists call attribution, which is the process of assigning causes to behaviors.
As we will see later on in this chapter, the very different reasons that the English and Chinese language newspapers used to explain the killings reflect important cultural differences in attribution. So, we are often in the business of trying to make sense out people and their behavior. In that sense, we are all amateur social psychologists.
In some situations, we may need to figure people out quite quickly. Some of these people are not particularly significant to us—the unknown pedestrians we pass on the sidewalk or the checkout clerk at the grocery, for instance. In these cases, our interactions might be on a fairly superficial level—we might just engage in a quick transaction, nod our head in passing, exchange pleasantries, or accomplish some relatively limited tasks with the person before we move on.
In other cases, our initial impressions of others might be more important. For example, if someone approaches you in a deserted alleyway, do you need to beat a hasty retreat, or is it safe for you to continue on your way? In this chapter, we will consider how we make sense of other people, including the initial and often262 Dr.
Hammond Tarry intuitive impressions that we rely on so heavily, and our later, more considered judgments. Then we will turn to the process of causal attribution, with the goal of understanding how we infer what other people are really like by observing their behaviors. Finally, we will consider how accurate we are in making our determinations about others and will examine differences among us in our person perception styles.
When we are finished, you will have a better idea of how we make judgments about other people, and this insight may enable you to perceive others more accurately. Media Attributions • “Van Allen Hall” by Twarneke under CC BY-SA 2.0 licence.5.1 Initial Impression Formation Learning Objectives 1. Describe how people use behaviors and traits to form initial perceptions of others.
2. Explore research about forming impressions from thin slices of information. 3.
Summarize the role of nonverbal behaviors in person perception. 4. Review research about detecting deception.
People are often very skilled at person perception—the process of learning about other people—and our brains are designed to help us judge others efficiently (Haselton & Funder, 2006; Macrae & Quadflieg, 2010). Infants prefer to look at faces of people more than they do other visual patterns, and children quickly learn to identify people and their emotional expressions (Turati, Cassia, Simion, & Leo, 2006). As adults, we are able to identify and remember a potentially unlimited number of people as we navigate our social environments (Haxby, Hoffman, & Gobbini, 2000), and we form impressions of those others quickly and without much effort (Carlston & Skowronski, 2005; Fletcher-Watson, Findlay, Leekam, & Benson, 2008).
Furthermore, our first impressions are, at least in some cases, remarkably accurate (Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson, 2000). Recent research is beginning to uncover the areas in our brain where person perception occurs. In one relevant study, Mason and Macrae (2004) used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans to test whether people stored information about other people in a different location in the brain than where they stored information about animals, and they found that this was the case.
Specific areas of the prefrontal cortex were found to be more active when people made judgments about people rather than dogs (Figure 5.2). 263264 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Figure 5.2 Recent advances in neuroimaging techniques have provided information about the brain structures that are involved in person perception.
The prefrontal cortex shows strong activation when we are thinking about another person. Learning about people is a lot like learning about any other object in our environment, with one major exception. With an object, there is no interaction: we learn about the characteristics of a car or a cell phone, for example, without any concern that the car or the phone is learning about us.
It is a one-way process. With people, in contrast, there is a two-way social process: just as we are learning about another person, that person is learning about us, or potentially attempting to keep us from accurately perceiving him or her. For instance, research has found that when other people are looking directly at us, we process their features more fully and faster, and we remember them better than when the same people are not looking at us (Hood & Macrae, 2007).
In the social dynamic with others, then, we have two goals: first, we need to learn about them, and second, we want them to learn about us (and, we hope, like and respect us). Our focus here is on the former process—how we make sense of other people. But remember that just as you are judging them, they are judging you.
We have seen in “Chapter 4. Attitudes, Behavior, and Persuasion“, that when people are asked to describe themselves, they generally do so in terms of their physical features (“I am really tall”), social category memberships (“I am a woman”), and traits (“I am friendly”). These characteristics well reflect the dimensions we use when we try to form impressions of others.
In this section, we will review how we initially use the physical features and social category memberships of others (e.g., male or female, race, and ethnicity) to form judgments and then will focus on the role of personality traits in person perception.5.1 Initial Impression Formation 265 Figure 5.3 One of the important tasks of everyday life is to form judgments about other people. Research Focus Forming Impressions from Thin Slices Although it might seem surprising, social psychological research has demonstrated that at least in some limited situations, people can draw remarkably accurate conclusions about others on the basis of very little data, and that they can do this very quickly (Rule & Ambady, 2010; Rule, Ambady, Adams, & Macrae, 2008; Rule, Ambady, & Hallett, 2009). Ambady and Rosenthal (1993) made videotapes of six female and seven male graduate students while they were teaching an undergraduate course.
The courses covered diverse areas of the college curriculum, including humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. For each instructor, three266 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others 10-second video clips were taken—10 seconds from the first 10 minutes of the class, 10 seconds from the middle of the class, and 10 seconds from the last 10 minutes of the class.
Nine female undergraduates were asked to rate the 39 clips of the instructors individually on 15 dimensions, such as “optimistic,” “confident,” “active,” and so on, as well as give an overall, global rating. Ambady and her colleagues then compared the ratings of the instructors made by the participants who had seen the instructors for only 30 seconds with the ratings of the same instructors that had been made by actual students who had spent a whole semester with the instructors and who had rated them at the end of the semester on dimensions such as “the quality of the course section” and “the section leader’s performance.” The researchers used the Pearson correlation coefficient to make the comparison (remember that correlations nearer +1.0 or –1.0 are stronger). As you can see in the following table, the ratings of the participants and the ratings of the students were highly positively correlated.
Table 5.1 Forming Accurate Impressions in Only 30 Seconds Correlations of Molar Nonverbal Behaviors with College Teacher Effectiveness Ratings (Student Ratings) Variable r Accepting .50 Active .77** Attentive .48 Competent .56* Confident .82*** Dominant .79** Empathic .45 Enthusiastic .76** Honest .32 Likable .73** (Not) Anxious .26 Optimistic .84*** Professional .53 Supportive .55* Warm .67* Global Variable .76** *p<.05. **p<.01. ***p<.001.
Data are from Ambady and Rosenthal (1993). Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1993).
Half a minute: Predicting teacher evaluations from thin slices of nonverbal behavior and physical attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(3), 431–441.5.1 Initial Impression Formation 267 If the finding that we can make accurate judgments about other people in only 30 seconds surprises you, then perhaps you will be even more surprised to learn that we do not even need that much time. Willis and Todorov (2006) found that even a tenth of a second was enough to make judgments that correlated highly with the same judgments made by other people who were given several minutes to make the judgments.
Other research has found that we can make accurate judgments in seconds or even milliseconds about, for instance, the personalities of salespersons (Ambady, Krabbenhoft, & Hogan, 2006) and even whether or not a person is prejudiced (Richeson & Shelton, 2005). Todorov, Mandisodza, Goren, and Hall (2005) reported a demonstration of just how important such initial impressions can be. These researchers showed to participants pairs of political candidates who had run against each other in previous elections for the U.S.
Senate and House of Representatives. Participants saw only the faces of the candidates, and they saw them in some cases for only one second. Their task was to judge which person in of each pair was the most competent.
Todorov and colleagues (2005) found that these judgments predicted the actual result of the election; in fact, 68% of the time the person judged to have the most competent face won. Rule and Ambady (2010) showed that perceivers were also able to accurately distinguish whether people were Democrats or Republicans based only on photos of their faces. Republicans were perceived as more powerful than Democrats, and Democrats were perceived as warmer than Republicans.
Further, Rule, Ambady, Adams, and Macrae (2008) found that people could accurately determine the sexual orientation of faces presented in photos (gay or straight) based on their judgments of what they thought “most people” would say. These findings have since been replicated across different cultures varying in their average acceptance of homosexuality (Rule, Ishii, Ambady, Rosen, & Hallett, 2011). Taken together, these data confirm that we can form a wide variety of initial impressions of others quickly and, at least in some cases, quite accurately.
Of course, in these situations, the people who were being observed were not trying to hide their personalities from the observers. As we saw in Chapter 3, people often use strategic self-presentation quite skillfully, which further complicates the person perception process. Nonverbal Behavior One way that the participants in the studies described above may have been able to form such accurate impressions of instructors on the basis of such little information was by viewing their nonverbal behavior.
Nonverbal behavior is any type of communication that does not involve speaking, including facial expressions, body language, touching, voice patterns, and interpersonal distance. Nonverbal behaviors are used to reinforce spoken words (Hostetter, 2011) but also include such things as interpersonal distance (how far away from you the other person stands), tone of voice, eye gaze, and hand gestures and body positions (DePaulo et al., 2003). The ability to decode nonverbal behavior is learned early, even before the development of language (Walker-Andrews, 2008).
We tend to like people who have a pleasant tone of voice and open posture, who stand an appropriate distance away from us, and who look at and touch us for the “right” amount of time—not too much or too little. And, of course, behavior matters; people who walk faster are perceived as happier and more powerful than those who walk more slowly (Montepare & Zebrowitz-268 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others McArthur, 1988).
(For more insight into the relationship between nonverbal communication and success, see social psychologist Amy Cuddy’s fascinating TED Talk. The importance of body movement has been demonstrated in studies in which people are viewed in point-light displays in dark rooms with only small lights at their joints. Research has found that observers are able to accurately recognize the behavior of others from these minimal displays (Clarke, Bradshaw, Field, Hampson, & Rose, 2005; Johnson, Gill, Reichman, & Tassinary, 2007; Heberlein, Adolphs, Tranel, & Damasio, 2004; Figure 5.4 “Point-Light Displays”).
People can also determine personality by tone of voice provided by degraded and incomprehensible speech (Ambady, Krabbenhoft, & Hogan, 2006).5.1 Initial Impression Formation 269 Figure 5.4 Point-Light Displays People can accurately detect behaviors, emotions, and traits from point-light displays.270 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Although they may be pretty good at it in some cases, people are often not aware of their ability to make accurate judgments. Rule, Ambady, Adams, and Macrae (2008) found that even though the participants in their research were quite accurate in their perceptions, they could not articulate how they made their judgments.
They claimed that they were “just guessing” and could hardly believe that they were getting the judgments right. These results suggest that they were made without any conscious awareness on the part of the judgers. Furthermore, the participants’ judgments of their own accuracy were not generally correlated with their actual accurate judgments.
Figure 5.5 Nonverbal behaviors are an important form of communication—and they are particularly important in expressing our liking of, and caring for, others. The particular nonverbal behaviors that we use, as well as their meanings, are determined by social norms, and these norms may vary across cultures. For example, people who live in warm climates nearer the equator use more nonverbal communication (e.g., talking with their hands or showing strong facial expressions) and are more likely to touch each other during conversations than people who live in colder climates nearer Earth’s poles (Manstead, 1991; Pennebaker, Rime, & Blankenship, 1996).
And the appropriate amount of personal space to keep between ourselves and others also varies across cultures. In some cultures—for instance, those of South American countries—it is appropriate to stand very close to another person while talking to him or her; in other cultures—for example, in the United States and Western Europe—more interpersonal space is the norm (Knapp & Hall, 2006). The appropriate amount of eye contact with others is also determined by culture.
In Latin America, it is appropriate to lock eyes with another person, whereas in Japan, people more often try to avoid eye contact. Although nonverbal behaviors can be informative during the initial stages of person perception, they are limited in what they can convey. In general, they communicate our own status or dominance (self- concern) as well as our interest in or liking of another (other-concern).
If we notice that someone is smiling and making eye contact with us while leaning toward us in conversation, we can be pretty sure that he or she likes us. On the other hand, if someone frowns at us, touches us inappropriately, or moves away when we get close, we may naturally conclude that he or she does not like us. We may also use nonverbal behaviors to try out new situations: If we move a little closer and look at someone a bit longer, we communicate our interest.
If these responses are reciprocated by the other person, that can indicate that he or she likes us, and we can move on to share other types of information. If the initial nonverbal behaviors are not reciprocated, then we may conclude that the relationship may not work out and we can withdraw before we go “too far.” Nonverbal behavior provides different information than verbal behavior because people frequently say5.1 Initial Impression Formation 271 one thing and do another. Perhaps you remember being really angry at someone but not wanting to let on that you were mad, so you tried to hide your emotions by not saying anything.
But perhaps your nonverbal behavior eventually gave you away to the other person: although you were trying as hard as you could not to, you just looked angry. We frequently rely more on nonverbal than on verbal behavior when messages are contradictory. One reason for this is that we know that it is relatively easy to monitor our verbal behavior but harder to control the nonverbal.
However, we expect that people who need to deceive others—for instance, good poker players—are able to monitor their nonverbal behavior better than most people, making it difficult to get a good read on them. Because we use nonverbal behaviors so frequently in our social interactions, we are fluent readers of them. We also realize that we can better communicate with others when we use them.
Indeed, it is difficult to communicate accurately when we cannot express ourselves nonverbally (Krauss, Chen, & Chawla, 1996). You probably have noticed this yourself. If you e-mail or text a message to your friend, for instance, you need to be careful about using sarcasm because he or she might misinterpret your meaning.
Because nonverbal information is so important, we quickly learned to incorporate it, in the form of emoticons, in our text messages (Figure 5.6 ). Figure 5.6 Emoticons are a type of nonverbal behavior for electronic messages.272 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Detecting Danger by Focusing on Negative Information You may have noticed when you first looked at the images presented earlier in this chapter that you tended to like some of the people and to dislike others.
It is not surprising that you had these emotions—these initial affective reactions are an essential and highly adaptive part of person perception. One of the things that we need to determine when we first perceive someone is whether that person poses any threat to our well-being. We may dislike or experience negative emotions about people because we feel that they are likely to harm us, just as we may like and feel positively about them if we feel that they can help us (Rozin & Royzman, 2001).
Research has found that the threat and the trustworthiness of others are particularly quickly perceived, at least by people who are not trying to hide their intentions (Bar, Neta, & Linz, 2006; Todorov, Said, Engel, & Oosterhof, 2008). Most people with whom we interact are not dangerous, nor do they create problems for us. In fact, when we are asked to rate how much we like complete strangers, we generally rate them positively (Sears, 1986).
Because we generally expect people to be positive, people who are negative or threatening are salient, likely to create strong emotional responses, and relatively easy to spot. Compared with positive information, negative information about a person tends to elicit more physiological arousal, draw greater attention, and exert greater impact on our judgments and impressions of the person. Hansen and Hansen (1988) had undergraduate students complete a series of trials in which they were shown, for very brief time periods, “crowds” of nine faces (Figure 5.7, “Faces”).
On some of the trials, all the faces were happy or all the faces were angry. On other trials, the “crowd” was made up of eight happy faces and one angry face, or eight angry faces and one happy face. For each trial, the participants were instructed to say, as quickly as possible, whether the crowd contained a discrepant face or not.
Hansen and Hansen found that the students were significantly faster at identifying the single angry face among the eight happy ones than they were at identifying the single happy face among the eight angry ones. They also made significantly fewer errors doing so. The researchers’ conclusion was that angry, and thus threatening, faces quickly popped out from the crowd.
Similarly, Ackerman and colleagues (2006) found that people were better at recognizing the faces of other people when those faces had angry, rather than neutral, expressions, and Dijksterhuis and Aarts (2003) found that people could more quickly and more accurately recognize negative, rather than positive, words.5.1 Initial Impression Formation 273 Figure 5.7 Faces. Because negative faces are more salient and therefore more likely to grab our attention than are positive faces, people are faster at locating a single negative face in a display of positive faces than they are to locate a single positive face in a display of negative faces. Our brains seem to be hardwired to detect negative behaviors (Adams, Gordon, Baird, Ambady, & Kleck, 2003), and at an evolutionary level this makes sense.
It is important to tell the “good guys” from the “bad guys” and to try to avoid interacting with the latter. In one study, Tiffany Ito and her colleagues (Ito, Larsen, Smith, & Cacioppo, 1998) showed college students a series of positive, negative, and neutral images while their event-related brain potentials were collected. The researchers found that different parts of the brain reacted to positive and negative images and that the response to negative images was greater overall.
They concluded that “negative information weighs more heavily on the brain” (p. 887). In sum, the results of research in person perception are clear: when we are perceiving people, negative information is simply more influential than positive information (Pratto & John, 1991).
Social Psychology in the Public Interest Detecting Deception One important person perception task that we must all engage in sometimes is to try to determine whether other people are lying to us. We might wonder whether our poker opponent is bluffing, whether our partner is being honest when she tells us she loves us, or whether our boss is really planning to give us the promotion he has promised. This task is particularly important for members of courtroom juries, who are asked determine the truth or falsehood of the testimony given by witnesses.
And detecting deception is perhaps even more important for those whose job is to provide public security. How good are professionals, such as airport security officers and police detectives at determining whether or not someone is telling the truth? It turns out that the average person is only moderately good at detecting deception and that experts do not seem to be much better.
In a recent meta-analysis, researchers looked at over 200 studies that had274 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others tested the ability of almost 25,000 people to detect deception (Bond & DePaulo, 2006). The researchers found that people were better than chance at doing so but were not really that great.
The participants in the studies were able to correctly identify lies and truths about 54% of the time (chance performance is 50%). This is not a big advantage, but it is one that could have at least some practical consequences and that suggests that we can at least detect some deception. However, the meta-analysis also found that experts—including police officers, detectives, judges, interrogators, criminals, customs officials, mental health professionals, polygraph examiners, job interviewers, federal agents, and auditors—were not significantly better at detecting deception than were nonexperts.
Why is it so difficult for us to detect liars? One reason is that people do not expect to be lied to. Most people are good and honest folk, and we expect them to tell the truth, and we tend to give them the benefit of the doubt (Buller, Stiff, & Burgoon, 1996; Gilbert, Krull, & Malone, 1990).
In fact, people are more likely to expect deception when they view someone on a videotape than when they are having an interpersonal interaction with the person. It’s as if we expect the people who are right around us to be truthful (Bond & DePaulo, 2006). A second reason is that most people are pretty good liars.
The cues that liars give off are quite faint, particularly when the lies that they are telling are not all that important. Bella DePaulo and her colleagues (DePaulo et al., 2003) found that in most cases it was very difficult to tell if someone was lying, although it was easier when the liar was trying to cover up something important (e.g., a sexual transgression) than when he or she was lying about something less important. De Paulo and colleagues did find, however, that there were some reliable cues to deception.
Compared with truth tellers, liars: • Made more negative statements overall • Appeared more tense • Provided fewer details in their stories • Gave accounts that were more indirect and less personal • Took longer to respond to questions and exhibited more silent pauses when they were not able to prepare their responses • Gave responses that were briefer and spoken in a higher pitch A third reason it is difficult for us to detect liars is that we tend to think we are better at catching lies than we actually are. This overconfidence may prevent us from working as hard as we should to try to uncover the truth. Finally, most of us do not really have a very good idea of how to detect deception; we tend to pay attention to the wrong things.
Many people think that a person who is lying will avert his or her gaze or will not smile or that perhaps he or she will smile too much. But it turns out that faces are not that revealing. The problem is that liars can more easily control their facial expressions than they can control other parts of their bodies.
In fact, Ekman and Friesen (1974) found that people were better able to detect other people’s true emotions when they could see their bodies but not their faces than when they could see their faces but not their bodies. Although we may think that deceivers do not smile when they are lying, it is actually common for them to mask their statements with false smiles—smiles that5.1 Initial Impression Formation 275 look very similar to the more natural smile that we make when we are really happy (Ekman & Davidson, 1993; Frank & Ekman, 1993). Recently, advances in technology have begun to provide new ways to assess deception.
Some software analyzes the language of truth tellers, other software analyzes facial microexpressions that are linked with lying (Newman, Pennebaker, Berry, & Richards, 2003), and still other software uses neuroimaging techniques to try to catch liars (Langleben et al., 2005). Whether these techniques will be successful, however, remains to be seen. Judging People by Their Traits Although we can learn some things about others by observing their physical characteristics and their nonverbal behaviors, to really understand them we will eventually need to know their personality traits.
Traits are important because they are the basic language by which we understand and communicate about people. When we talk about other people, we describe their traits. Our friends are “fun,” “creative,” and “crazy in a good way,” or “quiet,” “serious,” and “controlling.” The language of traits is a powerful one—indeed, there are over 18,000 trait terms in the English language.
Combining Traits: Information Integration Let’s consider for a moment how people might use trait terms to form an overall evaluation of another person. Imagine that you have to describe two friends of yours, Amir and Connor, to another person, Rianna, who might be interested in dating one of them. You’ll probably describe the two men in terms of their physical features first, but then you’ll want to say something about their personalities.
Let’s say that you want to make both Amir and Connor sound as good as possible to Rianna, but you also want to be honest and not influence her one way or the other. How would you do that? You would probably start by mentioning their positive traits: Amir is “intelligent” and “serious”; Connor is “fun” and “exciting.” But to be fair, you would also need to mention their negative traits: Amir sometimes seems “depressed,” and Connor can be “inconsiderate.” You might figure that Rianna will just combine whatever information you give her, perhaps in a mathematical way.
For instance, she might listen to all the traits that you mention, decide how positive or negative each one is, and then add the traits together or average them. Research has found that people do exactly that, both for strangers and for people whom they know very well (Anderson, 1974; Falconi & Mullet, 2003). Consider what might happen if you gave Rianna the following information: • Amir is smart, serious, kind, and sad.
• Connor is fun, happy, selfish, and inconsiderate. Rianna might decide to score each trait on a scale of +5 (very positive) to –5 (very negative). Once she has these numbers, she could then either add them together or average them to get an overall judgment.276 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others Table 5.2a: Combining Traits – Amir Trait Value Smart +5 Serious +1 Kind +4 Sad –4 Sum +6.0 Average +1.5 Table 5.2b: Combining Traits – Connor Trait Value Fun +3 Happy +2 Selfish –4 Inconsiderate –5 Sum –4.0 Average –1.0 Based on this scoring, Rianna would probably decide that she likes Amir more than Connor. Of course, different people might weight the traits in somewhat different ways, and this would lead different people to draw different impressions about Amir and Connor. But there is pretty good agreement among most people about the meaning of traits, at least in terms of the overall positivity or negativity of each trait, and thus most people would be likely to draw similar conclusions.
Now imagine that you later thought of some other new, moderately positive characteristics about Amir—that he was also “careful” and “helpful.” Whether you told Rianna about them might depend on how you thought they would affect her overall impression of Amir. Perhaps these new traits would make Rianna like Amir more (after all, they do add new positive information about him). But perhaps they might make her like him less (if the new, moderately positive information diluted the existing positive impression she has already formed about him).
One way to think about this is to consider whether Rianna might be adding the traits together or averaging them. In our first example, it didn’t matter because the outcome was the same. But now it might—if she’s adding the traits together, then Rianna will probably like Amir more after she hears the new information, because new positive traits have been added to the existing sum score.
If she is averaging the traits together, however, then Rianna will probably like him less than she did before, because the new, more moderate information tends to dilute the initial impressions. It turns out that in most cases, our judgments are better predicted by mental averaging than by mental5.1 Initial Impression Formation 277 adding (Mills, 2007). What this means is that when you are telling someone about another person and you are trying to get him or her to like the person, you should say the most positive things that you know but leave out the more moderate (although also positive) information.
The moderate information is more likely to dilute, rather than enhance, the more extreme information. The Importance of the Central Traits Warm and Cold Although the averaging model is quite good at predicting final impressions, it is not perfect. This is because some traits are simply weighted more heavily than others.
For one, negative information is more heavily weighted than is positive information (Rozin & Royzman, 2001). In addition to the heavy weight that we give to negative traits, we give a particular emphasis to the traits “warm” and “cold.” Imagine two men, Brad and Phil, who were described with these two sets of characteristics: • Brad is industrious, critical, warm, practical, and determined. • Phil is industrious, critical, cold, practical, and determined.
As you can see, the descriptions are identical except for the presence of “warm” and “cold.” In a classic study, Solomon Asch (1946) found that people described with these two sets of traits were perceived very differently—the “warm” person very positively and the “cold” person very negatively. To test whether or not these differences would influence real behavior, Harold Kelley (1950) had students read about a professor who was described either as “rather cold” or as “very warm.” Then the professor came into the classroom and led a 20-minute discussion group with the students. Although the professor behaved in the same way for both groups, the students nevertheless reacted very differently to him.
The students who were expecting the “warm” instructor were more likely to participate in the discussion, in comparison with those who were expecting him to be “cold.” And at the end of the discussion, the students also rated the professor who had been described as “warm” as being significantly more humorous, sociable, popular, and better natured than the “cold” professor. Moreover, the effects of warmth and coolness seem to be wired into our bodily responses. Research has found that even holding a cup of hot versus iced coffee, or making judgments in warm versus cold rooms leads people to judge others more positively (Ijzerman & Semin, 2009; Williams & Bargh, 2008).
In short, the particular dimension warm versus cold makes a big difference in how we perceive people—much bigger than do other traits. As a result, the traits of warm and cold are known as central traits, which are characteristics that have a very strong influence on our impressions of others (Asch, 1946). The powerful influence of central traits is due to two things.
One, they lead us to make inferences about other traits that might not have been mentioned. The students who heard that the professor was “warm” might also have assumed that he had other positive traits (maybe “nice” and “funny”), in comparison with those who heard that he was “cold.” Two, the important central traits also color our perceptions of the other traits that surround them. When a person is described as “warm” and “intelligent,” the meaning of “intelligent” seems a lot better than does the term “intelligent” in the context of a person who is also “cold.” Overall, the message is clear: if you want to get someone to like you, try to act in a warm manner toward them.
Be friendly, nice, and interested in what they say. This attention you pay to the other will be more powerful than any other characteristics that you might try to display to them. The importance of perceptions of warmth-coldness has been confirmed in many other278 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others contexts. For example, in the field of psychotherapy, many studies have indicated that therapists’ warmth, empathy, and genuineness are the three most important traits in establishing a strong and trusting relationship with clients, which in turn leads to positive change (Shapiro, 1969). First Impressions Matter: The Primacy Effect It has frequently been said that “first impressions matter.” Social psychological research supports this idea.
The primacy effect describes the tendency for information that we learn first to be weighted more heavily than is information that we learn later. One demonstration of the primacy effect was conducted by Solomon Asch (1946). In his research, participants learned some traits about a person and then made judgments about him.
One half of the participants saw this list of traits: • Intelligent, industrious, impulsive, critical, stubborn, envious The other half of the participants saw this list: • Envious, stubborn, critical, impulsive, industrious, intelligent You may have noticed something interesting about these two lists—they contain exactly the same traits but in reverse order. Asch discovered something interesting in his study: because the traits were the same, we might have expected that both groups would form the same impression of the person, but this was not at all the case. Rather, Asch found that the participants who heard the first list, in which the positive traits came first, formed much more favorable impressions than did those who heard the second list, in which the negative traits came first.
Similar findings were found by Edward Jones (1968), who had participants watch one of two videotapes of a woman taking an intelligence test. In each video, the woman correctly answered the same number of questions and got the same number wrong. However, when the woman got most of her correct answers in the beginning of the test but got more wrong near the end, she was seen as more intelligent than when she got the same number correct but got more correct at the end of the test.
Primacy effects also show up in other domains, even in those that seem really important. For instance, Koppell and Steen (2004) found that in elections in New York City, the candidate who was listed first on the ballot was elected more than 70% of the time, and Miller and Krosnick (1998) found similar effects for candidate preferences in laboratory studies. This is not to say that it is always good to be first.
In some cases, the information that comes last can be most influential. Recency effects, in which information that comes later is given more weight, although much less common than primacy effects, may sometimes occur. For example, de Bruin (2005) found that in competitions such as the Eurovision Song Contest and ice skating, higher marks were given to competitors who performed last.
Considering the primacy effect in terms of the cognitive processes central to human information processing leads us to understand why it can be so powerful. One reason is that humans are cognitive misers. Because we desire to conserve our energy, we are more likely to pay more attention to the information that comes first and less likely to attend to information that comes later.
In fact, when5.1 Initial Impression Formation 279 people read a series of statements about a person, the amount of time they spend reading the items declines with each new piece of information (Belmore & Hubbard, 1987). Not surprisingly, then, we are more likely to show the primacy effect when we are tired than when we are wide awake and when we are distracted than when we are paying attention (Webster, Richter, & Kruglanski, 1996). Another reason for the primacy effect is that the early traits lead us to form an initial expectancy about the person, and once that expectancy is formed, we tend to process information in ways that keep that expectancy intact.
Thinking back to Chapter 2 and the discussion of social cognition, we can see that this of course is a classic case of assimilation—once we have developed a schema, it becomes difficult to change it. If we learn that a person is “intelligent” and “industrious,” those traits become cognitively accessible, which leads us to develop a positive expectancy about the person. When the information about the negative features comes later, these negatives will be assimilated into the existing knowledge more than the existing knowledge is accommodated to fit the new information.
Once we have formed a positive impression, the new negative information just doesn’t seem as bad as it might have been had we learned it first. This is an important factor in explaining the halo effect, which is the influence of a global positive evaluation of a person on perceptions of their specific traits. Put simply, if we get an initially positive general impression of someone, we often see their specific traits more positively.
The halo effect has been demonstrated in many social contexts, including a classic investigation by Bingham and Moore (1931) on job interviewing and a far more recent study of students’ evaluations of their professors (Keeley, English, Irons, & Hensley, 2013). You can be sure that it would be good to take advantage of the primacy and halo effects if you are trying to get someone you just met to like you. Begin with your positive characteristics, and only bring the negatives up later.
This will create a much better outcome than beginning with the negatives. Key Takeaways • Every day we must size up the people we interact with. The process of doing this is known as person perception.
• We can form a wide variety of initial impressions of others quickly and often quite accurately. • Nonverbal behavior is communication that does not involve speaking, including facial expressions, body language, touching, voice patterns, and interpersonal distance. We rely on nonverbal behavior in our initial judgments of others.
• The particular nonverbal behaviors that we use, as well as their meanings, are determined by social norms, and these may vary across cultures. • In comparison with positive information about people, negative information tends to elicit more physiological arousal, draw greater attention, and exert greater impact on our judgments and impressions of people. • People are only moderately good at detecting deception, and experts are not usually much better than the average person.
• We integrate traits to form judgments of people primarily by averaging them. • Negative and central traits have a large effect on our impressions of others.280 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others • The primacy effect occurs because we pay more attention to information that comes first and also because initial information colors how we perceive information that comes later.
• These processes also help to explain how the halo effect occurs. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Consider a case where you formed an impression of someone quickly and on only a little information.
How accurate do you think your judgment was and why? What information did you take into account? What information might you have missed?
2. Consider some of the nonverbal behaviors that you and your friends use when you communicate. What information are you usually trying to communicate by using them?
When do you find yourself using more vigorous gesturing and why? 3. Give an example of a situation in which you have noticed the effects of central traits on your perception of someone.
Why do you think that this happened? 4. Describe a situation where you were influenced by either the primacy or the halo effect in your initial perceptions of someone.
How accurate did those initial perceptions turn out to be and why? References Ackerman, J. M., Shapiro, J.
R., Neuberg, S. L., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D.
V., Griskevicius, V., Schaller, M. (2006). They all look the same to me (unless they’re angry): From out-group homogeneity to out-group heterogeneity.
Psychological Science, 17(10), 836–840. Adams, R. B., Jr., Gordon, H.
L., Baird, A. A., Ambady, N., & Kleck, R. E.
(2003). Effects of gaze on amygdala sensitivity to anger and fear faces. Science, 300(5625), 1536.
Ambady, N., Bernieri, F. J., & Richeson, J. A.
(2000). Toward a histology of social behavior: Judgmental accuracy from thin slices of the behavioral stream. In M.
P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 32, pp.
201–271). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Ambady, N., Krabbenhoft, M.
A., & Hogan, D. (2006). The 30-sec sale: Using thin-slice judgments to evaluate sales effectiveness.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 16(1), 4–13. doi: 10.1207/ s15327663jcp1601_2 Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1993).
Half a minute: Predicting teacher evaluations from thin slices of nonverbal behavior and physical attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(3), 431–441. Anderson, N.
H. (1974). Cognitive algebra: Integration theory applied to social attribution.
In L.5.1 Initial Impression Formation 281 Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 1–101).
New York, NY: Academic Press; Asch, S. E. (1946).
Forming impressions of personality. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41, 258–290. Bar, M., Neta, M., & Linz, H.
(2006). Very first impressions. Emotion, 6(2), 269–278.
doi: 10.1037/ 1528–3542.6.2.269; Belmore, S. M., & Hubbard, M. L.
(1987). The role of advance expectancies in person memory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 61–70.
Bingham, W. V., & Moore, B. V.
(1931). How to interview. Oxford, England: Harpers.
Bond, C. F., Jr., & DePaulo, B. M.
(2006). Accuracy of deception judgments. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 214–234.
Buller, D. B., Stiff, J. B., & Burgoon, J.
K. (1996). Behavioral adaptation in deceptive transactions: Fact or fiction: Reply to Levine and McCornack.
Human Communication Research, 22(4), 589-603. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.1996.tb00381.x Carlston, D. E., & Skowronski, J.
J. (2005). Linking versus thinking: Evidence for the different associative and attributional bases of spontaneous trait transference and spontaneous trait inference.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(6), 884–898; Clarke, T. J., Bradshaw, M. F., Field, D.
T., Hampson, S. E., & Rose, D. (2005).
The perception of emotion from body movement in point-light displays of interpersonal dialogue. Perception, 34(10), 1171–1180; de Bruin, W. B.
(2005). Save the last dance for me: Unwanted serial position effects in jury evaluations. Acta Psychologica, 118(3), 245–260.
doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2004.08.005 DePaulo, B. M., Lindsay, J. J., Malone, B.
E., Muhlenbruck, L., Charlton, K., & Cooper, H. (2003). Cues to deception.
Psychological Bulletin, 129(1), 74–118. Dijksterhuis, A., & Aarts, H. (2003).
On wildebeests and humans: The preferential detection of negative stimuli. Psychological Science, 14(1), 14–18. Ekman, P., & Davidson, R.
J. (1993). Voluntary smiling changes regional brain activity.
Psychological Science, 4(5), 342–345; Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1974).
Detecting deception from the body or face. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29(3), 288–298. doi: 10.1037/h0036006 Falconi, A., & Mullet, E.
(2003). Cognitive algebra of love through the adult life. International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 57(3), 275–290.
Fletcher-Watson, S., Findlay, J. M., Leekam, S. R., & Benson, V.
(2008). Rapid detection of person information in a naturalistic scene. Perception, 37(4), 571–583.
Frank, M. G., & Ekman, P. (1993).
Not all smiles are created equal: The differences between enjoyment and nonenjoyment smiles. Humor: International Journal of Humor Research, 6(1), 9–26. Gilbert, D.
T., Krull, D. S., & Malone, P. S.
(1990). Unbelieving the unbelievable: Some problems in the rejection of false information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(4), 601–613.282 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others Hansen, C. H., & Hansen, R. D.
(1988). Finding the face in the crowd: An anger superiority effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 917–924.
Haselton, M. G., & Funder, D. C.
(2006). The evolution of accuracy and bias in social judgment. In M.
Schaller, J. A. Simpson, & D.
T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and social psychology (pp. 15–37).
Madison, CT: Psychosocial Press. Haxby, J. V., Hoffman, E.
A., & Gobbini, M. I. (2000).
The distributed human neural system for face perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(6), 223–233. Heberlein, A.
S., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H. (2004). Cortical regions for judgments of emotions and personality traits from point-light walkers.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(7), 1143–1158. Hood, B. M., & Macrae, C.
N. (2007). Look into my eyes: The effect of direct gaze on face processing in children and adults.
In R. Flom, K. Lee, & D.
Muir (Eds.), Gaze-following: Its development and significance (pp. 283–296). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; Mason, M.
F., Hostetter, A. B. (2011).
When do gestures communicate? A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 137 (2), 297–315.
Ijzerman, H., & Semin, G. R. (2009).
The thermometer of social relations: Mapping social proximity on temperature. Psychological Science, 20(10), 1214–1220 Ito, T. A., Larsen, J.
T., Smith, N. K., & Cacioppo, J. T.
(1998). Negative information weighs more heavily on the brain: The negativity bias in evaluative categorizations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(4), 887–900.
Johnson, K. L., Gill, S., Reichman, V., & Tassinary, L. G.
(2007). Swagger, sway, and sexuality: Judging sexual orientation from body motion and morphology. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93(3), 321–334; Jones, E.
E. (1968). Pattern of performance and ability attribution: An unexpected primacy effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 10(4), 317–340. Keeley, J. W., English, T., Irons, J., & Henslee, A.
M. (2013). Investigating halo and ceiling effects in student evaluations of instruction.
Educational And Psychological Measurement, 73(3), 440-457. doi:10.1177/0013164412475300 Kelley, H. H.
(1950). The warm-cold variable in first impressions of persons. Journal of Personality,18(4), 431–439.
Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A.
(2006). Nonverbal communication in human interaction (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Koppell, J. G. S., & Steen, J.
A. (2004). The effects of ballot position on election outcomes.
Journal of Politics, 66(1), 267–281. Krauss, R. M., Chen, Y., & Chawla, P.
(Eds.). (1996). Nonverbal behavior and nonverbal communication: What do conversational hand gestures tell us?
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Langleben, D. D., Loughead, J.
W., Bilker, W. B., Ruparel, K., Childress, A. R., Busch, S.
I., & Gur, R. C. (2005).
Telling truth from lie in individual subjects with fast event-related fMRI. Human Brain Mapping, 26(4), 262–272. Macrae, C.
N., & Quadflieg, S. (2010). Perceiving people.
In S. T. Fiske, D.
T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey5.1 Initial Impression Formation 283 (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol.
1, pp. 428–463). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Manstead, A. S. R.
(Ed.). (1991). Expressiveness as an individual difference.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; Mason, M. F., & Macrae, C. N.
(2004). Categorizing and individuating others: The neural substrates of person perception. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(10), 1785–1795.
doi: 10.1162/ 0898929042947801 Miller, J. M., & Krosnick, J. A.
(1998). The impact of candidate name order on election outcomes. Public Opinion Quarterly, 62(3), 291–330.
Mills, J. (2007). Evidence forming attitudes from combining beliefs about positive attributes of activities follows averaging (Unpublished manuscript).
University of Maryland, College Park. Montepare, J. M., & Zebrowitz-McArthur, L.
(1988). Impressions of people created by age-related qualities of their gaits. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55(4), 547–556.
Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J. W., Berry, D.
S., & Richards, J. M. (2003).
Lying words: Predicting deception from linguistic styles. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(5), 665–675. Pennebaker, J.
W., Rime, B., & Blankenship, V. E. (1996).
Stereotypes of emotional expressiveness of Northerners and Southerners: A cross-cultural test of Montesquieu’s hypotheses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(2), 372–380. Pratto, F., & John, O.
P. (1991). Automatic vigilance: The attention-grabbing power of negative social information.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(3), 380–391. Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J.
N. (2005). Brief report: Thin slices of racial bias.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 29(1), 75–86. Rozin, P., & Royzman, E. B.
(2001). Negativity bias, negativity dominance, and contagion. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5(4), 296–320.
Rule, N. O., & Ambady, N. (2010).
Democrats and Republicans can be differentiated from their faces. PLoS ONE, 5(1), e8733; Rule, N. O., Ambady, N., & Hallett, K.
C. (2009). Female sexual orientation is perceived accurately, rapidly, and automatically from the face and its features.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(6), 1245–1251. Rule, N. O., Ambady, N., Adams, R.
B., Jr., & Macrae, C. N. (2008).
Accuracy and awareness in the perception and categorization of male sexual orientation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(5), 1019–1028; Rule, N. O., Ishii, K., Ambady, N., Rosen, K.
S., & Hallett, K. C. (2011).
Found in translation: Cross- cultural consensus in the accurate categorization of male sexual orientation. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 37(11), 1499-1507. doi:10.1177/0146167211415630 Sears, D.
O. (1986). College sophomores in the laboratory: Influences of a narrow data base on social psychology’s view of human nature.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(3), 515–530. Shapiro, D. A.
(1969). Empathy, warmth, and genuineness in psychotherapy. British Journal of Clinical and Social Psychology, 8(4), 350-361.
doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8260.1969.tb00627.x284 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Todorov, A., Mandisodza, A. N., Goren, A., & Hall, C.
C. (2005). Inferences of competence from faces predict election outcomes.
Science, 308(5728), 1623–1626. Todorov, A., Said, C. P., Engel, A.
D., & Oosterhof, N. N. (2008).
Understanding evaluation of faces on social dimensions. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(12), 455–460. doi: 10.1016/ j.tics.2008.10.001 Turati, C., Cassia, V.
M., Simion, F., & Leo, I. (2006). Newborns’ face recognition: Role of inner and outer facial features.
Child Development, 77(2), 297–311. Walker-Andrews, A. S.
(2008). Intermodal emotional processes in infancy. In M.
Lewis, J. M. Haviland-Jones, & L.
F. Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (3rd ed., pp. 364–375).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Webster, D. M., Richter, L., & Kruglanski, A.
W. (1996). On leaping to conclusions when feeling tired: Mental fatigue effects on impressional primacy.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32(2), 181–195. Williams, L. E., & Bargh, J.
A. (2008). Experiencing physical warmth promotes interpersonal warmth.
Science, 322(5901), 606–607. Willis, J., & Todorov, A. (2006).
First impressions: Making up your mind after a 100ms exposure to a face. Psychological Science, 17(7), 592–598. Media Attributions • “Figure 5.2 Recent advances in neuroimaging techniques have provided information about the brain structures that are involved in person perception” is based on data are from Mason, Banfield, and Macrae (2004).
Mason, M. F., & Macrae, C. N.
(2004). Categorizing and individuating others: The neural substrates of person perception. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(10), 1785–1795.
doi: 10.1162/0898929042947801 • “Flickr – Israel Defense Forces – Terrorist Disguised as a Woman” by Israel Defense Forces is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “You’re not listening!” by Jesslee Cuizon is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “Family Party” by Fairfax County is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.
• “North Charleston Police Officers Daniel Stewart and Matt Kirk visiting with students” by North Charleston is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “touch…” by Eternal ☼ Sunshine is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “02710009” by IAEA Imagebank is licensed under aCC BY-SA 2.0 Licence.
• “mother and daughter” by imagebang@gmail.com is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence. • Emoticons by Gustavo26776 used under CC BY-SA 3.0 licence.5.2 Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution Learning Objectives 1. Review the fundamental principles of causal attribution.
2. Explore the tendency to make personal attributions for unusual events. 3.
Review the main components of the covariation principle. 4. Outline Weiner’s model of success and failure.
We have seen that we use personality traits to help us understand and communicate about the people we know. But how do we know what traits people have? People don’t walk around with labels saying “I am generous” or “I am aggressive” on their foreheads.
In some cases, thinking back to our discussions of reputation in Chapter 3, we may learn about a person indirectly, for instance, through the comments that other people make about that person. We also use the techniques of person perception to help us learn about people and their traits by observing them and interpreting their behaviors. If Zoe hits Joe, we might conclude that Zoe is aggressive.
If Cejay leaves a big tip for the waitress, we might conclude that he is generous. It seems natural and reasonable to make such inferences because we can assume (often, but not always, correctly) that behavior is caused by personality. It is Zoe’s aggressiveness that causes her to hit, and it is Cejay’s generosity that led to his big tip.
Although we can sometimes infer personality by observing behavior, this is not always the case. Remember that behavior is influenced by both our personal characteristics and the social context in which we find ourselves. What this means is that the behavior we observe other people engaging in might not always be reflective of their personality; instead, the behavior might have been caused more by the situation rather than by underlying person characteristics.
Perhaps Zoe hit Joe not because she is really an aggressive person but because Joe insulted or provoked her first. And perhaps Cejay left a big tip in order to impress his friends rather than because he is truly generous. Because behavior can be influenced by both the person and the situation, we must attempt to determine which of these two causes actually more strongly determined the behavior.
The process of trying to determine the causes of people’s behavior is known as causal attribution (Heider, 1958). Because we cannot see personality, we must work to infer it. When a couple we know breaks up, despite what seemed to be a match made in heaven, we are naturally curious.
What could have caused the breakup? Was it something one of them said or did? Or perhaps stress from financial hardship was the culprit?
Making a causal attribution can be a bit like conducting a social psychology experiment. We carefully observe the people we are interested in, and we note how they behave in different social situations. After we have made our observations, we draw our conclusions.
We make a personal (or internal or dispositional) attribution when we decide that the behavior was caused primarily by the person. A 285286 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others personal attribution might be something like “I think they broke up because Sarah was not committed to the relationship.” At other times, we may determine that the behavior was caused primarily by the situation—we call this making a situational (or external) attribution.
A situational attribution might be something like, “I think they broke up because they were under such financial stress.” At yet other times, we may decide that the behavior was caused by both the person and the situation; “I think they broke up because Sarah’s lack of commitment really became an issue once they had financial troubles.” Making Inferences about Personality It is easier to make personal attributions in some cases than in others. When a behavior is unusual or unexpected in the particular situation it occurs in, we can more easily make a personal attribution for it. Imagine that you go to a party and you are introduced to Tess.
Tess shakes your hand and says, “Nice to meet you!” Can you readily conclude, on the basis of this behavior, that Tess is a friendly person? Probably not. Because the social context demands that people act in a friendly way (by shaking your hand and saying “Nice to meet you”), it is difficult to know whether Tess acted friendly because of the situation or because she is really friendly.
Imagine, however, that instead of shaking your hand, Tess ignores you and walks away. In such cases, it is easier in this case to infer that Tess is unfriendly because her behavior is so contrary to what one would expect. To test this idea, Edward Jones and his colleagues (Jones, Davis, & Gergen, 1961) conducted a classic experiment in which participants viewed one of four different videotapes of a man who was applying for a job.
For half the participants, the video indicated that the man was interviewing for a job as a submariner, a position that required close contact with many people over a long period of time. It was clear to the man being interviewed, as well as to the research participants, that to be a good submariner you should be extroverted (i.e., you should enjoy being around others). The other half of the participants saw a video in which the man was interviewing for a job as an astronaut, which involved (remember, this study was conducted in 1961) being in a small capsule, alone, for days on end.
In this case, it was clear to everyone that in order to be good astronaut, you should have an introverted personality. During the videotape of the interview, a second variable was also manipulated. One half of the participants saw the man indicate that he was actually an introvert (he said things such as “I like to work on my own,” “I don’t go out much”), and the other half saw the man say that he was actually an extrovert (he said things such as “I would like to be a salesman,” “I always get ideas from others”).
After viewing one of the four videotapes, participants were asked to indicate how introverted or extroverted they thought the applicant really was. As you can see in Table 5.2, “Attributions to Expected and Unexpected Behaviors,” when the applicant gave responses that better matched what was required by the job (i.e., for the submariner job, the applicant said he was an extrovert, and for the astronaut job, he said he was an introvert), the participants did not think his statements were as indicative of his underlying personality as they did when the applicant said the opposite of what was expected by the job (i.e., when the job required that he be extroverted but he said he was introverted, or vice versa).5.2 Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution 287 Table 5.2 Attributions to Expected and Unexpected Behaviors The Job Applied For Extraverted Introverted Astronaut 91 71 Submariner 71 45 We are more likely to draw personal attributions when a behavior is unexpected. The numbers represent the percentage of extraverted responses that participants believed the job applicant would actually endorse if he were telling the complete truth.
Participants were more likely to believe that the applicant was more extraverted (91%) and more introverted (45%) when he said that he did not have the personality traits required by the job than when he said that he did have the personality traits required by the job. Data are from Jones, Davis, and Gergen (1961). Jones, E.
E., Davis, K. E., & Gergen, K. J.
(1961). Role playing variations and their informational value for person perception. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63(2), 302–310.
The idea here is that the statements that were unusual or unexpected (on the basis of the job requirements) just seemed like they could not possibly have been caused by the situation, so the participants really thought that the interviewee was telling the truth. On the other hand, when the interviewee made statements that were consistent with what was required by the situation, it was more difficult to be sure that he was telling the truth (perhaps, thinking back to the discussion of strategic self-presentation in Chapter 3, he was just saying these things because he wanted to get the job), and the participants made weaker personal attributions for his behavior. We can also make personal attributions more easily when we know that the person had a choice in the behavior.
If a man chooses to be friendly, even in situations in which he might not be, this probably means that he is friendly. But if we can determine that he’s been forced to be friendly, it’s more difficult to know. If, for example, you saw a man pointing a gun at another person, and then you saw that person give his watch and wallet to the gunman, you would probably not infer that the person was generous!
Jones and Harris (1967) had student participants in a study read essays that had been written by other students. Half of the participants thought the students had chosen the essay topics, whereas the other half thought the students had been assigned the topics by their professor. The participants were more likely to make a personal attribution that the students really believed in the essay they were writing when they had chosen the topics rather than been assigned topics.
Sometimes a person may try to lead others to make personal attributions for their behavior to make themselves seem more believable. For example, when a politician makes statements supporting a cause in front of an audience that does not agree with her position, she will be seen as more committed to her beliefs and may be more persuasive than if she gave the same argument in front of an audience known to support her views. Again, the idea is based on principles of attribution: if there is an obvious situational reason for making a statement (the audience supports the politician’s views), then the personal attribution (that the politician really believes what she is saying) is harder to make.
Detecting the Covariation between Personality and Behavior So far, we have considered how we make personal attributions when we have only limited information; that is, behavior observed at only a single point in time—a man leaving a big tip at a restaurant, a man288 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others answering questions at a job interview, or a politician giving a speech. But the process of making attributions also occurs when we are able to observe a person’s behavior in more than one situation.
Certainly, we can learn more about Cejay’s generosity if he gives a big tip in many different restaurants with many different people, and we can learn more about a politician’s beliefs by observing the kinds of speeches she gives to different audiences over time. When people have multiple sources of information about the behavior of a person, they can make attributions by assessing the relationship between a person’s behavior and the social context in which it occurs. One way of doing so is to use the covariation principle,which states that a given behavior is more likely to have been caused by the situation if that behavior covaries (or changes) across situations.
Our job, then, is to study the patterns of a person’s behavior across different situations in order to help us to draw inferences about the causes of that behavior (Jones et al., 1987; Kelley, 1967). Research has found that people focus on three kinds of covariation information when they are observing the behavior of others (Cheng & Novick, 1990). • Consistency information.
A situation seems to be the cause of a behavior if the situation always produces the behavior in the target. For instance, if I always start to cry at weddings, then it seems as if the wedding is the cause of my crying. • Distinctiveness information.
A situation seems to be the cause of a behavior if the behavior occurs when the situation is present but not when it is not present. For instance, if I only cry at weddings but not at any other time, then it seems as if the wedding is the cause of my crying. • Consensus information.
A situation seems to be the cause of a behavior if the situation creates the same behavior in most people. For instance, if many people cry at weddings, then it seems as if the wedding is the cause of my (and the other people’s) crying. Imagine that your friend Jane likes to go out with a lot of different men, and you have observed her behavior with each of these men over time.
One night she goes to a party with Ravi, where you observe something unusual. Although Jane has come to the party with Ravi, she completely ignores him all night. She dances with some other men, and in the end she leaves the party with someone else.
This is the kind of situation that might make you wonder about the cause of Jane’s behavior (is she a rude person, or is this behavior caused more by Ravi?) and for which you might use the covariation principle to attempt to draw some conclusions. According to the covariation principle, you should be able to determine the cause of Jane’s behavior by considering the three types of covariation information: consistency, distinctiveness, and consensus. One question you might ask is whether Jane always treats Ravi this way when she goes out with him.
If the answer is yes, then you have some consistency information: the perception that a situation always produces the same behavior in a person. If you have noticed that Jane ignores Ravi more than she ignores the other men she dates, then you also have distinctiveness information: the perception that a behavior occurs when the situation is present but not when it is not present. Finally, you might look for consensus information: the perception that a situation is creating the same response in most people—do other people tend to treat Ravi in the same way?
Consider one more example. Imagine that a friend of yours tells you that he has just seen a new movie and that it is the greatest movie he’s ever seen. As you wonder whether you should make an attribution5.2 Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution 289 to the situation (the movie), you will naturally ask about consensus; do other people like the movie too?
If they do, then you have positive consensus information about how good the movie is. But you probably also have some information about your friend’s experiences with movies over time. If you are like most people, you probably have friends who love every movie they see.
If this is the case for this friend, you probably won’t yet be that convinced that it’s a great movie—in this case, your friend’s reactions would not be distinctive. On the other hand, if your friend does not like most movies he sees but loves this one, then distinctiveness is strong (the behavior is occurring only in this particular situation). If this is the case, then you can be more certain it’s something about the movie that has caused your friend’s enthusiasm.
Your next thought may be, “I’m going to see that movie tonight.” You can see still another example of the use of covariation information in Table 5.3, “Using Covariation Information.” Table 5.3 Using Covariation Information Attribution Consensus Distinctiveness Consistency An external attribution (to the All my friends Bill always Bill laughs more at this TV situation, in this case the TV show) is laugh at this TV laughs at this show. more likely if… show. TV show.
Bill Very few of my Bill laughs at this TV show as An internal attribution (to the person, always laughs friends laugh at this much as he laughs at other TV in this case Bill) is more likely if… at this TV TV show. shows. show.
According to the covariation principle, we use three sources of information to help us determine whether we should make an attribution to the situation or to the person. In this example, the attribution is either personal (to my friend Bill) or situational (to a TV show we are watching). In summary, covariation models predict that we will most likely make external attributions when consensus, distinctiveness, and consistency are all high.
In contrast, when consensus and disctinctiveness are both low and this is accompanied by high consistency, then we are most likely to arrive at an internal attribution (Kelley, 1967). In other situations, where the pattern of consensus, consistency, and distinctiveness does not fall into one of these two options, it is predicted that we will tend to make attributions to both the person and the situation. These predictions have generally been supported in studies of attribution, typically asking people to make attributions about a stranger’s behaviors in vignettes (Kassin, 1979).
In studies in more naturalistic contexts, for example those we make about ourselves and others who we know well, many other factors will also affect the types of attributions that we make. These include our relationship to the person and our prior beliefs. For instance, our attributions toward our friends are often more favorable than those we make toward strangers (Campbell, Sedikides, Reeder, & Elliot, 2000).
Also, in line with our discussions of schemas and social cogniton in Chapter 2, they are often consistent with the content of the schemas that are salient to us at the time (Lyon, Startup, & Bentall, 1999).290 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 5 FILL IN THE BLANKS – INTERNAL OR EXTERNAL ATTRIBUTION CASE STUDY Use your understanding of consensus, distinctiveness, and consistency information to determine the type of attribution you would most likely make in the situation below. Fill in each blank with the correct word (low or high for the three types of information; internal or external for the type of attribution).
You are a psychotherapist with many clients. One day, your last client is twenty minutes late for a one hour appointment. He is regularly late for your appointments.
Most of your other clients are typically late arriving. He has disclosed to you that, in general, he is quite a punctual person. In this situation, your client’s lateness for his current appointment shows consensus, distinctiveness, and consistency.
Given this, it is most likely that you would make an attribution about his behavior. Attributions for Success and Failure Causal attribution is involved in many important situations in our lives; for example, when we attempt to determine why we or others have succeeded or failed at a task. Think back for a moment to a test that you took, or another task that you performed, and consider why you did either well or poorly on it.
Then see if your thoughts reflect what Bernard Weiner (1985) considered to be the important factors in this regard. Weiner was interested in how we determine the causes of success or failure because he felt that this information was particularly important for us: accurately determining why we have succeeded or failed will help us see which tasks we are good at already and which we need to work on in order to improve. Weiner proposed that we make these determinations by engaging in causal attribution and that the outcomes of our decision-making process were attributions made either to the person (“I succeeded/ failed because of my own personal characteristics”) or to the situation (“I succeeded/failed because of something about the situation”).
Weiner’s analysis is shown in Figure 5.8, “Attributions for Success and Failure.” According to Weiner, success or failure can be seen as coming from personal causes (e.g., ability, motivation) or from situational causes (e.g., luck, task difficulty). However, he also argued that those personal and situational causes could be either stable (less likely to change over time) or unstable (more likely to change over time).5.2 Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution 291 Figure 5.8 Attributions for Success and Failure [Image description] This figure shows the potential attributions that we can make for our, or for other people’s, success or failure. Locus considers whether the attributions are to the per son or to the situation, and stability considers whether or not the situation is likely to remain the same over time.
If you did well on a test because you are really smart, then this is a personal and stable attribution of ability. It’s clearly something that is caused by you personally, and it is also quite a stable cause—you are smart today, and you’ll probably be smart in the future. However, if you succeeded more because you studied hard, then this is a success due to motivation.
It is again personal (you studied), but it is also potentially unstable (although you studied really hard for this test, you might not work so hard for the next one). Weiner considered task difficulty to be a situational cause: you may have succeeded on the test because it was easy, and he assumed that the next test would probably be easy for you too (i.e., that the task, whatever it is, is always either hard or easy). Finally, Weiner considered success due to luck (you just guessed a lot of the answers correctly) to be a situational cause, but one that was more unstable than task difficulty.
It turns out that although Weiner’s attributions do not always fit perfectly (e.g., task difficulty may sometimes change over time and thus be at least somewhat unstable), the four types of information pretty well capture the types of attributions that people make for success and failure. We have reviewed some of the important theory and research into how we make attributions. Another292 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others important question, that we will now turn to, is how accurately we attribute the causes of behavior. It is one thing to believe that that someone shouted at us because he or she has an aggressive personality, but quite another to prove that the situation, including our own behavior, was not the more important cause! Key Takeaways • Causal attribution is the process of trying to determine the causes of people’s behavior.
• Attributions are made to personal or situational causes. • It is easier to make personal attributions when a behavior is unusual or unexpected and when people are perceived to have chosen to engage in it. • The covariation principle proposes that we use consistency information, distinctiveness information, and consensus information to draw inferences about the causes of behaviors.
• According to Bernard Weiner, success or failure can be seen as coming from either personal causes (ability and motivation) or situational causes (luck and task difficulty). Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Describe a time when you used causal attribution to make an inference about another person’s personality.
What was the outcome of the attributional process? To what extent do you think that the attribution was accurate? Why?
2. Outline a situation where you used consensus, consistency, and distinctiveness information to make an attribution about someone’s behavior. How well does the covariation principle explain the type of attribution (internal or external) that you made?
3. Consider a time when you made an attribution about your own success or failure. How did your analysis of the situation relate to Weiner’s ideas about these processes?
How did you feel about yourself after making this attribution and why? References Allison, S. T., & Messick, D.
M. (1985b). The group attribution error.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 21(6), 563-579.5.2 Inferring Dispositions Using Causal Attribution 293 Campbell, W. K., Sedikides, C., Reeder, G. D., & Elliot, A.
J. (2000). Among friends: An examination of friendship and the self-serving bias.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 229-239. Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L.
R. (1990). A probabilistic contrast model of causal induction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(4), 545–567. Heider, F. (1958).
The psychology of interpersonal relations. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Jones, E.
E., & Harris, V. A. (1967).
The attribution of attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 3(1), 1–24. Jones, E.
E., Davis, K. E., & Gergen, K. J.
(1961). Role playing variations and their informational value for person perception. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63(2), 302–310.
Jones, E. E., Kanouse, D. E., Kelley, H.
H., Nisbett, R. E., Valins, S., & Weiner, B. (Eds.).
(1987). Attribution: Perceiving the causes of behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kassin, S. M. (1979).
Consensus information, prediction, and causal attribution: A review of the literature and issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1966-1981. Kelley, H.
H. (1967). Attribution theory in social psychology.
In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation (Vol. 15, pp.
192–240). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. Lyon, H.
M., & Startup, M., & Bentall, R. P. (1999).
Social cognition and the manic defense: Attributions, selective attention, and self-schema in Bipolar Affective Disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108(2), 273-282.Frubin Uleman, J. S., Blader, S.
L., & Todorov, A. (Eds.). (2005).
Implicit impressions. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Weiner, B.
(1985). Attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 548–573.
Image Description Figure 5.8 Attributions for Success and Failure The potential attributions we make for our, or for other people’s, success or failure based on the locus and the stability of the situation • Ability: internal locus, stable • Task difficulty: external locus, stable • Motivation: internal locus, unstable • Luck: external locus, unstable [Return to Figure 5.8]5.3 Biases in Attribution Learning Objectives 1. Review a variety of common attibutional biases, outlining cultural diversity in these biases where indicated. 2.
Explore the related concepts of the fundamental attribution error and correspondence bias. 3. Describe the actor-observer bias.
4. Outline self-serving attributional biases. 5.
Explore group-serving biases in attribution. 6. Describe victim-blaming attributional biases.
Are Our Attributions Accurate? We have seen that person perception is useful in helping us successfully interact with others. In relation to our preceding discussion of attributions for success and failure, if we can determine why we did poorly on a test, we can try to prepare differently so we do better on the next one.
Because successful navigation of the social world is based on being accurate, we can expect that our attributional skills will be pretty good. However, although people are often reasonably accurate in their attributions—we could say, perhaps, that they are “good enough” (Fiske, 2003)—they are far from perfect. In fact, causal attributions, including those relating to success and failure, are subject to the same types of biases that any other types of social judgments are.
Let’s consider some of the ways that our attributions may go awry. The Fundamental Attribution Error One way that our attributions may be biased is that we are often too quick to attribute the behavior of other people to something personal about them rather than to something about their situation. This is a classic example of the general human tendency of underestimating how important the social situation really is in determining behavior.
This bias occurs in two ways. First, we are too likely to make strong personal attributions to account for the behavior that we observe others engaging in. That is, we are more likely to say “Cejay left a big tip, so he must be generous” than “Cejay left a big tip, but perhaps that was because he was trying to impress his friends.” Second, we also tend to make more personal attributions about the behavior of others (we tend to say, “Cejay is a generous person”) than we do for ourselves (we tend to say, “I am generous in some situations but not in others”).
295296 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others When we tend to overestimate the role of person factors and overlook the impact of situations, we are making a mistake that social psychologists have termed the fundamental attribution error. This error is very closely related to another attributional tendency, the correspondence bias, which occurs when we attribute behaviors to people’s internal characteristics, even in heavily constrained situations.
In one demonstration of the fundamental attribution error, Linda Skitka and her colleagues (Skitka, Mullen, Griffin, Hutchinson, & Chamberlin, 2002) had participants read a brief story about a professor who had selected two student volunteers to come up in front of a class to participate in a trivia game. The students were described as having been randomly assigned to the role of either quizmaster or contestant by drawing straws. The quizmaster was asked to generate five questions from his idiosyncratic knowledge, with the stipulation that he knew the correct answer to all five questions.
Joe (the quizmaster) subsequently posed his questions to the other student (Stan, the contestant). For example, Joe asked, “What cowboy movie actor’s sidekick is Smiley Burnette?” Stan looked puzzled and finally replied, “I really don’t know. The only movie cowboy that pops to mind for me is John Wayne.” Joe asked four additional questions, and Stan was described as answering only one of the five questions correctly.
After reading the story, the students were asked to indicate their impression of both Stan’s and Joe’s intelligence. If you think about the setup here, you’ll notice that the professor has created a situation that can have a big influence on the outcomes. Joe, the quizmaster, has a huge advantage because he got to choose the questions.
As a result, the questions are hard for the contestant to answer. But did the participants realize that the situation was the cause of the outcomes? They did not.
Rather, the students rated Joe as significantly more intelligent than Stan. You can imagine that Joe just seemed to be really smart to the students; after all, he knew all the answers, whereas Stan knew only one of the five. But of course this is a mistake.
The difference was not at all due to person factors but completely to the situation: Joe got to use his own personal store of esoteric knowledge to create the most difficult questions he could think of. The observers committed the fundamental attribution error and did not sufficiently take the quizmaster’s situational advantage into account. As we have explored in many places in this book, the culture that we live in has a significant impact on the way we think about and perceive our social worlds.
Thus, it is not surprising that people in different cultures would tend to think about people at least somewhat differently. One difference is between people from many Western cultures (e.g., the United States, Canada, Australia) and people from many Asian cultures (e.g., Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, India). For instance, as we reviewed in Chapter 2 in our discussion of research about the self-concept, people from Western cultures tend to be primarily oriented toward individualism.
This leads to them having an independent self-concept where they view themselves, and others, as autonomous beings who are somewhat separate from their social groups and environments. In contrast, people in many East Asian cultures take a more interdependent view of themselves and others, one that emphasizes not so much the individual but rather the relationship between individuals and the other people and things that surround them. In relation to our current discussion of attribution, an outcome of these differences is that, on average, people from individualistic cultures tend to focus their attributions more on the individual person, whereas, people from collectivistic cultures tend to focus more on the situation (Ji, Peng, & Nisbett, 2000; Lewis, Goto, & Kong, 2008; Maddux & Yuki, 2006).
In one study demonstrating this difference, Miller (1984) asked children and adults in both India (a collectivistic culture) and the United States (an individualist culture) to indicate the causes of negative5.3 Biases in Attribution 297 actions by other people. Although the younger children (ages 8 and 11) did not differ, the older children (age 15) and the adults did—Americans made more personal attributions, whereas Indians made more situational attributions for the same behavior. Masuda and Nisbett (2001) asked American and Japanese students to describe what they saw in images like the one shown in Figure 5.9, “Cultural Differences in Perception.” They found that while both groups talked about the most salient objects (the fish, which were brightly colored and swimming around), the Japanese students also tended to talk and remember more about the images in the background (they remembered the frog and the plants as well as the fish).
Figure 5.9 Cultural Differences in Perception Michael Morris and his colleagues (Hong, Morris, Chiu, & Benet-Martínez, 2000) investigated the role of culture on person perception in a different way, by focusing on people who are bicultural (i.e., who have knowledge about two different cultures). In their research, they used high school students living in Hong Kong. Although traditional Chinese values are emphasized in Hong Kong, because Hong Kong was a British-administered territory for more than a century, the students there are also somewhat acculturated with Western social beliefs and values.
Morris and his colleagues first randomly assigned the students to one of three priming conditions. Participants in the American culture priming condition saw pictures of American icons (such as the298 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others U.S.
Capitol building and the American flag) and then wrote 10 sentences about American culture. Participants in the Chinese culture priming condition saw eight Chinese icons (such as a Chinese dragon and the Great Wall of China) and then wrote 10 sentences about Chinese culture. Finally, participants in the control condition saw pictures of natural landscapes and wrote 10 sentences about the landscapes.
Then participants in all conditions read a story about an overweight boy who was advised by a physician not to eat food with high sugar content. One day, he and his friends went to a buffet dinner where a delicious-looking cake was offered. Despite its high sugar content, he ate it.
After reading the story, the participants were asked to indicate the extent to which the boy’s weight problem was caused by his personality (personal attribution) or by the situation (situational attribution). The students who had been primed with symbols about American culture gave relatively less weight to situational (rather than personal) factors in comparison with students who had been primed with symbols of Chinese culture. Returning to the case study at the start of this chapter, the very different explanations given in the English and Chinese language newspapers about the killings perpetrated by Gang Lu at the University of Iowa reflect these differing cultural tendencies toward internal versus external attributions.
A focus on internal explanations led to an analysis of the crime primarily in terms of the individual characteristics of the perpetrator in the American newspaper, whereas there were more external attributions in the Chinese newspaper, focusing on the social conditions that led up to the tragedy. Morris and Peng (1994), in addition to their analyses of the news reports, extended their research by asking Chinese and American graduate students to weight the importance of the potential causes outlined in the newspaper coverage. In line with predictions, the Chinese participants rated the social conditions as more important causes of the murders than the Americans, particularly stressing the role of corrupting influences and disruptive social changes.
In contrast, the Americans rated internal characteristics of the perpetrator as more critical issues, particularly chronic psychological problems. Morris and Peng also found that, when asked to imagine factors that could have prevented the killings, the Chinese students focused more on the social conditions that could have been changed, whereas the Americans identified more changes in terms of the internal traits of the perpetrator. Given these consistent differences in the weight put on internal versus external attributions, it should come as no surprise that people in collectivistic cultures tend to show the fundamental attribution error and correspondence bias less often than those from individualistic cultures, particularly when the situational causes of behavior are made salient (Choi, Nisbett, & Norenzayan, 1999).
Being more aware of these cross-cultural differences in attribution has been argued to be a critical issue facing us all on a global level, particularly in the future in a world where increased power and resource equality between Western and Eastern cultures seems likely (Nisbett, 2003). Human history is littered with tragic examples of the fatal consequences of cross-cultural misunderstandings, which can be fueled by a failure to understand these differing approaches to attribution. Maybe as the two worldviews increasingly interact on a world stage, a fusion of their two stances on attribution may become more possible, where sufficient weight is given to both the internal and external forces that drive human behavior (Nisbett, 2003).
The Actor-Observer Bias The fundamental attribution error involves a bias in how easily and frequently we make personal versus5.3 Biases in Attribution 299 situational attributions about others. Another, similar way that we overemphasize the power of the person is that we tend to make more personal attributions for the behavior of others than we do for ourselves and to make more situational attributions for our own behavior than for the behavior of others. This is known as the actor-observer bias or difference(Nisbett, Caputo, Legant, & Marecek, 1973; Pronin, Lin, & Ross, 2002).
When we are asked about the behavior of other people, we tend to quickly make trait attributions (“Oh, Sarah, she’s really shy”). On the other hand, when we think of ourselves, we are more likely to take the situation into account—we tend to say, “Well, I’m shy in my team at work, but with my close friends I’m not at all shy.” When a friend behaves in a helpful way, we naturally believe that he or she is a friendly person; when we behave in the same way, on the other hand, we realize that there may be a lot of other reasons why we did what we did. You might be able to get a feel for the actor-observer difference by taking the following short quiz.
First, think about a person you know, but not particularly well —a distant relation, a colleague at work. Then, for each row, circle which of the three choices best describes his or her personality (for instance, is the person’s personality more energetic, relaxed, or does it depend on the situation?). Then answer the questions again, but this time about yourself.
Table 5.4: The Actor-Observer Bias 1. Energetic Relaxed Depends on the situation 2. Skeptical Trusting Depends on the situation 3.
Quiet Talkative Depends on the situation 4. Intense Calm Depends on the situation Richard Nisbett and his colleagues (Nisbett, Caputo, Legant, & Marecek, 1973) had college students complete a very similar task, which they did for themselves, for their best friend, for their father, and for a well-known TV newscaster at the time, Walter Cronkite. As you can see in Table 5.4, “The Actor- Observer Difference,” the participants checked one of the two trait terms more often for other people than they did for themselves, and checked off “depends on the situation” more frequently for themselves than they did for the other person; this is the actor-observer difference.300 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others Table 5.4 The Actor-Observer Difference Trait Term / Depends on the Situation Self 11.92 / 8.08 Best Friend 14.21 / 5.79 Father 13.42 / 6.58 Walter Cronkite 15.08 / 4.92 This table shows the average number of times (out of 20) that participants checked off a trait term (such as “energetic” or “talkative”) rather than “depends on the situation” when asked to describe the personalities of themselves and various other people. You can see the actor-observer difference. Participants were significantly more likely to check off “depends on the situation” for themselves than for others.
Data are from Nisbett, Caputo, Legant, and Marecek (1973). Nisbett, R. E., Caputo, C., Legant, P., & Marecek, J.
(1973). Behavior as seen by the actor and as seen by the observer. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27(2), 154–164.
Like the fundamental attribution error, the actor-observer difference reflects our tendency to overweight the personal explanations of the behavior of other people. However, a recent meta-analysis (Malle, 2006) has suggested that the actor-observer difference might not be as common and strong as the fundamental attribution error and may only be likely to occur under certain conditions. The tendency to overemphasize personal attributions in others versus ourselves seems to occur for several reasons.
One is simply because other people are so salient in our social environments. When you look at someone’s behavior, you tend to focus on that person and are likely to make personal attributions about him or her. It’s just easy because you are looking right at the person.
When you look at Cejay giving that big tip, you see him—and so you decide that he caused the action. In fact, research has shown that we tend to make more personal attributions for the people we are directly observing in our environments than for other people who are part of the situation but who we are not directly watching (Taylor & Fiske, 1975). When you think of your own behavior, however, you do not see yourself but are instead more focused on the situation.
You also tend to have more memory for your own past situations than for others’. You come to realize that it is not only you but also the different situations that you are in that determine your behavior. Maybe you can remember the other times where you did not give a big tip, and so you conclude that your behavior is caused more by the situation than by your underlying personality.
This greater access to evidence about our own past behaviors can lead us to realize that our conduct varies quite a lot across situations, whereas because we have more limited memory of the behavior of others, we may see them as less changeable. This in turn leads to another, related attributional tendency, namely the trait ascription bias, which defines a tendency for people to view their own personality, beliefs, and behaviors as more variable than those of others (Kammer, 1982). We are thus more likely to caricature the behaviors of others as just reflecting the type of people we think they are, whereas we tend to depict our own conduct as more nuanced, and socially flexible.
A second reason for the tendency to make so many personal attributions is that they are simply easier to make than situational attributions. In fact, personal attributions seem to be made spontaneously, without any effort on our part, and even on the basis of only very limited behavior (Newman & Uleman, 1989; Uleman, Blader, & Todorov, 2005). Personal attributions just pop into mind before situational5.3 Biases in Attribution 301 attributions do.
One reason for this is that is cognitively demanding to try to process all the relevant factors in someone else’s situation and to consider how all these forces may be affecting that person’s conduct. It is much more straightforward to label a behavior in terms of a personality trait. Third, personal attributions also dominate because we need to make them in order to understand a situation.
That is, we cannot make either a personal attribution (e.g., “Cejay is generous”) or a situational attribution (“Cejay is trying to impress his friends”) until we have first identified the behavior as being a generous behavior (“Leaving that big tip was a generous thing to do”). So we end up starting with the personal attribution (“generous”) and only later try to correct or adjust our judgment (“Oh,” we think, “perhaps it really was the situation that caused him to do that”). Adjusting our judgments generally takes more effort than does making the original judgment, and the adjustment is frequently not sufficient.
We are more likely to commit attributional errors—for example quickly jumping to the conclusion that behavior is caused by underlying personality—when we are tired, distracted, or busy doing other things (Geeraert, Yzerbyt, Corneille, & Wigboldus, 2004; Gilbert, 1989; Trope & Alfieri, 1997). There is a very important general message about perceiving others that applies here: we should not be too quick to judge other people! It is cognitively easy to think that poor people are lazy, that people who harm someone else are mean, and that people who say something harsh are rude or unfriendly.
But these attributions may frequently overemphasize the role of the person. This can sometimes result in overly harsh evaluations of people who don’t really deserve them; we tend to blame the victim, even for events that they can’t really control (Lerner, 1980). Sometimes people are lazy, mean, or rude, but they may also be the victims of situations.
When you find yourself making strong personal attribution for the behaviors of others, your knowledge of attribution research can help you to stop and think more carefully: Would you want other people to make personal attributions for your behavior in the same situation, or would you prefer that they more fully consider the situation surrounding your behavior? Are you perhaps making the fundamental attribution error? Ultimately, to paraphrase a well-known saying, we need to be try to be generous to others in our attributions, as everyone we meet is fighting a battle we know nothing about.
Self-Serving Biases You may recall that the process of making causal attributions is supposed to proceed in a careful, rational, and even scientific manner. But this assumption turns out to be, at least in part, untrue. Our attributions are sometimes biased by affect—particularly the desire to enhance the self that we talked about in Chapter 3.
Although we would like to think that we are always rational and accurate in our attributions, we often tend to distort them to make us feel better. Self-serving attributions are attributions that help us meet our desire to see ourselves positively (Mezulis, Abramson, Hyde, & Hankin, 2004). A particularly common example is the self-serving bias, which is the tendency to attribute our successes to ourselves, and our failures to others and the situation.
We all make self-enhancing attributions from time to time. If a teacher’s students do well on an exam, he may make a personal attribution for their successes (“I am, after all, a great teacher!”). On the other hand, when they do poorly on an exam, the teacher may tend to make a situational attribution and blame them for their failure (“Why didn’t you all study harder?”).
You can see that this process is clearly not the type of scientific, rational, and careful process that attribution theory suggests the302 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others teacher should be following. It’s unfair, although it does make him feel better about himself.
If he were really acting like a scientist, however, he would determine ahead of time what causes good or poor exam scores and make the appropriate attribution, regardless of the outcome. You might have noticed yourself making self-serving attributions too. Perhaps you have blamed another driver for an accident that you were in or blamed your partner rather than yourself for a breakup.
Or perhaps you have taken credit (internal) for your successes but blamed your failures on external causes. If these judgments were somewhat less than accurate, but they did benefit you, then they were indeed self-serving. Interestingly, we do not as often show this bias when making attributions about the successes and setbacks of others.
This tendency to make more charitable attributions about ourselves than others about positive and negative outcomes often links to the actor-observer difference that we mentioned earlier in this section. It appears that the tendency to make external attributions about our own behavior and internal attributions about the conduct of others is particularly strong in situations where the behavior involves undesirable outcomes. This was dramatically illustrated in some fascinating research by Baumeister, Stillwell, and Wotman (1990).
In this study, the researchers analyzed the accounts people gave of an experience they identified where they angered someone else (i.e., when they were the perpetrator of a behavior leading to an unpleasant outcome) and another one where someone else angered them (i.e., they were the victim). The differences in attributions made in these two situations were considerable. When accounting for themselves as perpetrators, people tended to emphasize situational factors to describe their behavior as an isolated incident that was a meaningful, understandable response to the situation, and to assert that the action caused no lasting harm.
When they were the victims, on the other hand, they explained the perpetrator’s behavior by focusing on the presumed character defects of the person and by describing the behavior as an arbitrary and senseless action, taking place in an ongoing context of abusive behavior that caused lasting harm to them as victims. These sobering findings have some profound implications for many important social issues, including reconciliation between individuals and groups who have been in conflict. In a more everyday way, they perhaps remind us of the need to try to extend the same understanding we give to ourselves in making sense of our behaviors to the people around us in our communities.
Too many times in human history we have failed to understand and even demonized other people because of these types of attributional biases. Why are these self-serving attributional biases so common? One answer, that we have already alluded to, is that they can help to maintain and enhance self-esteem.
Consistent with this idea is that there are some cross-cultural differences, reflecting the different amounts of self-enhancement that were discussed in Chapter 3. Specifically, self-serving bias is less apparent in members of collectivistic than individualistic cultures (Mezulis, Abramson, Hyde, & Hankin, 2004). Another important reason is that when we make attributions, we are not only interested in causality, we are often interested in responsibility.
Fincham and Jaspers (1980) argued that, as well as acting like lay scientists, hunting for the causes of behavior, we are also often akin to lay lawyers, seeking to assign responsibility. We want to know not just why something happened, but also who is to blame. Indeed, it is hard to make an attribution of cause without also making a claim about responsibility.
When we attribute someone’s angry outburst to an internal factor, like an aggressive personality, as opposed to an external cause, such as a stressful situation, we are, implicitly or otherwise, also placing more blame on5.3 Biases in Attribution 303 that person in the former case than in the latter. Seeing attribution as also being about responsibility sheds some interesting further light on the self-serving bias. Perhaps we make external attributions for failure partly because it is easier to blame others or the situation than it is ourselves.
In the victim- perpetrator accounts outlined by Baumeister, Stillwell, and Wotman (1990), maybe they were partly about either absolving or assigning responsibility, respectively. Indeed, there are a number of other attributional biases that are also relevant to considerations of responsibility. It is to these that we will now turn.
Group-Serving Biases A self-serving pattern of attribution can also spill over into our attributions about the groups that we belong to. The group-serving bias, sometimes referred to as the ultimate attribution error, describes a tendency to make internal attributions about our ingroups’ successes, and external attributions about their setbacks, and to make the opposite pattern of attributions about our outgroups (Taylor & Doria, 1981). When members of our favorite sports team make illegal challenges on the field, or rink, or court, we often attribute it to their being provoked.
What about when it is someone from the opposition? Their illegal conduct regularly leads us to make an internal attribution about their moral character! On a more serious note, when individuals are in a violent confrontation, the same actions on both sides are typically attributed to different causes, depending on who is making the attribution, so that reaching a common understanding can become impossible (Pinker, 2011).
Returning to the case study at the start of this chapter, could the group-serving bias be at least part of the reason for the different attributions made by the Chinese and American participants about the mass killing? How might this bias have played out in this situation? Remember that the perpetrator, Gang Lu, was Chinese.
Might the American participants’ tendency to make internal attributions have reflected their desire to blame him solely, as an outgroup member, whereas the Chinese participants’ more external attributions might have related to their wish to try to mitigate some of what their fellow ingroup member had done, by invoking the social conditions that preceded the crime? Morris and Peng (1994) sought to test out this possibility by exploring cross-cultural reactions to another, parallel tragedy, that occurred just two weeks after Gang Lu’s crimes. Thomas Mcllvane, an Irish American postal worker who had recently lost his job, unsuccessfully appealed the decision with his union.
He had in the meantime failed to find a new full-time job. On November 14, he entered the Royal Oak, Michigan, post office and shot his supervisor, the person who handled his appeal, several fellow workers and bystanders, and then himself. In all, like Gang Lu, Thomas McIllvane killed himself and five other people that day.
If the group-serving bias could explain much of the cross- cultural differences in attributions, then, in this case, when the perpetrator was American, the Chinese should have been more likely to make internal, blaming attributions against an outgroup member, and the Americans to make more external, mitigating ones about their ingroup member. This is not what was found. Although the Americans did make more situational attributions about McIlvane than they did about Lu, the Chinese participants were equally likely to use situational explanations for both sets of killings.
As Morris and Peng (1994) point out, this finding indicated that whereas the American participants tended to show the group-serving bias, the Chinese participants did not. This has been replicated in other studies indicating a lower likelihood of this bias in people from collectivistic versus individualistic cultures (Heine & Lehman, 1997). At first glance, this might seem like a counterintuitive finding.
If people from collectivist cultures tend304 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others to see themselves and others as more embedded in their ingroups, then wouldn’t they be more likely to make group-serving attributions? A key explanation as to why they are less likely relates back to the discussion in Chapter 3 of cultural differences in self-enhancement.
Like the self-serving bias, group- serving attributions can have a self-enhancing function, leading people to feel better about themselves by generating favorable explanations about their ingroups’ behaviors. Therefore, as self-enhancement is less of a priority for people in collectivistic cultures, we would indeed expect them to show less group-serving bias. There are other, related biases that people also use to favor their ingroups over their outgroups.
—The group attribution error describes a tendency to make attributional generalizations about entire outgroups based on a very small number of observations of individual members. This error tends to takes one of two distinct, but related forms. The first was illustrated in an experiment by Hamill, Wilson, and Nisbett (1980), college students were shown vignettes about someone from one of two outgroups, welfare recipients and prison guards.
They were then asked to make inferences about members of these two groups as a whole, after being provided with varying information about how typical the person they read about was of each group. A key finding was that even when they were told the person was not typical of the group, they still made generalizations about group members that were based on the characteristics of the individual they had read about. This bias may thus cause us to see a person from a particular outgroup behave in an undesirable way and then come to attribute these tendencies to most or all members of their group.
This is one of the many ways that inaccurate stereotypes can be created, a topic we will explore in more depth in Chapter 11. The second form of group attribution bias closely relates to the fundamental attribution error, in that individuals come to attribute groups’ behaviors and attitudes to each of the individuals within those groups, irrespective of the level of disagreement in the group or how the decisions were made. In a series of experiments, Allison & Messick (1985) investigated people’s attributions about group members as a function of the decisions that the groups reached in various social contexts.
In their first experiment, participants assumed that members of a community making decisions about water conservation laws held attitudes reflecting the group decision, regardless of how it was reached. In two follow-up experiments, subjects attributed a greater similarity between outgroup decisions and attitudes than between ingroup decisions and attitudes. A further experiment showed that participants based their attributions of jury members’ attitudes more on their final group decision than on their individual views.
This bias can present us with numerous challenges in the real world. Let’s say, for example, that a political party passes a policy that goes against our deep-seated beliefs about an important social issue, like abortion or same-sex marriage. This type of group attribution bias would then make it all too easy for us to caricature all members of and voters for that party as opposed to us, when in fact there may be a considerable range of opinions among them.
This false assumption may then cause us to shut down meaningful dialogue about the issue and fail to recognize the potential for finding common ground or for building important allegiances. Victim-Blaming Biases We saw earlier how the fundamental attribution error, by causing us to place too much weight on the person and not enough on the situation, can lead to us to make attributions of blame toward others, even victims, for their behaviors. Another bias that increases the likelihood of victim-blaming is termed the just world hypothesis,which is a tendency to make attributions based on the belief that the world is fundamentally just.
In other words, that the outcomes people experience are fair.5.3 Biases in Attribution 305 Lerner (1965), in a classic experimental study of these beliefs, instructed participants to watch two people working together on an anagrams task. They were informed that one of the workers was selected by chance to be paid a large amount of money, whereas the other was to get nothing. Participants also learned that both workers, though ignorant of their fate, had agreed to do their best.
In addition, the attractiveness of the two workers was set up so that participants would perceive one as more attractive. Consistent with the idea of the just world hypothesis, once the outcome was known to the observers, they persuaded themselves that the person who had been awarded the money by chance had really earned it after all. Also, when the less attractive worker was selected for payment, the performance of the entire group was devalued.
As with many of the attributional biases that have been identified, there are some positive aspects to these beliefs when they are applied to ourselves. Fox, Elder, Gater, & Johnson (2010), for instance, found that stronger endorsement of just world beliefs in relation to the self was related to higher self- esteem. Intuitively this makes sense: if we believe that the world is fair, and will give us back what we put in, this can be uplifting.
On the other hand, though, as in the Lerner (1965) study above, there can be a downside, too. If we believe that the world is fair, this can also lead to a belief that good things happen to good people and bad things happen to bad people. In other words, people get what they deserve.
When people are in difficult positions, the just world hypothesis can cause others to make internal attributions about the causes of these difficulties and to end up blaming them for their problems (Rubin & Peplau, 1973). Consistent with this, Fox and colleagues found that greater agreement with just world beliefs about others was linked to harsher social attitudes and greater victim derogation. The just world hypothesis is often at work when people react to news of a particular crime by blaming the victim, or when they apportion responsibility to members of marginalized groups, for instance, to those who are homeless, for the predicaments they face.
Degree of endorsement of just world attributions also relates to more stigmatizing attitudes toward people who have mental illnesses (Rüsch, Todd, Bodenhausen, & Corrigan, 2010). These views, in turn, can act as a barrier to empathy and to an understanding of the social conditions that can create these challenges. Belief in a just world has also been shown to correlate with meritocratic attitudes, which assert that people achieve their social positions on the basis of merit alone.
For example, people who endorse just world statements are also more likely to rate high-status individuals as more competent than low-status individuals. Such beliefs are in turn used by some individuals to justify and sustain inequality and oppression (Oldmeadow & Fiske, 2007). Here, then, we see important links between attributional biases held by individuals and the wider social inequities in their communities that these biases help to sustain.
Attributions that blame victims don’t only have the potential to help to reinforce people’s general sense that the world is a fair place, they also help them to feel more safe from being victimized themselves. If, according to the logic of the just world hypothesis, victims are bad people who get what they deserve, then those who see themselves as good people do not have to confront the threatening possibility that they, too, could be the victims of similar misfortunes. Accordingly, defensive attribution (e.g., Shaver, 1970) occurs when we make attributions which defend ourselves from the notion that we could be the victim of an unfortunate outcome, and often also that we could be held responsible as the victim.
Put another way, people’s attributions about the victims are motivated by both harm avoidance (this is unlikely to happen to me) and blame avoidance (if it did happen to me, I would not be to blame). If we see ourselves as more similar to the victim, therefore, we are less likely to attribute the blame to them. If, on the other hand, we identify more with the perpetrator, then our attributions of responsibility to the victim will increase (Burger, 1981).306 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others This pattern of attribution clearly has significant repercussions in legal contexts. For example, attributions about the victims of rape are related to the amount that people identify with the victim versus the perpetrator, which could have some interesting implications for jury selection procedures (Grubb & Harrower, 2009). Furthermore, men are less likely to make defensive attributions about the victims of sexual harassment than women, regardless of the gender of the victim and perpetrator (e.g., Smirles, 2004).
Defensive attributions can also shape industrial disputes, for example, damages claims for work-related injuries. The victims of serious occupational accidents tend to attribute the accidents to external factors. In contrast, their coworkers and supervisors are more likely to attribute the accidents to internal factors in the victim (Salminen, 1992).
Again, the role of responsibility attributions are clear here. It is in the victims’ interests to not be held accountable, just as it may well be for the colleagues or managers who might instead be in the firing line. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 5 DRAG THE WORDS – ATTRIBUTIONAL ERRORS AND BIASES Match up the following attributions with the appropriate error or bias (Just world hypothesis, Actor- observer difference, Fundamental attribution error, Self-serving bias, Group-serving bias).
Which error or bias do you think is most clearly shown in each situation? 1. A man says about his relationship partner “I can’t believe he never asks me about my day, he’s so selfish”.
The real reasons are more to do with the high levels of stress his partner is experiencing. 2. A co-worker says this about a colleague she is not getting along with “I can be aggressive when I am under too much pressure, but she is just an aggressive person”.
3. A therapist thinks the following to make himself feel better about a client who is not responding well to him: “My client is too resistant to the process to make any meaningful changes. I have tried everything I can and he won’t meet my half way”.
4. Two teenagers are discussing another student in the schoolyard, trying to explain why she is often excluded by her peers. One says: “She kind of deserves it.
She alienates everyone she meets, that’s why she’s left out of things”. 5. A sports fan excuses the rowdy behaviour of his fellow supporters by saying “We’re only rowdy when the other team’s fans provoke us”.
Key Takeaways • Our attributional skills are often “good enough” but not perfect. We often show biases and make errors in our attributions, although in general these biases are less evident in people from collectivistic versus individualistic cultures. • Sometimes, we put too much weight on internal factors, and not enough on situational factors, in5.3 Biases in Attribution 307 explaining the behavior of others.
• When we are the attributing causes to our own behaviors, we are more likely to use external attributions than when we are when explaining others’ behaviors, particularly if the behavior is undesirable. • We tend to make self-serving attributions that help to protect our self-esteem; for example, by making internal attributions when we succeed and external ones when we fail. • We also often show group-serving biases where we make more favorable attributions about our ingroups than our outgroups.
• We sometimes show victim-blaming biases due to beliefs in a just world and a tendency to make defensive attributions. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Describe a situation where you or someone you know engaged in the fundamental attribution error.
What internal causes did you attribute the other person’s behavior to? In hindsight, what external, situation causes were probably at work here? 2.
Outline a time that someone made the fundamental attribution error about one of your behaviors. How did you feel when they put your actions down to your personality, as opposed to the situation, and why? 3.
Think of an example when you attributed your own behavior to external factors, whereas you explained the same behavior in someone else as being due to their internal qualities? What were the reasons for you showing the actor-observer bias here? 4.
Identify some examples of self-serving and group-serving attributions that you have seen in the media recently. What sorts of behaviors were involved and why do you think the individuals involved made those attributions? 5.
Which groups in the communities that you live in do you think most often have victim-blaming attributions made about their behaviors and outcomes? What consequences do you think that these attributions have for those groups? How do you think the individual group members feel when others blame them for the challenges they are facing?
References Allison, S. T., & Messick, D. M.
(1985). The group attribution error. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 21(6), 563-579.308 Chapter 5.
Perceiving Others Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A., & Wotman, S. R.
(1990). Victim and perpetrator accounts of interpersonal conflict: Autobiographical narratives about anger. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 59(5), 994-1005.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.59.5.994 Burger, J. M. (1981).
Motivational biases in the attribution of responsibility for an accident: A meta- analysis of the defensive-attribution hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 90(3), 496-512. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.90.3.496 Choi, I., Nisbett, R.
E., Norenzayan, A. (1999) Causal attribution across cultures: Variation and universality. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 47-63.
doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.125.1.47 Fincham, F. D., & Jaspers, J. M.
(1980). Attribution of responsibility: From man the scientist to man the lawyer. In L.
K. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 13, 81-138. Fiske, S.
T. (2003). Social beings.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Fox, C. L., Elder, T., Gater, J., Johnson, E.
(2010). The association between adolescents’ beliefs in a just world and their attitudes to victims of bullying. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(2), 183-198.
doi: 10.1348/000709909X479105 Geeraert, N., Yzerbyt, V. Y., Corneille, O., & Wigboldus, D. (2004).
The return of dispositionalism: On the linguistic consequences of dispositional suppression. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40(2), 264–272; Gilbert, D. T.
(Ed.). (1989). Thinking lightly about others: Automatic components of the social inference process.
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Grubb, A., & Harrower, J. (2009).
Understanding attribution of blame in cases of rape: An analysis of participant gender, type of rape and perceived similarity to the victim. Journal Of Sexual Aggression, 15(1), 63-81. doi:10.1080/13552600802641649 Hamill, R., Wilson, T.
D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1980).
Insensitivity to sample bias: Generalizing from atypical cases. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 39(4), 578-589. doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.39.4.578 Heine, S.
J., & Lehman, D. R. (1997).
The cultural construction of self-enhancement: An examination of group-serving biases. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 72(6), 1268-1283. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.72.6.1268 Hong, Y.-Y., Morris, M.
W., Chiu, C.-Y., & Benet-Martínez, V. (2000). Multicultural minds: A dynamic constructivist approach to culture and cognition.
American Psychologist, 55(7), 709–720. Ji, L., Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E.
(2000). Culture, control, and perception of relationships in the environment. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 78(5), 943-955.
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.78.5.943 Kammer, D. (1982). Differences in trait ascriptions to self and friend: Unconfounding intensity from variability.
Psychological Reports, 51(1), 99-102. doi:10.2466/pr0.1982.51.1.99 Lerner, M. J.
(1965). Evaluation of performance as a function of performer’s reward and attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 355-360.
Lerner, M. J. (1980).
The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York, NY: Plenum. Lewis, R.
S., Goto, S. G., & Kong, L. L.
(2008). Culture and context: East Asian American and European American differences in P3 event-related potentials and self-construal. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(5), 623-634.
doi:10.1177/01461672073137315.3 Biases in Attribution 309 Maddux, W. W., & Yuki, M. (2006).
The ‘Ripple Effect’: Cultural Differences in Perceptions of the Consequences of Events.Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 32(5), 669-683. doi:10.1177/ 0146167205283840 Malle, B. F.
(2006). The actor-observer asymmetry in attribution: A (surprising) meta- analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 895–919.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001).
Attending holistically versus analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 922–934. Mezulis, A.
H., Abramson, L. Y., Hyde, J. S., & Hankin, B.
L. (2004). Is there a universal positivity bias in attributions?
A meta-analytic review of individual, developmental, and cultural differences in the self-serving attributional bias. Psychological Bulletin, 130(5), 711–747. Miller, J.
G. (1984). Culture and the development of everyday social explanation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46(5), 961–978. Morris, M. W., & Peng, K.
(1994). Culture and cause: American and Chinese attributions for social and physical events. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 67(6), 949-971.
doi:10.1037/ 0022-3514.67.6.949 Newman, L. S., & Uleman, J. S.
(1989). Spontaneous trait inference. In J.
S. Uleman & J. A.
Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 155–188). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003).
The geography of thought. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster Inc. Nisbett, R.
E., Caputo, C., Legant, P., & Marecek, J. (1973). Behavior as seen by the actor and as seen by the observer.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27(2), 154–164; Oldmeadow, J., & Fiske, S. T. (2007).
System-justifying ideologies moderate status = competence stereotypes: Roles for belief in a just world and social dominance orientation. European Journal Of Social Psychology, 37(6), 1135-1148. doi:10.1002/ejsp.428 Pinker, S.
(2011). The better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined. New York, NY, US: Viking.
Pronin, E., Lin, D. Y., & Ross, L. (2002).
The bias blind spot: Perceptions of bias in self versus others. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(3), 369–381. Rubin Z., & Peplau LA (1973).
Belief in a just world and reactions to another’s lot: A study of participants in the national draft lottery. Journal of Social Issues, 29, 73–93. Rüsch, N., Todd, A.
R., Bodenhausen, G. V., & Corrigan, P. W.
(2010). Do people with mental illness deserve what they get? Links between meritocratic worldviews and implicit versus explicit stigma.
European Archives Of Psychiatry And Clinical Neuroscience,260(8), 617-625. doi:10.1007/ s00406-010-0111-4 Salminen, S. (1992).
Defensive attribution hypothesis and serious occupational accidents. Psychological Reports, 70(3, Pt 2), 1195-1199. doi:10.2466/PR0.70.4.1195-1199 Shaver, K.
G. (1970). Defensive attribution: Effects of severity and relevance on the responsibility assigned for an accident.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 14(2), 101–113. doi: 10.1037/h00028777 Skitka, L. J., Mullen, E., Griffin, T., Hutchinson, S., & Chamberlin, B.
(2002). Dispositions, scripts, or310 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others motivated correction?
Understanding ideological differences in explanations for social problems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(2), 470–487. Smirles, K.
(2004). Attributions of Responsibility in Cases of Sexual Harassment: The Person and the Situation. Journal Of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2), 342-365.
doi:10.1111/ j.1559-1816.2004.tb02551.x Taylor, S. E., & Fiske, S. T.
(1975). Point of view and perceptions of causality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32(3), 439–445.
Taylor, D. M., & Doria, J. R.
(1981). Self-serving and group-serving bias in attribution. The Journal of Social Psychology, 113(2), 201-211.
Trope, Y., & Alfieri, T. (1997). Effortfulness and flexibility of dispositional judgment processes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(4), 662–674. Uleman, J. S., Blader, S.
L., & Todorov, A. (Eds.). (2005).
Implicit impressions. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Media Attributions • “Figure 5.9 Cultural Differences in Perception” is based on Nisbett, Richard & Masuda, Takahiko.
(2003). Culture and point of view. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
100. 11163-70. 10.1073/pnas.1934527100.5.4 Individual Differences in Person Perception Learning Objectives 1.
Outline some important individual differences factors that influence people’s causal attributions. 2. Explain the ways that attributions can influence mental health and the ways that mental health can affect attributions.
3. Explore how and why people engage in self-handicapping attributions and behaviors. To this point, we have focused on how the appearance, behaviors, and traits of the people we encounter influence our understanding of them.
It makes sense that this would be our focus because of the emphasis within social psychology on the social situation—in this case, the people we are judging. But the person is also important, so let’s consider some of the person variables that influence how we judge other people. Perceiver Characteristics So far, we have assumed that different perceivers will all form pretty much the same impression of the same person.
For instance, if two people are both thinking about their mutual friend Janetta, or describing her to someone else, they should each think about or describe her in pretty much the same way. After all, Janetta is Janetta, and she should have a personality that they can both see. But this is not always the case; they may form different impressions of Janetta for a variety of reasons.
For one, the two people’s experiences with Janetta may be somewhat different. If one sees her in different places and talks to her about different things than the other, then they will each have a different sample of behavior on which to base their impressions. But they might even form different impressions of Janetta if they see her performing exactly the same behavior.
To every experience, each of us brings our own schemas, attitudes, and expectations. In fact, the process of interpretation guarantees that we will not all form exactly the same impression of the people that we see. This, of course, reflects a basic principle that we have discussed throughout this book—our prior experiences color our current perceptions.
One factor that influences how we perceive others is the current cognitive accessibility of a given person characteristic—that is, the extent to which a person characteristic quickly and easily comes to mind for the perceiver. Differences in accessibility will lead different people to attend to different aspects of the other person. Some people first notice how attractive someone is because they care a lot about physical appearance—for them, appearance is a highly accessible characteristic.
Others pay more attention to a person’s race or religion, and still others attend to a person’s height or weight. If you are 311312 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others interested in style and fashion, you would probably first notice a person’s clothes, whereas another person might be more likely to notice a person’s athletic skills.
You can see that these differences in accessibility will influence the kinds of impressions that we form about others because they influence what we focus on and how we think about them. In fact, when people are asked to describe others, there is often more overlap in the descriptions provided by the same perceiver about different people than there is in those provided by different perceivers about the same target person (Dornbusch, Hastorf, Richardson, Muzzy, & Vreeland, 1965; Park, 1986). If someone cares a lot about fashion, that person will describe friends on that dimension, whereas if someone else cares about athletic skills, he or she will tend to describe friends on the basis of those qualities.
These differences reflect the emphasis that we as observers place on the characteristics of others rather than the real differences between those people. Our view of others may sometimes be more informative about us than it is about them. People also differ in terms of how carefully they process information about others.
Some people have a strong need to think about and understand others. I’m sure you know people like this—they want to know why something went wrong or right, or just to know more about anyone with whom they interact. Need for cognition refers to the tendency to think carefully and fully about our experiences, including the social situations we encounter (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982).
People with a strong need for cognition tend to process information more thoughtfully and therefore may make more causal attributions overall. In contrast, people without a strong need for cognition tend to be more impulsive and impatient and may make attributions more quickly and spontaneously (Sargent, 2004). In terms of attributional differences, there is some evidence that people higher in need for cognition may take more situational factors into account when considering the behaviors of others.
Consequently, they tend to make more tolerant rather than punitive attributions about people in stigmatized groups (Van Hiel, Pandelaere, & Duriez, 2004). Although the need for cognition refers to a tendency to think carefully and fully about any topic, there are also individual differences in the tendency to be interested in people more specifically. For instance, Fletcher, Danilovics, Fernandez, Peterson, and Reeder (1986) found that psychology majors were more curious about people than were natural science majors.
In turn, the types of attributions they tend to make about behavior may be different. Individual differences exist not only in the depth of our attributions but also in the types of attributions we tend to make about both ourselves and others (Plaks, Levy, & Dweck, 2009). Some people are entity theorists who tend to believe that people’s traits are fundamentally stable and incapable of change.
Entity theorists tend to focus on the traits of other people and tend to make a lot of personal attributions. On the other hand, incremental theorists are those who believe that personalities change a lot over time and who therefore are more likely to make situational attributions for events. Incremental theorists are more focused on the dynamic psychological processes that arise from individuals’ changing mental states in different situations.
In one relevant study, Molden, Plaks, and Dweck (2006) found that when forced to make judgments quickly, people who had been classified as entity theorists were nevertheless still able to make personal attributions about others but were not able to easily encode the situational causes of a behavior. On the other hand, when forced to make judgments quickly, the people who were classified as incremental5.4 Individual Differences in Person Perception 313 theorists were better able to make use of the situational aspects of the scene than the personalities of the actors. Individual differences in attributional styles can also influence our own behavior.
Entity theorists are more likely to have difficulty when they move on to new tasks because they don’t think that they will be able to adapt to the new challenges. Incremental theorists, on the other hand, are more optimistic and do better in such challenging environments because they believe that their personality can adapt to the new situation. You can see that these differences in how people make attributions can help us understand both how we think about ourselves and others and how we respond to our own social contexts (Malle, Knobe, O’Laughlin, Pearce, & Nelson, 2000).
Research Focus How Our Attributions Can Influence Our School Performance Carol Dweck and her colleagues (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007) tested whether the type of attributions students make about their own characteristics might influence their school performance. They assessed the attributional tendencies and the math performance of 373 junior high school students at a public school in New York City. When they first entered seventh grade, the students all completed a measure of attributional styles.
Those who tended to agree with statements such as “You have a certain amount of intelligence, and you really can’t do much to change it” were classified as entity theorists, whereas those who agreed more with statements such as “You can always greatly change how intelligent you are” were classified as incremental theorists. Then the researchers measured the students’ math grades at the end of the fall and spring terms in seventh and eighth grades. As you can see in the following figure, the researchers found that the students who were classified as incremental theorists improved their math scores significantly more than did the entity students.
It seems that the incremental theorists really believed that they could improve their skills and were then actually able to do it. These findings confirm that how we think about traits can have a substantial impact on our own behavior.314 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Figure 5.10 Students who believed that their intelligence was more malleable (incremental styles) were more likely to improve their math skills than were students who believed that intelligence was difficult to change (entity styles).
Data are from Blackwell et al. (2007). Blackwell, L.
S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S.
(2007). Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78(1), 246–263.
Attributional Styles and Mental Health As we have seen in this chapter, how we make attributions about other people has a big influence on our reactions to them. But we also make attributions for our own behaviors. Social psychologists have discovered that there are important individual differences in the attributions that people make to the negative events that they experience and that these attributions can have a big influence on how they feel about and respond to them.
The same negative event can create anxiety and depression in one individual but have virtually no effect on someone else. And still another person may see the negative event as a challenge and try even harder to overcome the difficulty (Blascovich & Mendes, 2000). A major determinant of how we react to perceived threats is the type of attribution that we make to them.
Attributional style refers to the type of attributions that we tend to make for the events that occur to us. These attributions can be to our own characteristics (internal) or to the situation (external), but attributions can also be made on other dimensions, including stable versus unstable, and global versus specific. Stable attributions are those that we think will be relatively permanent, whereas unstable attributions are expected to change over time.
Global attributions are those that we feel apply broadly, whereas specific attributions are those causes that we see as more unique to particular events. You may know some people who tend to make negative or pessimistic attributions to negative events that they experience. We say that these people have a negative attributional style.
This is the tendency to explain negative events by referring to their own internal, stable, and global qualities. People with a negative attributional style say things such as the following: • “I failed because I am no good” (an internal attribution). • “I always fail” (a stable attribution).5.4 Individual Differences in Person Perception 315 • “I fail in everything” (a global attribution).
You might well imagine that the result of these negative attributional styles is a sense of hopelessness and despair (Metalsky, Joiner, Hardin, & Abramson, 1993). Indeed, Alloy, Abramson, and Francis (1999) found that college students who indicated that they had negative attributional styles when they first came to college were more likely than those who had a more positive style to experience an episode of depression within the next few months. People who have an extremely negative attributional style, in which they continually make external, stable, and global attributions for their behavior, are said to be experiencing learned helplessness (Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978; Seligman, 1975).
Learned helplessness was first demonstrated in research that found that some dogs that were strapped into a harness and exposed to painful electric shocks became passive and gave up trying to escape from the shock, even in new situations in which the harness had been removed and escape was therefore possible. Similarly, some people who were exposed to bursts of noise later failed to stop the noise when they were actually able to do so. Those who experience learned helplessness do not feel that they have any control over their own outcomes and are more likely to have a variety of negative health outcomes, including anxiety and depression (Henry, 2005; Peterson & Seligman, 1984).
Most people tend to have a more positive attributional style —ways of explaining events that are related to high self-esteem and a tendency to explain the negative events they experience by referring to external, unstable, and specific qualities. Thus people with a positive attributional style are likely to say things such as the following: • “I failed because the task is very difficult” (an external attribution). • “I will do better next time” (an unstable attribution).
• “I failed in this domain, but I’m good in other things” (a specific attribution). In sum, we can say that people who make more positive attributions toward the negative events that they experience will persist longer at tasks and that this persistence can help them. These attributions can also contribute to everything from academic success (Boyer, 2006) to better mental health (Vines & Nixon, 2009).
There are limits to the effectiveness of these strategies, however. We cannot control everything, and trying to do so can be stressful. We can change some things but not others; thus sometimes the important thing is to know when it’s better to give up, stop worrying, and just let things happen.
Having a positive, mildly optimistic outlook is healthy, as we explored in Chapter 2, but we cannot be unrealistic about what we can and cannot do. Unrealistic optimism is the tendency to be overly positive about the likelihood that negative things will occur to us and that we will be able to effectively cope with them if they do. When we are too optimistic, we may set ourselves up for failure and depression when things do not work out as we had hoped (Weinstein & Klein, 1996).
We may think that we are immune to the potential negative outcomes of driving while intoxicated or practicing unsafe sex, but these optimistic beliefs can be risky. The findings here linking attributional style to mental health lead to the interesting prediction that people’s well-being could be improved by moving from a negative to a (mildly) positive or optimistic attributional style. Attributional retraining interventions have been developed based on this idea.
These types of psychotherapy have indeed been shown to assist people in developing a more positive attributional style and have met with some success in alleviating symptoms of depression, anxiety, and316 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others obsessive compulsive disorders (Wang, Zhang, Y., Zhang, N., & Zhang, J., 2011). Dysfunctional attributions can also be at the heart of relationship difficulties, including abuse, where partners consistently make negative attributions about each other’s behaviors.
Again, retraining couples to make more balanced attributions about each other can be useful, helping to promote more positive communication patterns and to increase relationship satisfaction (Hrapczynski, Epstein, Werlinich, LaTaillade, 2012). Attributions also play an important part in the quality of the working relationships between clients and therapists in mental health settings. If a client and therapist both make similar attributions about the causes of the client’s challenges, this can help to promote mutual understanding, empathy, and respect (Duncan & Moynihan, 1994).
Also, clients generally rate their therapists as more credible when their attributions are more similar to their own (Atkinson, Worthington, Dana, & Good, 1991). In turn, therapists tend to report being able to work more positively with clients who make similar attributions to them (O’Brien & Murdock, 1993). As well as developing a more positive attributional style, another technique that people sometimes use here to help them feel better about themselves is known as self-handicapping.
Self-handicapping occurs when we make statements or engage in behaviors that help us create a convenient external attribution for potential failure. There are two main ways that we can self-handicap. One is to engage in a form of preemptive self-serving attributional bias, where we claim an external factor that may reduce our performance, ahead of time, which we can use if things go badly.
For example, in a job interview or before giving a presentation at work, Veronica might say she is not feeling well and ask the audience not to expect too much from her because of this. Another method of self-handicapping is to behave in ways that make success less likely, which can be an effective way of coping with failure, particularly in circumstances where we feel the task may ordinarily be too difficult. For instance, in research by Berglas and Jones (1978), participants first performed an intelligence test on which they did very well.
It was then explained to them that the researchers were testing the effects of different drugs on performance and that they would be asked to take a similar but potentially more difficult intelligence test while they were under the influence of one of two different drugs. The participants were then given a choice—they could take a pill that was supposed to facilitate performance on the intelligence task (making it easier for them to perform) or a pill that was supposed to inhibit performance on the intelligence task, thereby making the task harder to perform (no drugs were actually administered). Berglas found that men—but not women—engaged in self-handicapping: they preferred to take the performance-inhibiting rather than the performance-enhancing drug, choosing the drug that provided a convenient external attribution for potential failure.
Although women may also self-handicap, particularly by indicating that they are unable to perform well due to stress or time constraints (Hirt, Deppe, & Gordon, 1991), men seem to do it more frequently. This finding is consistent with the general gender differences we have talked about in many places in this book: on average, men are more concerned than women about using this type of self-enhancement to boost their self-esteem and social status in the eyes of themselves and others. You can see that there are some benefits (but also, of course, some costs) of self-handicapping.
If we fail after we self-handicap, we simply blame the failure on the external factor. But if we succeed5.4 Individual Differences in Person Perception 317 despite the handicap that we have created for ourselves, we can make clear internal attributions for our success. “Look at how well I did in my presentation at work, even though I wasn’t feeling well!” Engaging in behaviors that create self-handicapping can be costly because doing so makes it harder for us to succeed.
In fact, research has found that people who report that they self-handicap regularly show lower life satisfaction, less competence, poorer moods, less interest in their jobs, and greater substance abuse (Zuckerman & Tsai, 2005). Meta-analytic evidence shows that increased self-handicapping also relates to more negative academic outcomes (Schwinger, Wirthwein, Lemmer, & Steinmayr, 2014). Although self-handicapping would seem to be useful for insulating our feelings from failure, it is not a good tack to take in the long run.
Fortunately, most people have a reasonable balance between optimism and realism in the attributions that they make (Taylor & Armor, 1996) and do not often rely on self-handicapping. They also tend to set goals that they believe they can attain, and to regularly make some progress toward reaching them. Research has found that setting reasonable goals and feeling that we are moving toward them makes us happy, even if we may not in fact attain the goals themselves (Lawrence, Carver, & Scheier, 2002).
As the saying goes, being on the journey is often more important than reaching the destination. Key Takeaways • Because we each use our own expectations in judgment, people may form different impressions of the same person performing the same behavior. • Individual differences in the cognitive accessibility of a given personal characteristic may lead to more overlap in the descriptions provided by the same perceiver about different people than there is in those provided by different perceivers about the same target person.
• People with a strong need for cognition make more causal attributions overall. Entity theorists tend to focus on the traits of other people and tend to make a lot of personal attributions, whereas incremental theorists tend to believe that personalities change a lot over time and therefore are more likely to make situational attributions for events. • Individual differences in attributional styles can influence how we respond to the negative events that we experience.
• People who have extremely negative attributional styles, in which they continually make external, stable, and global attributions for their behavior, are said to be experiencing learned helplessness. • Self-handicapping is an attributional technique that prevents us from making ability attributions for our own failures. • Having a positive outlook is healthy, but it must be tempered.
We cannot be unrealistic about what we can and cannot do.318 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Think of a time when your own expectations influenced your attributions about another person.
What type of expectations did you have and what type of attributions did you end up making? In hindsight, how accurate do you think that these attributions were? 2.
Which constructs are more cognitively accessible for you? How do these constructs influence the types of attributions that you make about other people? 3.
Consider a time when you or someone you knew engaged in self-handicapping. Why do you think that they did this? What was the outcome of doing so?
4. Do you think that you have a more positive or a more negative attributional style? How do you think this style influences your judgments about your own successes and failures?
What do you see as the advantages and disadvantages for you of your attributional style? References Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M.
E., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978).
Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87(1), 49–74; Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L.
Y., & Francis, E. L. (1999).
Do negative cognitive styles confer vulnerability to depression? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 8(4), 128–132. Atkinson, D.
R., Worthington, R. L., Dana, D. M, & Good, G.
E. (1991). Etiology beliefs, preferences for counseling orientations, and counseling effectiveness.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 38, 258-264. Berglas, S., & Jones, E. E.
(1978). Drug choice as a self-handicapping strategy in response to noncontingent success. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(4), 405–417.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C.
S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention.
Child Development, 78(1), 246–263. Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B.
(2000). Challenge and threat appraisals: The role of affective cues. In J.
P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and thinking: The role of affect in social cognition (pp. 59–82).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Boyer, W. (2006).
Accentuate the positive: The relationship between positive explanatory style and academic achievement of prospective elementary teachers. Journal Of Research In Childhood Education,21(1), 53-63. doi:10.1080/02568540609594578 Cacioppo, J.
T., & Petty, R. E. (1982).
The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116–131. Dornbusch, S.
M., Hastorf, A. H., Richardson, S. A., Muzzy, R.
E., & Vreeland, R. S. (1965).
The5.4 Individual Differences in Person Perception 319 perceiver and the perceived: Their relative influence on the categories of interpersonal cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1(5), 434–440. Duncan, B.
L., & Moynihan, D. W. (1994).
Applying outcome research: Intentional utilization of the client’s frame of reference. Psychotherapy, 31, 294-301. Fletcher, G.
J. O., Danilovics, P., Fernandez, G., Peterson, D., & Reeder, G. D.
(1986). Attributional complexity: An individual differences measure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(4), 875–884.
Henry, P. C. (2005).
Life stress, explanatory style, hopelessness, and occupational stress. International Journal of Stress Management, 12, 241–256; Hirt, E. R., Deppe, R.
K., & Gordon, L. J. (1991).
Self-reported versus behavioral self-handicapping: Empirical evidence for a theoretical distinction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(6), 981–991. Hrapczynski, K.
M., Epstein, N. B., Werlinich, C. A., & LaTaillade, J.
J. (2012). Changes in negative attributions during couple therapy for abusive behavior: Relations to changes in satisfaction and behavior.
Journal Of Marital And Family Therapy, 38 (Suppl 1), 117-132. doi:10.1111/ j.1752-0606.2011.00264.x Lawrence, J. W., Carver, C.
S., & Scheier, M. F. (2002).
Velocity toward goal attainment in immediate experience as a determinant of affect. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32(4), 788–802. doi: 10.1111/j.1559–1816.2002.tb00242.x Malle, B.
F., Knobe, J., O’Laughlin, M. J., Pearce, G. E., & Nelson, S.
E. (2000). Conceptual structure and social functions of behavior explanations: Beyond person-situation attributions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(3), 309–326. Metalsky, G. I., Joiner, T.
E., Hardin, T. S., & Abramson, L. Y.
(1993). Depressive reactions to failure in a naturalistic setting: A test of the hopelessness and self-esteem theories of depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102(1), 101–109.
Molden, D. C., Plaks, J. E., & Dweck, C.
S. (2006). “Meaningful” social inferences: Effects of implicit theories on inferential processes.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42(6), 738–752. O’Brien, K. M., & Murdock, N.
L. (1993). Shelter workers perceptions of battered women.
Sex Roles, 29, 183-194. Park, B. (1986).
A method for studying the development of impressions of real people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(5), 907–917. Peterson, C., & Seligman, M.
E. P. (1984).
Causal explanations as a risk factor for depression: Theory and evidence. Psychological Review, 91, 347–374. Plaks, J.
E., Levy, S. R., & Dweck, C. S.
(2009). Lay theories of personality: Cornerstones of meaning in social cognition. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 3(6), 1069–1081.
doi: 10.1111/ j.1751–9004.2009.00222.x Sargent, M. (2004). Less thought, more punishment: Need for cognition predicts support for punitive responses to crime.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30(11), 1485–1493. doi: 10.1177/ 0146167204264481320 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others Schwinger, M., Wirthwein, L., Lemmer, G., & Steinmayr, R.
(2014). Academic Self-Handicapping and Achievement: A Meta-Analysis.Journal Of Educational Psychology, doi:10.1037/a0035832 Seligman, M. E.
(1975). Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco, CA: W.
H. Freeman. Taylor, S.
E., & Armor, D. A. (1996).
Positive illusions and coping with adversity. Journal of Personality, 64, 873–898. Van Hiel, A., Pandelaere, M., & Duriez, B.
(2004). The impact of need for closure on conservative beliefs and racism: Differential mediation by authoritarian submission and authoritarian dominance. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 30(7), 824-837.
doi:10.1177/ 0146167204264333 Vines, L., & Nixon, R. V. (2009).
Positive attributional style, life events and their effect on children’s mood: Prospective study.Australian Journal Of Psychology, 61(4), 211-219. doi:10.1080/ 00049530802579507 Wang, C., Zhang, Y., Zhang, N., & Zhang, J. (2011).
Psychosocial effects of attributional retraining group therapy on major depression disorder, anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Chinese Journal Of Clinical Psychology, 19(3), 398-400. Weinstein, N.
D., & Klein, W. M. (1996).
Unrealistic optimism: Present and future. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 15(1), 1–8. Zuckerman, M., & Tsai, F.-F.
(2005). Costs of self-handicapping. Journal of Personality, 73(2), 411–442.
Media Attributions • “Figure 5.10 Students who believed that their intelligence…” is based on data from Blackwell et al. (2007). Blackwell, L.
S., Trzesniewski, K. H., &amp; Dweck, C. S.
(2007). Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78(1), 246–263.5.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Person Perception Understanding other people is one of the most important tasks facing us in our everyday lives.
Now that you are familiar with the processes we use during person perception, perhaps you will use this information to be more aware of—and perhaps even improve—your own person perception skills. Are you now more aware of how quickly you are forming impressions of other people and of how quickly they are forming impressions of you? Does this knowledge make you think differently about those snap judgments you make about others?
Might it make you more careful about how you behave in front of others? You may find that you are now better able to use your person perception powers to accurately determine how others are responding to you. Do you find yourself more attuned to the nonverbal information that you are sending to others and that they are sending to you?
Are you more aware of the role that traits (and particularly central traits) are playing in your everyday interactions? And are you now more (or perhaps less) sure about your skills at detecting deception in others? Your broader understanding about the processes of causal attribution—and the potential errors that may accompany it—may also help you improve your relationships with others.
Do you sometimes blame other people for their misfortunes that they could not really have caused themselves? If so, and you stop to think about it, you know that you may well be falling into the traps of the fundamental attribution error, of the just world hypothesis and defensive attribution. Do you sometimes take more credit for your contribution to a group project than you should?
This would, of course, be expected if you, like most people, tend to make self-serving attributions. But because you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will more likely be aware of their potential pitfalls and try to prevent or correct for them. With your new knowledge of person perception in hand, you may also think about your own style of person perception.
Do you now do this more thoughtfully or more spontaneously? Could you be more accurate if you took more time to evaluate the actions of others? And how do you think that the culture that you live in influences your person perception?
Do you think that cultures are too focused on individuals rather than on situational factors in explaining important social issues, like homelessness, addiction, and crime? Finally, consider again the many ways that the processes of causal attribution guide your perceptions of yourself and influence your own behaviors and even your mental and physical health. Now that you can see how important your own thinking styles are, you might want to try to further improve them.
H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 5 True or False Quiz To check what you have remembered about some key concepts in this chapter, try this quick true-false 321322 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others quiz. You can either choose to get feedback after each question, or wait until the end for an overall score.
1. The study of social perception focuses on how we try to understand our own and others behavior. 2.
Impression formation research confirms the belief that you should never trust your first impressions of other people. 3. When Julian often attributes positive outcomes he experiences to internal causes and negative outcomes to external ones, this is an example of the actor-observer effect.
4. Gurjeet has depression, and so she is more likely than people who do not have depression to show the self-serving bias. 5.
Impression formation is a topic focused on how we interpret people’s personalities over the long-term.5.6 Chapter Summary Person perception helps us make accurate and informed judgments about how other people are likely to respond to us. At the same time, we are exercising our person perception skills on other people, those same people are also using their powers of person perception to form impressions of us. Our initial impressions of other people can be formed quite accurately in a very short time—sometimes in a matter of seconds.
These initial judgments are made on the basis of the other person’s social category memberships—such as race, gender, and age—and their physical appearance. Another source of information in initial perception is nonverbal behavior. We use a wide variety of nonverbal cues to help us form impressions of others.
These behaviors are also useful in helping us determine whether people are being honest with us. Although our ability to detect deception is often not very good, there are nevertheless some reliable cues that we can use to do so. Once we learn more about a person, we begin to think about that person in terms of their personality traits.
Often we average traits together to form an overall impression of the person. Some traits have more weight than others—for instance, negative traits, the central traits of warm and cold, and those traits that we learn first. An important task of person perception is to attempt to draw inferences about a person’s personality by observing his or her behavior.
This is the process of causal attribution. When we make attributions, we make either personal attributions, situational attributions, or both. We can make stronger personal attributions when behavior is unusual or unexpected and when it is freely chosen.
When we have information about behavior over time, we can analyze the consistency, distinctiveness, and consensus of that behavior to make attributions. In some cases, we may use the process of causal attribution to draw conclusions about the causes of success and failure. Our attributions are generally accurate, but they are subject to some biases.
We tend to make too many personal attributions for the behavior of others (the fundamental attribution error), and we make more personal attributions for others than we do for ourselves (the actor-observer effect). In some cases, this may lead us to blame others for events that they might not have been responsible for. Furthermore, we tend to make self-serving attributions, which are frequently inaccurate but which do help us to meet our needs for self-enhancement.
We also make a variety of attributions that favor our ingroups over our outgroups (e.g., the group-serving bias) and ones that can lead us to blame people for their misfortunes (e.g., the just world hypothesis). There are important cultural differences in person perception. People from individualistic cultures, or people for whom an individualistic culture is currently highly accessible, tend to make stronger personal attributions and weaker situational attributions in comparison with people from collectivistic cultures.
They also tend to show more self-serving and group-serving biases. Different individuals make different judgments about others, in part because they see those people in 323324 Chapter 5. Perceiving Others different circumstances and in part because they use their own attitudes and schemas when they judge them.
This can lead people to make more similar judgments about different people than different people make about the same person. Individual difference variables such as need for cognition and entity versus incremental thinking can also influence our person perception. Causal attributions for our own behaviors have an important outcome on our mental and physical health.
For example, whereas a negative attributional style has been linked to depression, a positive attributional style can act as a protective factor against it. Ultimately, finding a balance between positive and realistic explanations of our own behavior appears to be very important to our well-being. H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 5 Multiple-Choice Quiz To round out your review of this chapter, try this multiple-choice quiz.
You can either check the correct answers as you go along, or wait until the end for your overall score. Good luck! 1.
The self-serving attributional bias _____. a. tends to be weaker in Western cultures b.
tends to be stronger in Western cultures. c. is unrelated to cultural factors d.
is only found in Western cultures 2. People who have depression, compared to those who do not, are more likely to attribute their setbacks to _____ and their accomplishments to _____. a.
enduring internal causes; temporary external causes b. temporary external causes; enduring internal causes c. temporary external causes; temporary internal causes d.
enduring external causes; enduring external causes 3. Jason often shows the correspondence bias when evaluating his political rivals. How do we know this?
a. he always uses a self-serving bias in explaining his rivals’ behavior. b.
he pays more attention to his rivals’ personalities than to their situations when he makes attributions about their behaviors. c. he tends to focus his attention on the situation rather than on his rivals’ personality traits.
d. he gives more weight to situational than individual factors when making attributions about their behaviors. 4.
In Asch’s famous “warm/cold” study, central traits were _____. a. traits that we use to make attributions about behaviours5.6 Chapter Summary 325 b.
traits that determine our impression of another person, regardless of their other qualities c. traits that are central to making each individual’s personality unique d. traits that affect our overall impression of others 5.
Joseph would be most likely to attribute Raquel’s behavior to internal causes when consensus is _____, consistency is _____, and distinctiveness is _____. a. low; low; low b.
high; high; high c. high; high; low d. low; high; lowChapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Chapter Learning Objectives 1. The Many Varieties of Conformity • Describe some of the active and passive ways that conformity occurs in our everyday lives. • Compare and contrast informational social influence and normative social influence.
• Summarize the variables that create majority and minority social influence. • Outline the situational variables that influence the extent to which we conform. 2.
Obedience, Power, and Leadership • Describe and interpret the results of Stanley Milgram’s research on obedience to authority. • Compare the different types of power proposed by John French and Bertram Raven and explain how they produce conformity. • Define leadership and explain how effective leaders are determined by the person, the situation, and the person-situation interaction.
3. Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity • Summarize the social psychological literature concerning differences in conformity between men and women. • Review research concerning the relationship between culture and conformity.
• Explain the concept of psychological reactance and describe how and when it might occur. Genocide via Conformity? The term “Holocaust” is commonly used to describe the murder of approximately 6 million Jews by Nazi Germans and their collaborators during the 12 years between the election of the Nazi party in 1933 and then end of World War II in 1945.
Although the Nazis also targeted a variety of other groups, including homosexuals, communists, Jehovah’s witnesses, and the Roma, the Holocaust remains unparalleled in the systematic and industrial fashion in which those deemed to be of Jewish descent were targeted for worldwide annihilation. 327328 Dr. Hammond Tarry Although psychopathology and personality traits such as authoritarianism may be used to explain the motivations or actions of Hitler and other leading Nazis, one of the enduring questions posed by social psychologists in the years since concerns which situational forces may have compelled so many ordinary men and women to follow the orders of the Nazi leadership.
This question has yielded many interesting answers, including self-interest and material gain, a reclamation of national pride following the humiliation of defeat in World War I, a desire for strong leadership following political instability and high unemployment, and a history of anti-Semitism, dehumanization, and scapegoating. But perhaps the most surprising explanation is that of conformity. Is there any evidence to suggest that ordinary Germans may have gone along with the Nazis’ so-called final solution to the Jewish problem out of a desire to go along with the group?
As it turns out, there is plenty. An important study of the interrogations of 210 members of the Reserve Police Battalion 101 (responsible for the killing of 38,000 Jews and the deportation of 45,000 others) revealed that although the individual members of the group did not have orders to kill, almost 90 percent committed murders by the end of the Holocaust. Furthermore, their actions could not be attributed to psychopathology or a previous history of violence.
In fact, records indicate that 80 percent to 90 percent of the men were initially horrified and disgusted by what they were doing. However, the desire not to face isolation and ostracism or not to be perceived as “weak” motivated many of them to perpetrate truly horrific acts of violence and murder. The ordinary desire to get along with their comrades, not to stick out, and to avoid social rejection appears to have been a primary motivating force for many of them.
Figure 6.1 Sources:Principles of Social Psychology 329 Browning, C. R. (1998).
Ordinary men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the final solution in Poland. New York: HarperCollins. Waller, J.
(2007). Becoming evil: How ordinary people commit genocide and mass killing. New York: Oxford University Press.
Have you ever decided what courses to take by asking for advice from your friends or by observing what courses they were choosing? Have you picked the clothes to wear to a party based on what your friends were wearing? Can you think of a time when you changed your beliefs or behaviors because a person in authority, such as a teacher or a religious or political leader, gave you ideas about new ways to think or new things to do?
Or perhaps you started smoking cigarettes or drinking alcohol, even though you didn’t really want to, because some of your friends were doing it. Your answers to at least some of these questions will be yes because you, like all people, are influenced by those around you. When you find yourself in situations like these, you are experiencing what is perhaps the most basic of all social psychological processes—social influence, defined as the influence of other people on our everyday thoughts, feelings, and behavior (Hogg, 2010).
This chapter focuses on the social influence that leads individuals, sometimes against their will, to adopt and adhere to the opinions and behaviors of others. The outcome of this social influence, known as conformity, refers to the change in beliefs, opinions, and behaviors as a result of our perceptions about what other people believe or do. We conform to social influence in part to meet cognitive goals of forming accurate knowledge about the world around us, for instance, by using the opinions and recommendations of others to help us make better decisions.
But conformity also involves affective processes. Because we want to be liked and accepted by others, we may sometimes behave in ways that we might not really have wanted to if we had thought about them more carefully. As an example, we may we engage in unhealthy behaviors, such as smoking or alcohol abuse, simply because our friends are engaging in them.
There are many types of conformity, ranging from the simple and unconscious imitation of the other people around us to the obedience created by powerful people who have direct control over us. In this chapter, we will consider both conformity and leadership, which is the ability to direct or inspire others to achieve goals. We’ll look at the potential benefits of conforming to others but also consider the costs of doing so.
And we will also consider which people are most likely to conform. Although conformity sounds like it might be a negative thing (and in some cases it is), overall the tendency to be influenced by the actions of others is an important human adaptation. Just as birds conform to the movements of those around them when they fly together in a flock, social influence among humans probably increases our fitness by helping us live and work well together (Coultas, 2004; Fincher, Thornhill, Murray, & Schaller, 2008; Henrich & Boyd, 1998; Kessler & Cohrs, 2008).
Conformity is determined by the person-situation interaction, and although the situation is extremely powerful, different people are more or less likely to conform. As you read this chapter, keep in mind that conformity is another example of the ongoing interactive330 Dr. Hammond Tarry dynamic among people.
Just as you are conforming to the influence that others have on you, your behavior is also influencing those others to conform to your beliefs and opinions. You may be surprised by how often these influences are occurring around you. References Coultas, J.
(2004). When in Rome…An evolutionary perspective on conformity. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 7, 317–331; Fincher, C.
L., Thornhill, R., Murray, D. R., & Schaller, M. (2008).
Pathogen prevalence predicts human cross-cultural variability in individualism/collectivism. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 275, 1279–1285 Henrich, J., & Boyd, R. (1998).
The evolution of conformist transmission and the emergence of between-group differences. Evolution and Human Behavior, 19, 215–242; Hogg, M. A.
(2010). Influence and leadership. In S.
F. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
1166–1207). New York, NY: Wiley. Kessler, T., & Cohrs, J.
C. (2008). The evolution of authoritarian processes: Fostering cooperation in large-scale groups.
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 12, 73–84. Media Attributions • “Bundesarchiv Bild 101I-030-0780-28, Krakau, Razzia von deutscher Ordnungspolizei” by German Federal Archive is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 DE licence.6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity Learning Objectives 1. Describe some of the active and passive ways that conformity occurs in our everyday lives.
2. Compare and contrast informational social influence and normative social influence. 3.
Summarize the variables that create majority and minority social influence. 4. Outline the situational variables that influence the extent to which we conform.
The typical outcome of social influence is that our beliefs and behaviors become more similar to those of others around us. At times, this change occurs in a spontaneous and automatic sense, without any obvious intent of one person to change the other. Perhaps you learned to like jazz or rap music because your roommate was playing a lot of it.
You didn’t really want to like the music, and your roommate didn’t force it on you—your preferences changed in passive way. Robert Cialdini and his colleagues (Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990) found that college students were more likely to throw litter on the ground when they had just seen another person throw some paper on the ground and were least likely to litter when they had just seen another person pick up and throw paper into a trash can. The researchers interpreted this as a kind of spontaneous conformity—a tendency to follow the behavior of others, often entirely out of our awareness.
Even our emotional states become more similar to those we spend more time with (Anderson, Keltner, & John, 2003). Research Focus Imitation as Subtle Conformity Perhaps you have noticed in your own behavior a type of very subtle conformity—the tendency to imitate other people who are around you. Have you ever found yourself talking, smiling, or frowning in the same way that a friend does?
Tanya Chartrand and John Bargh (1999) investigated whether the tendency to imitate others would occur even for strangers, and even in very short periods of time. In their first experiment, students worked on a task with another student, who was actually an experimental confederate. The two worked together to discuss photographs taken from current magazines.
While they were working together, the confederate engaged in some unusual behaviors to see if the research participant would mimic them. Specifically, the confederate either rubbed his or her face or shook his or her foot. It turned out that the students did mimic the behavior of the confederate, by themselves either rubbing their own faces or shaking their own feet.
And when the experimenters 331332 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming asked the participants if they had noticed anything unusual about the behavior of the other person during the experiment, none of them indicated awareness of any face rubbing or foot shaking. It is said that imitation is a form of flattery, and we might therefore expect that we would like people who imitate us.
Indeed, in a second experiment, Chartrand and Bargh found exactly this. Rather than creating the behavior to be mimicked, in this study the confederate imitated the behaviors of the participant. While the participant and the confederate discussed the magazine photos, the confederate mirrored the posture, movements, and mannerisms displayed by the participant.
As you can see in Figure 6.2, the participants who had been mimicked liked the other person more and indicated that they thought the interaction had gone more smoothly, in comparison with the participants who had not been imitated. Figure 6.2 Participants who had been mimicked indicated that they liked the person who had imitated them more and that the interaction with that person had gone more smoothly, in comparison with participants who had not been mimicked. Data are from Chartrand and Bargh (1999).
Imitation is an important part of social interaction. We easily and frequently mimic others without being aware that we are doing so. We may communicate to others that we agree with their viewpoints by mimicking their behaviors, and we tend to get along better with people with whom we are well “coordinated.” We even expect people to mimic us in social interactions, and we become distressed when they do not (Dalton, Chartrand, & Finkel, 2010).
This unconscious conformity may help explain why we hit it off immediately with some people and never get it together with others (Chartrand & Dalton, 2009; Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal, 1990, 1992). Informational Social Influence: Conforming to Be Accurate Although mimicry represents the more subtle side, social influence also occurs in a more active and thoughtful sense, for instance, when we actively look to our friends’ opinions to determine appropriate behavior, when a car salesperson attempts to make a sale, or even when a powerful dictator uses6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 333 physical aggression to force the people in his country to engage in the behaviors that he desires. In these cases, the influence is obvious.
We know we are being influenced and we may attempt—sometimes successfully, and sometimes less so—to counteract the pressure. Influence also sometimes occurs because we believe that other people have valid knowledge about an opinion or issue, and we use that information to help us make good decisions. For example, if you take a flight and land at an unfamiliar airport you may follow the flow of other passengers who disembarked before you.
In this case your assumption might be that they know where they are going and that following them will likely lead you to the baggage carousel. Informational social influence is the change in opinions or behavior that occurs when we conform to people who we believe have accurate information. We base our beliefs on those presented to us by reporters, scientists, doctors, and lawyers because we believe they have more expertise in certain fields than we have.
But we also use our friends and colleagues for information; when we choose a jacket on the basis of our friends’ advice about what looks good on us, we are using informational conformity—we believe that our friends have good judgment about the things that matter to us. Informational social influence is often the end result of social comparison, the process of comparing our opinions with those of others to gain an accurate appraisal of the validity of an opinion or behavior (Festinger, Schachter, & Back, 1950; Hardin & Higgins, 1996; Turner, 1991). Informational social influence leads to real, long-lasting changes in beliefs.
The result of conformity due to informational social influence is normally private acceptance: real change in opinions on the part of the individual. We believe that choosing the jacket was the right thing to do and that the crowd will lead us to the baggage carousel. Normative Social Influence: Conforming to Be Liked and to Avoid Rejection In other cases we conform not because we want to have valid knowledge but rather to meet the goal of belonging to and being accepted by a group that we care about (Deutsch & Gerard, 1955).
When we start smoking cigarettes or buy shoes that we cannot really afford in order to impress others, we do these things not so much because we think they are the right things to do but rather because we want to be liked. We fall prey to normative social influence when we express opinions or behave in ways that help us to be accepted or that keep us from being isolated or rejected by others. When we engage in conformity due to normative social influence we conform to social norms—socially accepted beliefs about what we do or should do in particular social contexts (Cialdini, 1993; Sherif, 1936; Sumner, 1906).
In contrast to informational social influence, in which the attitudes or opinions of the individual change to match that of the influencers, the outcome of normative social influence often represents public compliance rather than private acceptance. Public compliance is a superficial change in behavior (including the public expression of opinions) that is not accompanied by an actual change in one’s private opinion. Conformity may appear in our public behavior even though we may believe something completely different in private.
We may obey the speed limit or wear a uniform to our job (behavior) to conform to social norms and requirements, even though we may not necessarily believe that it is appropriate to do so (opinion). We may use drugs with our friends without really wanting to, and334 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming without believing it is really right, because our friends are all using drugs.
However, behaviors that are originally performed out of a desire to be accepted (normative social influence) may frequently produce changes in beliefs to match them, and the result becomes private acceptance. Perhaps you know someone who started smoking to please his friends but soon convinced himself that it was an acceptable thing to do. Although in some cases conformity may be purely informational or purely normative, in most cases the goals of being accurate and being accepted go hand-in-hand, and therefore informational and normative social influence often occur at the same time.
When soldiers obey their commanding officers, they probably do it both because others are doing it (normative conformity) and because they think it is the right thing to do (informational conformity). And when you start working at a new job you may copy the behavior of your new colleagues because you want them to like you as well as because you assume they know how things should be done. It has been argued that the distinction between informational and normative conformity is more apparent than real and that it may not be possible to fully differentiate them (Turner, 1991).
Majority Influence: Conforming to the Group Although conformity occurs whenever group members change their opinions or behaviors as a result of their perceptions of others, we can divide such influence into two types. Majority influence occurs when the beliefs held by the larger number of individuals in the current social group prevail. In contrast, minority influence occurs when the beliefs held by the smaller number of individuals in the current social group prevail.
Not surprisingly, majority influence is more common, and we will consider it first. In a series of important studies on conformity, Muzafer Sherif (1936) used a perceptual phenomenon known as the autokinetic effect to study the outcomes of conformity on the development of group norms. The autokinetic effect is caused by the rapid, small movements of our eyes that occur as we view objects and that allow us to focus on stimuli in our environment.
However, when individuals are placed in a dark room that contains only a single small, stationary pinpoint of light, these eye movements produce an unusual effect for the perceiver—they make the point of light appear to move. Sherif took advantage of this natural effect to study how group norms develop in ambiguous situations. In his studies, college students were placed in a dark room with the point of light and were asked to indicate, each time the light was turned on, how much it appeared to move.
Some participants first made their judgments alone. Sherif found that although each participant who was tested alone made estimates that were within a relatively narrow range (as if they had their own “individual” norm), there were wide variations in the size of these judgments among the different participants he studied. Sherif also found that when individuals who initially had made very different estimates were then placed in groups along with one or two other individuals, and in which all the group members gave their responses on each trial aloud (each time in a different random order), the initial differences in judgments among the participants began to disappear, such that the group members eventually made very similar judgments.
You can see that this pattern of change, which is shown in Figure 6.3, “Outcomes of Sherif’s Study,” illustrates the fundamental principle of social influence—over time,6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 335 people come more and more to share their beliefs with each other. Sherif’s study is thus a powerful example of the development of group norms. Figure 6.3 Outcomes of Sherif’s Study The participants in the studies by Muzafer Sherif (1936) initially had different beliefs about the degree to which a point of light appeared to be moving.
(You can see these differences as expressed on Day 1.) However, as they shared their beliefs with other group members over several days, a common group norm developed. Shown here are the estimates made by a group of three participants who met together on four different days. Furthermore, the new group norms continued to influence judgments when the individuals were again tested alone, indicating that Sherif had created private acceptance.
The participants did not revert back to their initial opinions, even though they were quite free to do so; rather, they stayed with the new group norms. And these conformity effects appear to have occurred entirely out of the awareness of most participants. Sherif reported that the majority of the participants indicated after the experiment was over that their judgments had not been influenced by the judgments made by the other group members.
Sherif also found that the norms that were developed in groups could continue over time. When the original research participants were moved into groups with new people, their opinions subsequently influenced the judgments of the new group members (Jacobs & Campbell, 1961). The norms persisted through several “generations” (MacNeil & Sherif, 1976) and could influence individual judgments up to a year after the individual was last tested (Rohrer, Baron, Hoffman, & Swander, 1954).
When Solomon Asch (Asch, 1952, 1955) heard about Sherif’s studies, he responded in perhaps the same way that you might have: “Well of course people conformed in this situation, because after all the right answer was very unclear,” you might have thought. Since the study participants didn’t know the right answer (or indeed the “right” answer was no movement at all), it is perhaps not that surprising that people conformed to the beliefs of others. Asch conducted studies in which, in complete contrast to the autokinetic effect experiments of Sherif, the correct answers to the judgments were entirely obvious.
In these studies, the research participants were male college students who were told that they were to be participating in a test of visual abilities. The men were seated in a small semicircle in front of a board that displayed the visual stimuli that they336 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming were going to judge.
The men were told that there would be 18 trials during the experiment, and on each trial they would see two cards. The standard card had a single line that was to be judged. And the test card had three lines that varied in length between about 2 and 10 inches: Figure 6.4 Standard Card and Test Card.
The men’s task was simply to indicate which line on the test card was the same length as the line on the standard card. As you can see from the Asch card sample above, there is no question that correct answer is Line 1. In fact, Asch found that people made virtually no errors on the task when they made their judgments alone.
On each trial, each person answered out loud, beginning with one end of the semicircle and moving to the other end. Although the participant did not know it, the other group members were not true participants but experimental confederates who gave predetermined answers on each trial. Because the participant was seated next to last in the row, he always made his judgment after most of the other group members made theirs.
Although on the first two trials the confederates each gave the correct answer, on the third trial, and on 11 of the subsequent trials, they all had been instructed to give the same incorrect answer. For instance, even though the correct answer was Line 1, they would all say it was Line 2. Thus when it became the participant’s turn to answer, he could either give the clearly correct answer or conform to the incorrect responses of the confederates.
Asch found that about 76% of the 123 men who were tested gave at least one incorrect response when6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 337 it was their turn, and 37% of the responses, overall, were conforming. This is indeed evidence for the power of normative social influence because the research participants were giving clearly incorrect answers out loud. However, conformity was not absolute—in addition to the 24% of the men who never conformed, only 5% of the men conformed on all 12 of the critical trials.
Minority Influence: Resisting Group Pressure The research that we have discussed to this point involves conformity in which the opinions and behaviors of individuals become more similar to the opinions and behaviors of the majority of the people in the group—majority influence. But we do not always blindly conform to the beliefs of the majority. Although more unusual, there are nevertheless cases in which a smaller number of individuals are able to influence the opinions or behaviors of the group—this is minority influence.
It is a good thing that minorities can be influential; otherwise, the world would be pretty boring. When we look back on history we find that it is the unusual, divergent, innovative minority groups or individuals, who—although frequently ridiculed at the time for their unusual ideas—end up being respected for producing positive changes. The work of scientists, religious leaders, philosophers, writers, musicians, and artists who go against group norms by expressing new and unusual ideas frequently is not liked at first.
Galileo and Copernicus were scientists who did not conform to the opinions and behaviors of those around them. In the end, their innovative ideas changed the thinking of the masses. These novel thinkers may be punished—in some cases even killed—for their beliefs.
In the end, however, if the ideas are interesting and important, the majority may conform to these new ideas, producing social change. In short, although conformity to majority opinions is essential to provide a smoothly working society, if individuals only conformed to others there would be few new ideas and little social change. The French social psychologist Serge Moscovici was particularly interested in the situations under which minority influence might occur.
In fact, he argued that all members of all groups are able, at least in some degree, to influence others, regardless of whether they are in the majority or the minority. To test whether minority group members could indeed produce influence, he and his colleagues (Moscovici, Lage, & Naffrechoux, 1969) created the opposite of Asch’s line perception study, such that there was now a minority of confederates in the group (two) and a majority of experimental participants (four). All six individuals viewed a series of slides depicting colors, supposedly as a study of color perception, and as in Asch’s research, each voiced out loud an opinion about the color of the slide.
Although the color of the slides varied in brightness, they were all clearly blue. Moreover, demonstrating that the slides were unambiguous, just as the line judgments of Asch had been, participants who were asked to make their judgments alone called the slides a different color than blue less than 1% of the time. (When it happened, they called the slides green.) In the experiment, the two confederates had been instructed to give one of two patterns of answers that were different from the normal responses.
In the consistent-minority condition, the two confederates gave the unusual response (green) on every trial. In the inconsistent-minority condition the confederates called the slides green on two-thirds of their responses and called them blue on the other third. The minority of two was able to change the beliefs of the majority of four, but only when they were338 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming unanimous in their judgments. As shown in Figure 6.5, “The Power of Consistent Minorities,” Moscovici found that the presence of a minority who gave consistently unusual responses influenced the judgments made by the experimental participants. When the minority was consistent, 32% of the majority group participants said green at least once and 18% of the responses of the majority group were green.
However, the inconsistent minority had virtually no influence on the judgments of the majority. Figure 6.5 The Power of Consistent Minorities In the studies of minority influence by Serge Moscovici, only a consistent minority (in which each individual gave the same incorrect response) was able to produce conformity in the majority participants. Data are from Moscovici, Lage, and Naffrechoux (1969).
On the basis of this research, Moscovici argued that minorities could have influence over majorities, provided they gave consistent, unanimous responses. Subsequent research has found that minorities are most effective when they express consistent opinions over time and with each other, when they show that they are invested in their position by making significant personal and material sacrifices, and when they seem to be acting out of principle rather than from ulterior motives (Hogg, 2010). Although they may want to adopt a relatively open-minded and reasonable negotiating style on issues that are less critical to the attitudes they are trying to change, successful minorities must be absolutely consistent with their core arguments (Mugny & Papastamou, 1981).
When minorities are successful at producing influence, they are able to produce strong and lasting attitude change—true private acceptance—rather than simply public compliance. People conform to minorities because they think that they are right, and not because they think it is socially acceptable. Minorities have another, potentially even more important, outcome on the opinions of majority group members—the presence of minority groups can lead majorities to engage in fuller, as well as more divergent, innovative and creative thinking about the topics being discussed (Martin & Hewstone, 2003; Martin, Martin, Smith, & Hewstone, 2007).
Nemeth and Kwan (1987) had participants work in groups of four on a creativity task in which they were presented with letter strings such as tdogto and asked to indicate which word came to their mind first as they looked at the letters. The judgments were made privately, which allowed the experimenters to provide false feedback about the responses of the other group members. All participants indicated6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 339 the most obvious word (in this case, dog) as their response on each of the initial trials.
However, the participants were told (according to experimental condition) either that three of the other group members had also reported seeing dog and that one had reported seeing god or that three out of the four had reported seeing god whereas only one had reported dog. Participants then completed other similar word strings on their own, and their responses were studied. Results showed that when the participants thought that the unusual response (for instance, god rather than dog) was given by a minority of one individual in the group rather than by a majority of three individuals, they subsequently answered more of the new word strings using novel solutions, such as finding words made backwards or using a random order of the letters.
On the other hand, the individuals who thought that the majority of the group had given the novel response did not develop more creative ideas. Evidently, when the participants thought that the novel response came from a group minority (one person), they thought about the responses more carefully, in comparison with the same behaviors performed by majority group members, and this led them to adopt new and creative ways to think about the problems. This result, along with other research showing similar findings, suggests that messages that come from minority groups lead us to think more fully about the decision, which can produce innovative, creative thinking in majority group members (Crano & Chen, 1998).
In summary, we can conclude that minority influence, although not as likely as majority influence, does sometimes occur. The few are able to influence the many when they are consistent and confident in their judgments but are less able to have influence when they are inconsistent or act in a less confident manner. Furthermore, although minority influence is difficult to achieve, if it does occur it is powerful.
When majorities are influenced by minorities they really change their beliefs—the outcome is deeper thinking about the message, private acceptance of the message, and in some cases even more creative thinking. Situational Determinants of Conformity The studies of Asch, Sherif, and Moscovici demonstrate the extent to which individuals—both majorities and minorities—can create conformity in others. Furthermore, these studies provide information about the characteristics of the social situation that are important in determining the extent to which we conform to others.
Let’s consider some of those variables. The Size of the Majority As the number of people in the majority increases relative to the number of persons in the minority, pressure on the minority to conform also increases (Latané, 1981; Mullen, 1983). Asch conducted replications of his original line-judging study in which he varied the number of confederates (the majority subgroup members) who gave initial incorrect responses from one to 16 people, while holding the number in the minority subgroup constant at one (the single research participant).
You may not be surprised to hear the results of this research: when the size of the majorities got bigger, the lone participant was more likely to give the incorrect answer. Increases in the size of the majority increase conformity regardless of whether the conformity is informational or normative. In terms of informational conformity, if more people express an opinion, their opinions seem more valid.
Thus bigger majorities should result in more informational conformity.340 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming But larger majorities will also produce more normative conformity because being different will be harder when the majority is bigger. As the majority gets bigger, the individual giving the different opinion becomes more aware of being different, and this produces a greater need to conform to the prevailing norm.
Although increasing the size of the majority does increase conformity, this is only true up to a point. The increase in the amount of conformity that is produced by adding new members to the majority group (known as the social impact of each group member) is greater for initial majority members than it is for later members (Latané, 1981). This pattern is shown in Figure 6.6 , “Social Impact,” which presents data from a well-known experiment by Stanley Milgram and his colleagues (Milgram, Bickman, & Berkowitz, 1969) that studied how people are influenced by the behavior of others on the streets of New York City.
Milgram had confederates gather in groups on 42nd Street in New York City, in front of the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, each looking up at a window on the sixth floor of the building. The confederates were formed into groups ranging from one to 15 people. A video camera in a room on the sixth floor above recorded the behavior of 1,424 pedestrians who passed along the sidewalk next to the groups.
As you can see in Figure 6.6, “Social Impact,” larger groups of confederates increased the number of people who also stopped and looked up, but the influence of each additional confederate was generally weaker as size increased. Groups of three confederates produced more conformity than did a single person, and groups of five produced more conformity than groups of three. But after the group reached about six people, it didn’t really matter very much.
Just as turning on the first light in an initially dark room makes more difference in the brightness of the room than turning on the second, third, and fourth lights does, adding more people to the majority tends to produce diminishing returns—less additional effect on conformity. Figure 6.6 Social Impact One reason that the impact of new group members decreases so rapidly is because as the number in the group increases, the individuals in the majority are soon seen more as a group rather than as separate individuals. When there are only a couple of individuals expressing opinions, each person is likely to be seen as an individual, holding his or her own unique opinions, and each new individual adds to the impact.
As a result, two people are more influential than one, and three more influential than two.6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 341 However, as the number of individuals grows, and particularly when those individuals are perceived as being able to communicate with each other, the individuals are more likely to be seen as a group rather than as individuals. At this point, adding new members does not change the perception; regardless of whether there are four, five, six, or more members, the group is still just a group. As a result, the expressed opinions or behaviors of the group members no longer seem to reflect their own characteristics as much as they do that of the group as a whole, and thus increasing the number of group members is less effective in increasing influence (Wilder, 1977).
Group size is an important variable that influences a wide variety of behaviors of the individuals in groups. People leave proportionally smaller tips in restaurants as the number in their party increases, and people are less likely to help as the number of bystanders to an incident increases (Latané, 1981). The number of group members also has an important influence on group performance: as the size of a working group gets larger, the contributions of each individual member to the group effort become smaller.
In each case, the influence of group size on behavior is found to be similar to that shown in Figure 6.6, “Social Impact.” The Unanimity of the Majority Although the number of people in the group is an important determinant of conformity, it cannot be the only thing—if it were, minority influence would be impossible. It turns out that the consistency or unanimity of the group members is even more important. In Asch’s study, as an example, conformity occurred not so much because many confederates gave a wrong answer but rather because each of the confederates gave the same wrong answer.
In one follow-up study that he conducted, Asch increased the number of confederates to 16 but had just one of those confederates give the correct answer. He found that in this case, even though there were 15 incorrect and only one correct answer given by the confederates, conformity was nevertheless sharply reduced—to only about 5% of the participants’ responses. And you will recall that in the minority influence research of Moscovici, the same thing occurred; conformity was observed only when the minority group members were completely consistent in their expressed opinions.
Although you might not be surprised to hear that conformity decreases when one of the group members gives the right answer, you may be more surprised to hear that conformity is reduced even when the dissenting confederate gives a different wrong answer. For example, conformity is reduced dramatically in Asch’s line-judging situation, such that virtually all participants give the correct answer (assume it is Line 3 in this case) even when the majority of the confederates have indicated that Line 2 is the correct answer and a single confederate indicates that Line 1 is correct. In short, conformity is reduced when there is any inconsistency among the members of the majority group—even when one member of the majority gives an answer that is even more incorrect than that given by the other majority group members (Allen & Levine, 1968).
Why should unanimity be such an important determinant of conformity? For one, when there is complete agreement among the majority members, the individual who is the target of influence stands completely alone and must be the first to break ranks by giving a different opinion. Being the only person who is different is potentially embarrassing, and people who wish to make a good impression on, or be liked by, others may naturally want to avoid this.
If you can convince your friend to wear blue jeans rather than a coat and tie to a wedding, then you’re naturally going to feel a lot less conspicuous when you wear jeans too.342 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming Second, when there is complete agreement—once again, remember the consistent minority in the studies by Moscovici—the participant may become less sure of his or her own perceptions. Because everyone else is holding the exact same opinion, it seems that they must be correctly responding to the external reality.
When such doubt occurs, the individual may be likely to conform due to informational social influence. Finally, when one or more of the other group members gives a different answer than the rest of the group (so that the unanimity of the majority group is broken), that person is no longer part of the group that is doing the influencing and becomes (along with the participant) part of the group being influenced. You can see that another way of describing the effect of unanimity is to say that as soon as the individual has someone who agrees with him or her that the others may not be correct (a supporter or ally), then the pressure to conform is reduced.
Having one or more supporters who challenge the status quo validates one’s own opinion and makes disagreeing with the majority more likely (Allen, 1975; Boyanowsky & Allen, 1973). The Importance of the Task Still another determinant of conformity is the perceived importance of the decision. The studies of Sherif, Asch, and Moscovici may be criticized because the decisions that the participants made—for instance, judging the length of lines or the colors of objects—seem rather trivial.
But what would happen when people were asked to make an important decision? Although you might think that conformity would be less when the task becomes more important (perhaps because people would feel uncomfortable relying on the judgments of others and want to take more responsibility for their own decisions), the influence of task importance actually turns out to be more complicated than that. Research Focus How Task Importance and Confidence Influence Conformity The joint influence of an individual’s confidence in his or her beliefs and the importance of the task was demonstrated in an experiment conducted by Baron, Vandello, and Brunsman (1996) that used a slight modification of the Asch procedure to assess conformity.
Participants completed the experiment along with two other students, who were actually experimental confederates. The participants worked on several different types of trials, but there were 26 that were relevant to the conformity predictions. On these trials, a photo of a single individual was presented first, followed immediately by a “lineup” photo of four individuals, one of whom had been viewed in the initial slide (but who might have been dressed differently):6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 343 Figure 6.7 The participants’ task was to call out which person in the lineup was the same as the original individual using a number between 1 (the person on the far left) and 4 (the person on the far right).
In each of the critical trials, the two confederates went before the participant and they each gave the same wrong response. Two experimental manipulations were used. First, the researchers manipulated task importance by telling some participants (the high-importance condition) that their performance on the task was an important measure of eyewitness ability and that the participants who performed most accurately would receive $20 at the end of the data collection.
(A lottery using all the participants was actually held at the end of the semester, and some participants were paid the $20.) Participants in the low- importance condition, on the other hand, were told that the test procedure was part of a pilot study and that the decisions were not that important. Second, task difficulty was varied by showing the test and the lineup photos for 5 and 10 seconds, respectively (easy condition) or for only ½ and 1 second, respectively (difficult condition). The conformity score was defined as the number of trials in which the participant offered the same (incorrect) response as the confederates.344 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Figure 6.8 On easy tasks, participants conformed less when they thought that the decision was of high (versus low) importance, whereas on difficult tasks, participants conformed more when they thought the decision was of high importance. Data are from Baron et al. (1996).
As you can see in Figure 6.8, an interaction between task difficulty and task importance was observed. On easy tasks, participants conformed less to the incorrect judgments of others when the decision had more important consequences for them. In these cases, they seemed to rely more on their own opinions (which they were convinced were correct) when it really mattered, but were more likely to go along with the opinions of the others when things were not that critical (probably a result of normative social influence).
On the difficult tasks, however, results were the opposite. In this case, participants conformed more when they thought the decision was of high, rather than low, importance. In the cases in which they were more unsure of their opinions and yet they really wanted to be correct, they used the judgments of others to inform their own views (informational social influence).
Key Takeaways • Social influence creates conformity. • Influence may occur in more passive or more active ways. • We conform both to gain accurate knowledge (informational social influence) and to avoid being rejected by others (normative social influence).
• Both majorities and minorities may create social influence, but they do so in different ways. • The characteristics of the social situation, including the number of people in the majority and the unanimity of the majority, have a strong influence on conformity.6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 345 Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Describe a time when you conformed to the opinions or behaviors of others.
Interpret the conformity in terms of informational and/or normative social influence. 2. Imagine you were serving on a jury in which you found yourself the only person who believed that the defendant was innocent.
What strategies might you use to convince the majority? References Allen, V. L.
(1975). Social support for nonconformity. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 8). New York, NY: Academic Press; Allen, V.
L., & Levine, J. M. (1968).
Social support, dissent and conformity. Sociometry, 31(2), 138–149. Anderson, C., Keltner, D., & John, O.
P. (2003). Emotional convergence between people over time.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(5), 1054–1068. Asch, S. E.
(1952). Social psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; Asch, S.
E. (1955). Opinions and social pressure.
Scientific American, 11, 32. Baron, R. S., Vandello, J.
A., & Brunsman, B. (1996). The forgotten variable in conformity research: Impact of task importance on social influence.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 915–927. Boyanowsky, E. O., & Allen, V.
L. (1973). Ingroup norms and self-identity as determinants of discriminatory behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25, 408–418. Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J.
A. (1999). The chameleon effect: The perception-behavior link and social interaction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(6), 893–910. Chartrand, T. L., & Dalton, A.
N. (2009). Mimicry: Its ubiquity, importance, and functionality.
In E. Morsella, J. A.
Bargh, & P. M. Gollwitzer (Eds.), Oxford handbook of human action (pp.
458–483). New York, NY: Oxford University Press; Cialdini, R. B.
(1993). Influence: Science and practice (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Harper Collins; Sherif, M.
(1936). The psychology of social norms. New York, NY: Harper & Row; Cialdini, R.
B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A.
(1990). A focus theory of normative conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–1026.
Crano, W. D., & Chen, X. (1998).
The leniency contract and persistence of majority and minority influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1437–1450. Dalton, A.
N., Chartrand, T. L., & Finkel, E. J.
(2010). The schema-driven chameleon: How mimicry346 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming affects executive and self-regulatory resources.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98(4), 605–617. Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H. B.
(1955). A study of normative and informational social influences upon individual judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 629–636.
Festinger, L., Schachter, S., & Back, K. (1950). Social pressures in informal groups.
New York, NY: Harper; Hardin, C., & Higgins, T. (1996). Shared reality: How social verification makes the subjective objective.
In R. M. Sorrentino & E.
T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 3, pp.
28–84). New York, NY: Guilford; Hogg, M. A.
(2010). Influence and leadership. In S.
F. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
1166–1207). New York, NY: Wiley. Jacobs, R.
C., & Campbell, D. T. (1961).
The perpetuation of an arbitrary tradition through several generations of a laboratory microculture. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 62, 649–658. Latané, B.
(1981). The psychology of social impact. American Psychologist, 36, 343–356; MacNeil, M.
K., & Sherif, M. (1976). Norm change over subject generations as a function of arbitrariness of prescribed norms.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 762–773. Martin, R., & Hewstone, M. (2003).
Majority versus minority influence: When, not whether, source status instigates heuristic or systematic processing. European Journal of Social Psychology, 33(3), 313–330; Martin, R., Martin, P. Y., Smith, J.
R., & Hewstone, M. (2007). Majority versus minority influence and prediction of behavioral intentions and behavior.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43(5), 763–771. Milgram, S., Bickman, L., & Berkowitz, L. (1969).
Note on the drawing power of crowds of different size. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 13, 79–82. Moscovici, S., Lage, E., & Naffrechoux, M.
(1969). Influence of a consistent minority on the responses of a majority in a colour perception task. Sociometry, 32, 365–379.
Mugny, G., & Papastamou, S. (1981). When rigidity does not fail: Individualization and psychologicalization as resistance to the diffusion of minority innovation.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 43–62. Mullen, B. (1983).
Operationalizing the effect of the group on the individual: A self-attention perspective. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 295–322. Nemeth, C.
J., & Kwan, J. L. (1987).
Minority influence, divergent thinking, and the detection of correct solutions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 17, 788–799. Rohrer, J.
H., Baron, S. H., Hoffman, E. L., & Swander, D.
V. (1954). The stability of autokinetic judgments.
American Journal of Psychology, 67, 143–146. Sherif, M. (1936).
The psychology of social norms. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Sumner, W.
G. (1906). Folkways.
Boston, MA: Ginn. Tickle-Degnen, L., & Rosenthal, R. (1990).
The nature of rapport and its nonverbal correlates. Psychological Inquiry, 1(4), 285–293;6.1 The Many Varieties of Conformity 347 Tickle-Degnen, L., & Rosenthal, R. (Eds.).
(1992). Nonverbal aspects of therapeutic rapport. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Turner, J. C. (1991).
Social influence. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole. Wilder, D.
A. (1977). Perception of groups, size of opposition, and social influence.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(3), 253–268.6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership Learning Objectives 1. Describe and interpret the results of Stanley Milgram’s research on obedience to authority. 2.
Compare the different types of power proposed by John French and Bertram Raven and explain how they produce conformity. 3. Define leadership and explain how effective leaders are determined by the person, the situation, and the person-situation interaction.
One of the fundamental aspects of social interaction is that some individuals have more influence than others. Social power can be defined as the ability of a person to create conformity even when the people being influenced may attempt to resist those changes (Fiske, 1993; Keltner, Gruenfeld, & Anderson, 2003). Bosses have power over their workers, parents have power over their children, and, more generally, we can say that those in authority have power over their subordinates.
In short, power refers to the process of social influence itself—those who have power are those who are most able to influence others. Milgram’s Studies on Obedience to Authority The powerful ability of those in authority to control others was demonstrated in a remarkable set of studies performed by Stanley Milgram (1963). Milgram was interested in understanding the factors that lead people to obey the orders given by people in authority.
He designed a study in which he could observe the extent to which a person who presented himself as an authority would be able to produce obedience, even to the extent of leading people to cause harm to others. Like his professor Solomon Asch, Milgram’s interest in social influence stemmed in part from his desire to understand how the presence of a powerful person—particularly the German dictator Adolf Hitler who ordered the killing of millions of people during World War II—could produce obedience. Under Hitler’s direction, the German SS troops oversaw the execution of 6 million Jews as well as other “undesirables,” including political and religious dissidents, homosexuals, mentally and physically disabled people, and prisoners of war.
Milgram used newspaper ads to recruit men (and in one study, women) from a wide variety of backgrounds to participate in his research. When the research participant arrived at the lab, he or she was introduced to a man who the participant believed was another research participant but who was actually an experimental confederate. The experimenter explained that the goal of the research was to study the effects of punishment on learning.
After the participant and the confederate both consented to participate in the study, the researcher explained that one of them would be randomly assigned to be the teacher and the other the learner. They were each 349350 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming given a slip of paper and asked to open it and to indicate what it said.
In fact both papers read teacher, which allowed the confederate to pretend that he had been assigned to be the learner and thus to assure that the actual participant was always the teacher. While the research participant (now the teacher) looked on, the learner was taken into the adjoining shock room and strapped to an electrode that was to deliver the punishment. The experimenter explained that the teacher’s job would be to sit in the control room and to read a list of word pairs to the learner.
After the teacher read the list once, it would be the learner’s job to remember which words went together. For instance, if the word pair was blue-sofa, the teacher would say the word blue on the testing trials and the learner would have to indicate which of four possible words (house, sofa, cat, or carpet) was the correct answer by pressing one of four buttons in front of him. After the experimenter gave the “teacher” a sample shock (which was said to be at 45 volts) to demonstrate that the shocks really were painful, the experiment began.
The research participant first read the list of words to the learner and then began testing him on his learning. The shock panel, as shown in Figure 6.9, “The Shock Apparatus Used in Milgram’s Obedience Study,” was presented in front of the teacher, and the learner was not visible in the shock room. The experimenter sat behind the teacher and explained to him that each time the learner made a mistake the teacher was to press one of the shock switches to administer the shock.
They were to begin with the smallest possible shock (15 volts) but with each mistake the shock was to increased by one level (an additional 15 volts).6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 351 Figure 6.9 The Shock Apparatus Used in Milgram’s Obedience Study Once the learner (who was, of course, actually an experimental confederate) was alone in the shock room, he unstrapped himself from the shock machine and brought out a tape recorder that he used to play a prerecorded series of responses that the teacher could hear through the wall of the room. As you can see in Table 6.1,”The Confederate’s Schedule of Protest in the Milgram Experiments,” the teacher heard the learner say “ugh!” after the first few shocks. After the next few mistakes, when the shock level reached 150 volts, the learner was heard to exclaim “Get me out of here, please.
My heart’s starting to bother me. I refuse to go on. Let me out!” As the shock reached about 270 volts, the learner’s protests became more vehement, and after 300 volts the learner proclaimed that he was not going to answer any more questions.
From 330 volts and up the learner was silent. The experimenter responded to participants’ questions at this point, if they asked any, with a scripted response indicating352 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming that they should continue reading the questions and applying increasing shock when the learner did not respond.6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 353 Table 6.1 The Confederate’s Schedule of Protest in the Milgram Experiments 75 Ugh!
volts 90 Ugh! volts 105 Ugh! (louder) volts 120 Ugh!
Hey, this really hurts. volts 135 Ugh!! volts Ugh!!
Experimenter! That’s all. Get me out of here.
I told you I had heart trouble. My heart’s starting to 150 bother me now. Get me out of here, please.
My heart’s starting to bother me. I refuse to go on. Let me volts out!
165 Ugh! Let me out! (shouting) volts 180 Ugh!
I can’t stand the pain. Let me out of here! (shouting) volts Ugh!
Let me out of here! Let me out of here! My heart’s bothering me.
Let me out of here! You have no 195 right to keep me here! Let me out!
Let me out of here! Let me out! Let me out of here!
My heart’s volts bothering me. Let me out! Let me out!
210 Ugh!! Experimenter! Get me out of here.
I’ve had enough. I won’t be in the experiment any more. volts 225 Ugh!
volts 240 Ugh! volts 255 Ugh! Get me out of here.
volts 270 (agonized scream) Let me out of here. Let me out of here. Let me out of here.
Let me out. Do you hear? volts Let me out of here.
285 (agonized scream) volts 300 (agonized scream) I absolutely refuse to answer any more. Get me out of here. You can’t hold me here.
volts Get me out. Get me out of here. (intensely agonized scream) Let me out of here.
Let me out of here. My heart’s bothering me. Let me 315 out, I tell you.
(hysterically) Let me out of here. Let me out of here. You have no right to hold me here.
volts Let me out! Let me out! Let me out!
Let me out of here! Let me out! Let me out!
Before Milgram conducted his study, he described the procedure to three groups—college students,354 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming middle-class adults, and psychiatrists—asking each of them if they thought they would shock a participant who made sufficient errors at the highest end of the scale (450 volts). One hundred percent of all three groups thought they would not do so.
He then asked them what percentage of “other people” would be likely to use the highest end of the shock scale, at which point the three groups demonstrated remarkable consistency by all producing (rather optimistic) estimates of around 1% to 2%. The results of the actual experiments were themselves quite shocking. Although all of the participants gave the initial mild levels of shock, responses varied after that.
Some refused to continue after about 150 volts, despite the insistence of the experimenter to continue to increase the shock level. Still others, however, continued to present the questions, and to administer the shocks, under the pressure of the experimenter, who demanded that they continue. In the end, 65% of the participants continued giving the shock to the learner all the way up to the 450 volts maximum, even though that shock was marked as “danger: severe shock,” and there had been no response heard from the participant for several trials.
In sum, almost two-thirds of the men who participated had, as far as they knew, shocked another person to death, all as part of a supposed experiment on learning. Studies similar to Milgram’s findings have since been conducted all over the world (Blass, 1999), with obedience rates ranging from a high of 90% in Spain and the Netherlands (Meeus & Raaijmakers, 1986) to a low of 16% among Australian women (Kilham & Mann, 1974). In case you are thinking that such high levels of obedience would not be observed in today’s modern culture, there is evidence that they would be.
Recently, Milgram’s results were almost exactly replicated, using men and women from a wide variety of ethnic groups, in a study conducted by Jerry Burger at Santa Clara University. In this replication of the Milgram experiment, 65% of the men and 73% of the women agreed to administer increasingly painful electric shocks when they were ordered to by an authority figure (Burger, 2009). In the replication, however, the participants were not allowed to go beyond the 150 volt shock switch.
Although it might be tempting to conclude that Milgram’s experiments demonstrate that people are innately evil creatures who are ready to shock others to death, Milgram did not believe that this was the case. Rather, he felt that it was the social situation, and not the people themselves, that was responsible for the behavior. To demonstrate this, Milgram conducted research that explored a number of variations on his original procedure, each of which demonstrated that changes in the situation could dramatically influence the amount of obedience.
These variations are summarized in Figure 6.10.6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 355 Figure 6.10 Authority and Obedience in Stanley Milgram’s Studies Experimental Replication Description Percent Obedience Initial study: Yale University men Experiment 1 65 and women The study is conducted off campus, Experiment 10 48 in Bridgeport CT The teacher is in the same room as Experiment 3 40 the learner The participant must hold the Experiment 4 20 learner’s hand on the shock pad The experimenter communicates Experiment 7 20 by phone from another room An “ordinary man” (presumably Experiment 13 another research participants refuse 20 to give shock Two other research participants Experiment 17 10 refuse to give shock The teacher chooses his own Experiment 11 0 preferred shock level One experimenter indicates that the Experiment 15 0 participant should not shock This figure presents the percentage of participants in Stanley Milgram’s (1974) studies on obedience who were maximally obedient (that is, who gave all 450 volts of shock) in some of the variations that he conducted. In the initial study, the authority’s status and power was maximized—the experimenter had been introduced as a respected scientist at a respected university. However, in replications of the study in which the experimenter’s authority was decreased, obedience also declined.
In one replication the status of the experimenter was reduced by having the experiment take place in a building located in Bridgeport, Connecticut, rather than at the labs on the Yale University campus, and the research was ostensibly sponsored by a private commercial research firm instead of by the university. In this study, less obedience was observed (only 48% of the participants delivered the maximum shock). Full obedience was also reduced (to 20%) when the experimenter’s ability to express his authority was limited by having him sit in an adjoining room and communicate to the teacher by telephone.
And when the experimenter left the room and had another student (actually a confederate) give the instructions for him, obedience was also reduced to 20%. In addition to the role of authority, Milgram’s studies also confirmed the role of unanimity in producing obedience. When another research participant (again an experimental confederate) began by giving the shocks but then later refused to continue and the participant was asked to take over, only 10% were obedient.
And if two experimenters were present but only one proposed shocking while the other argued for stopping the shocks, all the research participants took the more benevolent advice and did not shock. But perhaps most telling were the studies in which Milgram allowed the participants to choose their own shock levels or in which one of the experimenters suggested that they should not356 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming actually use the shock machine.
In these situations, there was virtually no shocking. These conditions show that people do not like to harm others, and when given a choice they will not. On the other hand, the social situation can create powerful, and potentially deadly, social influence.
One final note about Milgram’s studies: Although Milgram explicitly focused on the situational factors that led to greater obedience, these have been found to interact with certain personality characteristics (yet another example of a person-situation interaction). Specifically, authoritarianism (a tendency to prefer things to be simple rather than complex and to hold traditional values), conscientiousness (a tendency to be responsible, orderly, and dependable), and agreeableness (a tendency to be good natured, cooperative, and trusting) are all related to higher levels of obedience whereas higher moral reasoning (the manner in which one makes ethical judgments) and social intelligence (an ability to develop a clear perception of the situation using situational cues) both predict resistance to the demands of the authority figure (Bègue et al., 2014; Blass, 1991). Before moving on to the next section, it is worth noting that although we have discussed both conformity and obedience in this chapter, they are not the same thing.
While both are forms of social influence, we most often tend to conform to our peers, whereas we obey those in positions of authority. Furthermore, the pressure to conform tends to be implicit, whereas the order to obey is typically rather explicit. And finally, whereas people don’t like admitting to having conformed (especially via normative social influence), they will more readily point to the authority figure as the source of their actions (especially when they have done something they are embarrassed or ashamed of).6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 357 Social Psychology in the Public Interest Figure 6.
11 The Stanford Prison Study and Abu Ghraib In Milgram’s research we can see a provocative demonstration of how people who have power can control the behavior of others. Can our understanding of the social psychological factors that produce obedience help us explain the events that occurred in 2004 at Abu Ghraib, the Iraqi prison in which U.S. soldiers physically and psychologically tortured their Iraqi prisoners?
The social psychologist Philip Zimbardo thinks so. He notes the parallels between the events that occurred at Abu Ghraib and the events that occurred in the “prison study” that he conducted in 1971 (Stanford Prison Study). In that study, Zimbardo and his colleagues set up a mock prison.
They selected 23 student volunteers and divided them into two groups. One group was chosen to be the “prisoners.” They were picked up at their homes by actual police officers, “arrested,” and brought to the prison to be guarded by the other group of students—the “guards.” The two groups were placed in a setting that was designed to look like a real prison, and the role-play began.358 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming The study was expected to run for two weeks.
However, on the second day, the prisoners tried to rebel against the guards. The guards quickly moved to stop the rebellion by using both psychological punishment and physical abuse. In the ensuing days, the guards denied the prisoners food, water, and sleep; shot them with fire-extinguisher spray; threw their blankets into the dirt; forced them to clean toilet bowls with their bare hands; and stripped them naked.
On the fifth night the experimenters witnessed the guards putting bags over the prisoners’ heads, chaining their legs, and marching them around. At this point, a former student who was not involved with the study spoke up, declaring the treatment of the prisoners to be immoral. As a result, the researchers stopped the experiment early.
The conclusions of Zimbardo’s research were seemingly clear: people may be so profoundly influenced by their social situation that they become coldhearted jail masters who torture their victims. Arguably, this conclusion may be applied to the research team itself, which seemingly neglected ethical principles in the pursuit of their research goals. Zimbardo’s research may help us understand the events that occurred at Abu Ghraib, a military prison used by the U.S.
military following the successful toppling of the dictator Saddam Hussein. Zimbardo acted as an expert witness in the trial of Sergeant Chip Frederick, who was sentenced to eight years in prison for his role in the abuse at Abu Ghraib. Frederick was the army reservist who was put in charge of the night shift at Tier 1A, where the detainees were abused.
During this trial, Frederick said, “What I did was wrong, and I don’t understand why I did it.” Zimbardo believes that Frederick acted exactly like the students in the prison study. He worked in a prison that was overcrowded, filthy, and dangerous, and where he was expected to maintain control over the Iraqi prisoners—in short, the situation he found himself in was very similar to that of Zimbardo’s prison study. In a recent interview, Zimbardo argued (you can tell that he is a social psychologist) that “human behavior is more influenced by things outside of us than inside.” He believes that, despite our moral and religious beliefs and despite the inherent goodness of people, there are times when external circumstances can overwhelm us and we will do things we never thought we were capable of doing.
He argued that “if you’re not aware that this can happen, you can be seduced by evil. We need inoculations against our own potential for evil. We have to acknowledge it.
Then we can change it” (Driefus, 2007). You may wonder whether the extreme behavior of the guards and prisoners in Zimbardo’s prison study was unique to the particular social context that he created. Recent research by Stephen Reicher and Alex Haslam (2006) suggests that this is indeed the case.
In their research, they recreated Zimbardo’s prison study while making some small, but important, changes. For one, the prisoners were not “arrested” before the study began, and the setup of the jail was less realistic. Furthermore, the researchers in this experiment told the “guards” and the “prisoners” that the groups were arbitrary and could change over time (that is, that some prisoners might be able to be promoted to guards).
The results of this study were entirely different than those found by Zimbardo. This study was also stopped early, but more because the guards felt uncomfortable in their superior position than because the prisoners were being abused. This “prison” simply did not feel like a real prison to the participants, and, as a result, they did not take on the roles they were assigned.
Again, the conclusions are clear—the specifics of the social situation, more than the people themselves, are often the most important determinants of behavior.6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 359 Types of Power One of the most influential theories of power was developed by Bertram Raven and John French (French & Raven, 1959; Raven, 1992). Raven identified five different types of power—reward power, coercive power, legitimate power, referent power, and expert power (shown in Table 6.2, “Types of Power”), arguing that each type of power involves a different type of social influence and that the different types vary in terms of whether their use will create public compliance or private acceptance. Understanding the types of power is important because it allows us to see more clearly the many ways that people can influence others.
Let’s consider these five types of power, beginning with those that are most likely to produce public compliance only and moving on to those that are more likely to produce private acceptance. Table 6.2 Types of Power Reward The ability to distribute positive or negative rewards power Coercive The ability to dispense punishments power Legitimate Authority that comes from a belief on the part of those being influenced that the person has a power legitimate right to demand obedience Referent Influence based on identification with, attraction to, or respect for the power-holder power Expert Power that comes from others’ beliefs that the power-holder possesses superior skills and power abilities Note: French and Raven proposed five types of power, which differ in their likelihood of producing public compliance or private acceptance. Reward Power Reward power occurs when one person is able to influence others by providing them with positive outcomes.
Bosses have reward power over employees because they are able to increase employees’ salary and job benefits, and teachers have reward power over students because they can assign students high marks. The variety of rewards that can be used by the powerful is almost endless and includes verbal praise or approval, the awarding of status or prestige, and even direct financial payment. The ability to wield reward power over those we want to influence is contingent on the needs of the person being influenced.
Power is greater when the person being influenced has a strong desire to obtain the reward, and power is weaker when the individual does not need the reward. A boss will have more influence on an employee who has no other job prospects than on one who is being sought after by other corporations, and expensive presents will be more effective in persuading those who cannot buy the items with their own money. Because the change in behavior that results from reward power is driven by the reward itself, its use is usually more likely to produce public compliance than private acceptance.360 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Coercive Power Coercive power is power that is based on the ability to create negative outcomes for others, for instance by bullying, intimidating, or otherwise punishing. Bosses have coercive power over employees if they are able (and willing) to punish employees by reducing their salary, demoting them to a lower position, embarrassing them, or firing them. And friends can coerce each other through teasing, humiliation, and ostracism.
people who are punished too much are likely to look for other situations that provide more positive outcomes. In many cases, power-holders use reward and coercive power at the same time—for instance, by both increasing salaries as a result of positive performance but also threatening to reduce them if the performance drops. Because the use of coercion has such negative consequences, authorities are generally more likely to use reward than coercive power (Molm, 1997).
Coercion is usually more difficult to use, since it often requires energy to keep the person from avoiding the punishment by leaving the situation altogether. And coercive power is less desirable for both the power-holder and the person being influenced because it creates an environment of negative feelings and distrust that is likely to make interactions difficult, undermine satisfaction, and lead to retaliation against the power- holder (Tepper et al., 2009). As with reward power, coercive power is more likely to produce public compliance than private acceptance.
Furthermore, in both cases the effective use of the power requires that the power-holder continually monitor the behavior of the target to be sure that he or she is complying. This monitoring may itself lead to a sense of mistrust between the two individuals in the relationship. The power-holder feels (perhaps unjustly) that the target is only complying due to the monitoring, whereas the target feels (again perhaps unjustly) that the power-holder does not trust him or her.
Legitimate Power Whereas reward and coercive power are likely to produce the desired behavior, other types of power, which are not so highly focused around reward and punishment, are more likely to create changes in attitudes (private acceptance) as well as behavior. In many ways, then, these sources of power are stronger because they produce real belief change. Legitimate power is power vested in those who are appointed or elected to positions of authority, such as teachers, politicians, police officers, and judges, and their power is successful because members of the group accept it as appropriate.
We accept that governments can levy taxes and that judges can decide the outcomes of court cases because we see these groups and individuals as valid parts of our society. Individuals with legitimate power can exert substantial influence on their followers. Those with legitimate power may not only create changes in the behavior of others but also have the power to create and change the social norms of the group.
In some cases, legitimate power is given to the authority figure as a result of laws or elections, or as part of the norms, traditions, and values of the society. The power that the experimenter had over the research participants in Milgram’s study on obedience seems to have been primarily the result of his legitimate power as a respected scientist at an important university. In other cases, legitimate power comes more informally, as a result of being a respected group member.
People who contribute to the group process and follow group norms gain status within the group and therefore earn legitimate power.6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 361 In some cases, legitimate power can even be used successfully by those who do not seem to have much power. After Hurricane Katrina hit the city of New Orleans in 2005, the people there demanded that the United States federal government help them rebuild the city. Although these people did not have much reward or coercive power, they were nevertheless perceived as good and respected citizens of the United States.
Many U.S. citizens tend to believe that people who do not have as much as others (for instance, those who are very poor) should be treated fairly and that these people may legitimately demand resources from those who have more. This might not always work, but to the extent that it does it represents a type of legitimate power—power that comes from a belief in the appropriateness or obligation to respond to the requests of others with legitimate standing.
Referent Power People with referent power have an ability to influence others because they can lead those others to identify with them. In this case, the person who provides the influence is (a) a member of an important reference group—someone we personally admire and attempt to emulate; (b) a charismatic, dynamic, and persuasive leader; or (c) a person who is particularly attractive or famous (Heath, McCarthy, & Mothersbaugh, 1994; Henrich & Gil-White, 2001; Kamins, 1989; Wilson & Sherrell, 1993). A young child who mimics the opinions or behaviors of an older sibling or a famous sportsperson, or a religious person who follows the advice of a respected religious leader, is influenced by referent power.
Referent power generally produces private acceptance rather than public compliance (Kelman, 1961). The influence brought on by referent power may occur in a passive sense because the person being emulated does not necessarily attempt to influence others, and the person who is being influenced may not even realize that the influence is occurring. In other cases, however, the person with referent power (such as the leader of a cult) may make full use of his or her status as the target of identification or respect to produce change.
In either case, referent power is a particularly strong source of influence because it is likely to result in the acceptance of the opinions of the important other. Expert Power French and Raven’s final source of power is expert power. Experts have knowledge or information, and conforming to those whom we perceive to be experts is useful for making decisions about issues for which we have insufficient expertise.
Expert power thus represents a type of informational influence based on the fundamental desire to obtain valid and accurate information, and where the outcome is likely to be private acceptance. Conformity to the beliefs or instructions of doctors, teachers, lawyers, and computer experts is an example of expert influence; we assume that these individuals have valid information about their areas of expertise, and we accept their opinions based on this perceived expertise (particularly if their advice seems to be successful in solving problems). Indeed, one method of increasing one’s power is to become an expert in a domain.
Expert power is increased for those who possess more information about a relevant topic than others do because the others must turn to this individual to gain the information. You can see, then, that if you want to influence others, it can be useful to gain as much information about the topic as you can.362 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming Research Focus Does Power Corrupt?
Having power provides some benefits for those who have it. In comparison to those with less power, people who have more power over others are more confident and more attuned to potential opportunities in their environment (Anderson & Berdahl, 2002). They are also more likely than are people with less power to take action to meet their goals (Anderson & Galinsky, 2006; Galinsky, Gruenfeld, & Magee, 2003).
Despite these advantages of having power, a little power goes a long way and having too much can be dangerous, for both the targets of the power and the power-holder himself or herself. In an experiment by David Kipnis (1972), college students played the role of “supervisors” who were supposedly working on a task with other students (the “workers”). According to random assignment to experimental conditions, one half of the supervisors were able to influence the workers through legitimate power only, by sending them messages attempting to persuade them to work harder.
The other half of the supervisors were given increased power. In addition to being able to persuade the workers to increase their output through the messages, they were also given both reward power (the ability to give small monetary rewards) and coercive power (the ability to take away earlier rewards). Although the workers (who were actually preprogrammed) performed equally well in both conditions, the participants who were given more power took advantage of it by more frequently contacting the workers and more frequently threatening them.
The students in this condition relied almost exclusively on coercive power rather than attempting to use their legitimate power to develop positive relations with the subordinates. Although it did not increase the workers’ performance, having the extra power had a negative effect on the power-holders’ images of the workers. At the end of the study, the supervisors who had been given extra power rated the workers more negatively, were less interested in meeting them, and felt that the only reason the workers did well was to obtain the rewards.
The conclusion of these researchers is clear: having power may lead people to use it, even though it may not be necessary, which may then lead them to believe that their subordinates are performing only because of the threats. Although using excess power may be successful in the short run, power that is based exclusively on reward and coercion is not likely to produce a positive environment for either the power-holder or the subordinate. People with power may also be more likely to stereotype people with less power than they have (Depret & Fiske, 1999) and may be less likely to help other people who are in need (van Kleef et al., 2008).
Although this research suggests that people may use power when it is available to them, other research has found that this is not equally true for all people—still another case of a person-situation interaction. Serena Chen and her colleagues (Chen, Lee-Chai, & Bargh, 2001) found that students who had been classified as more self-oriented (in the sense that they considered relationships in terms of what they could and should get out of them for themselves) were more likely to misuse their power, whereas students who were classified as other-oriented were more likely to use their power to help others6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 363 Leaders and Leadership One type of person who has power over others, in the sense that the person is able to influence them, is leaders. Leaders are in a position in which they can exert leadership, which is the ability to direct or inspire others to achieve goals (Chemers, 2001; Hogg, 2010).
Leaders have many different influence techniques at their disposal: In some cases they may give commands and enforce them with reward or coercive power, resulting in public compliance with the commands. In other cases they may rely on well-reasoned technical arguments or inspirational appeals, making use of legitimate, referent, or expert power, with the goal of creating private acceptance and leading their followers to achieve. Leadership is a classic example of the combined effects of the person and the social situation.
Let’s consider first the person part of the equation and then turn to consider how the person and the social situation work together to create effective leadership. Personality and Leadership Figure 6.12 The Google corporation cofounders Larry Page and Sergey Brin are good examples of transformational leaders who have been able to see new visions and to motivate their workers to achieve them.364 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming One approach to understanding leadership is to focus on person variables.
Personality theories of leadership are explanations of leadership based on the idea that some people are simply “natural leaders” because they possess personality characteristics that make them effective (Zaccaro, 2007). One personality variable that is associated with effective leadership is intelligence. Being intelligent improves leadership, as long as the leader is able to communicate in a way that is easily understood by his or her followers (Simonton, 1994, 1995).
Other research has found that a leader’s social skills, such as the ability to accurately perceive the needs and goals of the group members, are also important to effective leadership. People who are more sociable, and therefore better able to communicate with others, tend to make good leaders (Kenny & Zaccaro, 1983; Sorrentino & Boutillier, 1975). Other variables that relate to leadership effectiveness include verbal skills, creativity, self-confidence, emotional stability, conscientiousness, and agreeableness (Cronshaw & Lord, 1987; Judge, Bono, Ilies, & Gerhardt, 2002; Yukl, 2002).
And of course the individual’s skills at the task at hand are important. Leaders who have expertise in the area of their leadership will be more effective than those who do not. Because so many characteristics seem to be related to leadership skills, some researchers have attempted to account for leadership not in terms of individual traits but in terms of a package of traits that successful leaders seem to have.
Some have considered this in terms of charisma (Beyer, 1999; Conger & Kanungo, 1998). Charismatic leaders are leaders who are enthusiastic, committed, and self-confident; who tend to talk about the importance of group goals at a broad level; and who make personal sacrifices for the group. Charismatic leaders express views that support and validate existing group norms but that also contain a vision of what the group could or should be.
Charismatic leaders use their referent power to motivate, uplift, and inspire others. And research has found a positive relationship between a leader’s charisma and effective leadership performance (Simonton, 1988). Another trait-based approach to leadership is based on the idea that leaders take either transactional or transformational leadership styles with their subordinates (Avolio & Yammarino, 2003; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Moorman, & Fetter, 1990).
Transactional leaders are the more regular leaders who work with their subordinates to help them understand what is required of them and to get the job done. Transformational leaders, on the other hand, are more like charismatic leaders—they have a vision of where the group is going and attempt to stimulate and inspire their workers to move beyond their present status and to create a new and better future. Transformational leaders are those who can reconfigure or transform the group’s norms (Reicher & Hopkins, 2003).
Leadership as an Interaction between the Person and the Situation Even though there appears to be at least some personality traits that relate to leadership ability, the most important approaches to understanding leadership take into consideration both the personality characteristics of the leader and the situation in which the leader is operating. In some cases, the situation itself is important. For instance, although Winston Churchill is now regarded as having been one of the world’s greatest political leaders ever, he was not a particularly popular figure in Great Britain prior to World War II.
However, against the backdrop of the threat posed by Nazi Germany, his defiant and stubborn nature provided just the inspiration many sought. This is a classic example of how a situation can influence the perceptions of a leader’s skill. In other cases, however, both the situation and the person are critical.
One well-known person-situation approach to understanding leadership effectiveness was developed by Fred Fiedler and his colleagues (Ayman, Chemers, & Fiedler, 1995). The contingency model of6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 365 leadership effectiveness is a model of leadership effectiveness that focuses on both person variables and situational variables. Fielder conceptualized the leadership style of the individual as a relatively stable personality variable and measured it by having people consider all the people they had ever worked with and describe the person that they least liked to work with (their least preferred coworker).
Those who indicated that they only somewhat disliked their least preferred coworker were classified as relationship-oriented types of people, who were motivated to have close personal relationships with others. However, those who indicated that they did not like this coworker very much were classified as task-oriented types, who were motivated primarily by getting the job done. In addition to classifying individuals according to their leadership styles, Fiedler also classified the situations in which groups had to perform their tasks, both on the basis of the task itself and on the basis of the leader’s relationship to the group members.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 6.13, “The Contingency Model of Leadership Effectiveness,” Fiedler thought that three aspects of the group situation were important: 1. The degree to which the leader already has a good relationship with the group and the support of the group members (leader-member relations) 2. The extent to which the task is structured and unambiguous (task structure) 3.
The leader’s level of power or support in the organization (position power) Furthermore, Fielder believed that these factors were ordered in terms of their importance, with leader- member relationships being more important than task structure, which was in turn more important than position power. As a result, he was able to create eight levels of the “situational favorableness” of the group situation, which roughly range from most favorable to least favorable for the leader. The most favorable relationship involves good relationships, a structured task, and strong power for the leader, whereas the least favorable relationship involves poor relationships, an unstructured task, and weak leader power.366 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Figure 6.13 The Contingency Model of Leadership Effectiveness [Image description] The contingency model is interactionist because it proposes that individuals with different leadership styles will differ in effectiveness in different group situations. Task-oriented leaders are expected to be most effective in situations in which the group situation is very favorable because this gives the leader the ability to move the group forward, or in situations in which the group situation is very unfavorable and in which the extreme problems of the situation require the leader to engage in decisive action. However, in the situations of moderate favorableness, which occur when there is a lack of support for the leader or when the problem to be solved is very difficult or unclear, the more relationship-oriented leader is expected to be more effective.
In short, the contingency model predicts that task-oriented leaders will be most effective either when the group climate is very favorable and thus there is no need to be concerned about the group members’ feelings, or when the group climate is very unfavorable and the task-oriented leader needs to take firm control. Still another approach to understanding leadership is based on the extent to which a group member embodies the norms of the group. The idea is that people who accept group norms and behave in accordance with them are likely to be seen as particularly good group members and therefore likely to become leaders (Hogg, 2001; Hogg & Van Knippenberg, 2003).
Group members who follow group norms are seen as more trustworthy (Dirks & Ferrin, 2002) and are likely to engage in group-oriented behaviors to strengthen their leadership credentials (Platow & van Knippenberg, 2001).6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 367 Key Takeaways • Social power can be defined as the ability of a person to create conformity, even when the people being influenced may attempt to resist those changes. • Milgram’s studies on obedience demonstrated the remarkable extent to which the social situation and people with authority have the power to create obedience. • One of the most influential theories of power was developed by French and Raven, who identified five different types of power—reward power, coercive power, legitimate power, referent power, and expert power.
The types vary in terms of whether their use is more likely to create public compliance or private acceptance. • Although power can be abused by those who have it, having power also creates some positive outcomes for individuals. • Leadership is determined by person variables, situational variables, and by the person-situation interaction.
The contingency model of leadership effectiveness is an example of the last factor. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Write a paragraph that expresses your opinions about the Holocaust or about another example of obedience to authority.
Consider how social psychological research on obedience informs your interpretation of the event. 2. Imagine being a participant in Milgram’s experiment on obedience to authority.
Describe how you think you would react to the situation as it unfolds. 3. Provide an example of someone who has each of the types of power discussed in this section.
4. Consider a leader whom you have worked with in the past. What types of leadership did that person use?
Were they effective? 5. Choose a recent event that involved a very effective leader or one that involved a very poor one.
Analyze the leadership in terms of the topics discussed in this chapter. References Anderson, C., & Berdahl, J. L.
(2002). The experience of power: Examining the effects of power on approach and inhibition tendencies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1362–1377.368 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Anderson, C., & Galinsky, A. D. (2006).
Power, optimism, and risk-taking. European Journal of Social Psychology, 36, 511–536. Avolio, B.
J., & Yammarino, F. J. (2003).
Transformational and charismatic leadership: The road ahead. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Press. Ayman, R., Chemers, M.
M., & Fiedler, F. (1995). The contingency model of leadership effectiveness: Its level of analysis.
Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 147–167. Bègue, L., Beauvois, J-L., Courbet, D., Oberlé, D., Lepage, J., & Duke, A. A.
(2014). Personality predicts obedience in a Milgram paradigm. Journal of Personality.
Accepted, not yet published. Beyer, J. M.
(1999). Taming and promoting charisma to change organizations. Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), 307–330.
Blass, T. (1991). Understanding behavior in the Milgram obedience experiment: The role of personality, situations, and their interactions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(3), 398-413. Blass, T. (1999).
The Milgram paradigm after 35 years: Some things we now know about obedience to authority. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29, 955–978. Burger, J.
M. (2009). Replicating Milgram: Would people still obey today?
American Psychologist, 64(1), 1-11. Chemers, M. M.
(2001). Leadership effectiveness: An integrative review. In M.
A. Hogg & R. S.
Tindale (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of social psychology: Group processes (pp. 376–399). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Chen, S., Lee-Chai, A. Y., & Bargh, J. A.
(2001). Relationship orientation as a moderator of the effects of social power. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(2), 173–187.
Conger, J. A., & Kanungo, R. N.
(1998). Charismatic leadership in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cronshaw, S. F., & Lord, R. G.
(1987). Effects of categorization, attribution, and encoding processes on leadership perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 97–106.
Depret, E., & Fiske, S. T. (1999).
Perceiving the powerful: Intriguing individuals versus threatening groups. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35(5), 461–480. Dirks, K.
T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002).
Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and implications for research and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 611–628. Driefus, C.
(2007, April 3). Finding hope in knowing the universal capacity for evil. New York Times.
Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/03/science/03conv.html?_r=0# Fiske, S. T. (1993).
Controlling other people: The impact of power on stereotyping. American Psychologist, 48, 621–628. French, J.
R. P., & Raven, B. H.
(1959). The bases of social power. In D.
Cartwright (Ed.), Studies in social power (pp. 150–167). Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research.
Galinsky A. D., Gruenfeld, D. H, & Magee, J.
C. (2003). From power to action.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 453–466. Heath, T. B., McCarthy, M.
S., and Mothersbaugh, D. L. (1994).
Spokesperson fame and vividness6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 369 effects in the context of issue-relevant thinking: The moderating role of competitive setting. Journal of Consumer Research, 20, 520–534. Henrich, J., & Gil-White, F.
(2001). The evolution of prestige: Freely conferred status as a mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior, 22, 1–32.
Hogg, M. A. (2001).
A social identity theory of leadership. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5,184–200. Hogg, M.
A. (2010). Influence and leadership.
In S. F. Fiske, D.
T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (Vol.
2, pp. 1166–1207). New York, NY: Wiley.
Hogg, M. A., & van Knippenberg, D. (2003).
Social identity and leadership processes in groups. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 1–52. Judge, T, Bono, J., Ilies, R., & Gerhardt, M.
(2002). Personality and leadership: A qualitative and quantitative review, Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 765–780. Kamins, A.
M. (1989). Celebrity and non-celebrity in two-sided context.
Journal of Advertising Research, 29, 34–42. Kelman, H. (1961).
Processes of opinion change. Public Opinion Quarterly, 25, 57–78. Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D.
H., & Anderson, C. (2003). Power, approach, and inhibition.
Psychological Review, 110(2), 265–284. Kenny, D. A., & Zaccaro, S.
J. (1983). An estimate of variance due to traits in leadership.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 68, 678–685. Kilham, W., & Mann, L. (1974).
Level of destructive obedience as a function of transmitter and executant roles in the Milgram obedience paradigm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 692–702. Kipnis, D.
(1972). Does power corrupt? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24, 33–41.
Meeus, W. H., & Raaijmakers, Q. A.
(1986). Administrative obedience: Carrying out orders to use psychological-administrative violence. European Journal of Social Psychology, 16, 311–324.
Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 371–378. Molm, L. D.
(1997). Coercive power in social exchange. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Platow, M. J., & van Knippenberg, D. (2001).
A social identity analysis of leadership endorsement: The effects of leader in-group prototypicality and distributive intergroup fairness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1508–1519. Podsakoff, P.
M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R.
(1990). Transformational leader behaviors and their effects on followers’ trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 1, 107–142.
Raven, B. H. (1992).
A power/interaction model of interpersonal influence: French and Raven thirty years later. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7(2), 217–244. Reicher, S.
D., & Hopkins, N. (2003). On the science of the art of leadership.
In D. van Knippenberg and M. A.
Hogg (Eds.), Leadership and power: Identity processes in groups and organizations (pp. 197–209). London, UK: Sage.370 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Reicher, S., & Haslam, S. A. (2006).
Rethinking the psychology of tyranny: The BBC prison study. British Journal of Social Psychology, 45(1), 1–40. Simonton, D.
K. (1988). Presidential style: Personality, biography and performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 928–936. Simonton, D. K.
(1994). Greatness: Who makes history and why. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1995).
Personality and intellectual predictors of leadership. In D. H.
Saklofske et al. (Eds.), International handbook of personality and intelligence. Perspectives on individual differences (pp.
739–757). New York, NY: Plenum. Sorrentino, R.
M., & Boutillier, R. G. (1975).
The effect of quantity and quality of verbal interaction on ratings of leadership ability. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 11, 403–411. Tepper, B.
J., Carr, J. C., Breaux, D. M., Geider, S., Hu, C., & Hua, W.
(2009). Abusive supervision, intentions to quit, and employees’ workplace deviance: A power/dependence analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 109(2), 156–167.
van Kleef, G. A., Oveis, C., van der Löwe, I., LuoKogan, A., Goetz, J., & Keltner, D. (2008).
Power, distress, and compassion: Turning a blind eye to the suffering of others. Psychological Science, 19(12), 1315–1322. Wilson, E.
J., &. Sherrell, D. L.
(1993). Source effects in communication and persuasion: A meta- analysis of effect size. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 21, 101–112.
Yukl, G. A. (2002).
Leadership in organizations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Zaccaro, S.
J. (2007). Trait-based perspectives of leadership.
American Psychologist, 62, 6–16. Image Descriptions Figure 6.13 The Contingency Model of Leadership Effectiveness A graph demonstrating the relative effectiveness of relationship-oriented leader versus task-oriented leader, followed by a table illustrating 8 levels of situational favorableness. From the most favorable situational control to the most unfavorable situational control: • Good leader-member relations, structured task, strong leader’s position of power • Good leader-member relations, structured task, weak leader’s position of power • Good leader-member relations, unstructured task, strong leader’s position of power • Good leader-member relations, unstructured task, strong leader’s position of power • Bad leader-member relations, structured task, strong leader’s position of power • Bad leader-member relations, structured task, weak leader’s position of power • Bad leader-member relations, unstructured task, strong leader’s position of power • Bad leader-member relations, unstructured task, weak leader’s position of power [Return to Figure 6.13]6.2 Obedience, Power, and Leadership 371 Media Attributions • “Milgram Experiment v2” by Expiring frog is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence.
• “AbuGhraibAbuse-standing-on-box” by U.S. Government copyright is in the Public domain. • “Schmidt-Brin-Page-20080520” by Joi Ito is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.6.3 Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity Learning Objectives 1.
Summarize the social psychological literature concerning differences in conformity between men and women. 2. Review research concerning the relationship between culture and conformity.
3. Explain the concept of psychological reactance and describe how and when it might occur. Although we have focused to this point on the situational determinants of conformity, such as the number of people in the majority and their unanimity, we have not yet considered the question of which people are likely to conform and which people are not.
In this section, we will consider how personality variables, gender, and culture influence conformity. Person Differences Even in cases in which the pressure to conform is strong and a large percentage of individuals do conform (such as in Solomon Asch’s line-judging research), not everyone does so. There are usually some people willing and able to go against the prevailing norm.
In Asch’s study, for instance, despite the strong situational pressures, 24% of the participants never conformed on any of the trials. People prefer to have an “optimal” balance between being similar to, and different from, others (Brewer, 2003). When people are made to feel too similar to others, they tend to express their individuality, but when they are made to feel too different from others, they attempt to increase their acceptance by others.
Supporting this idea, research has found that people who have lower self-esteem are more likely to conform in comparison with those who have higher self-esteem. This makes sense because self-esteem rises when we know we are being accepted by others, and people with lower self- esteem have a greater need to belong. And people who are dependent on and who have a strong need for approval from others are also more conforming (Bornstein, 1992).
Age also matters, with individuals who are either younger or older being more easily influenced than individuals who are in their 40s and 50s (Visser & Krosnick, 1998). People who highly identify with the group that is creating the conformity are also more likely to conform to group norms, in comparison to people who don’t really care very much (Jetten, Spears, & Manstead, 1997; Terry & Hogg, 1996). However, although there are some differences among people in terms of their tendency to conform (it has even been suggested that some people have a “need for uniqueness” that leads them to be particularly likely to resist conformity; Snyder & Fromkin, 1977), research has generally found that the 373374 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming impact of person variables on conformity is smaller than the influence of situational variables, such as the number and unanimity of the majority. Gender Differences Several reviews and meta-analyses of the existing research on conformity and leadership in men and women have now been conducted, and so it is possible to draw some strong conclusions in this regard. In terms of conformity, the overall conclusion from these studies is that that there are only small differences between men and women in the amount of conformity they exhibit, and these differences are influenced as much by the social situation in which the conformity occurs as by gender differences themselves.
On average, men and women have different levels of self-concern and other-concern. Men are, on average, more concerned about appearing to have high status and may be able to demonstrate this status by acting independently from the opinions of others. On the other hand, and again although there are substantial individual differences among them, women are, on average, more concerned with connecting to others and maintaining group harmony.
Taken together, this means that, at least when they are being observed by others, men are likely to hold their ground, act independently, and refuse to conform, whereas women are more likely to conform to the opinions of others in order to prevent social disagreement. These differences are less apparent when the conformity occurs in private (Eagly, 1978, 1983). The observed gender differences in conformity have social explanations—namely that women are socialized to be more caring about the desires of others—but there are also evolutionary explanations.
Men may be more likely to resist conformity to demonstrate to women that they are good mates. Griskevicius, Goldstein, Mortensen, Cialdini, and Kenrick (2006) found that men, but not women, who had been primed with thoughts about romantic and sexual attraction were less likely to conform to the opinions of others on a subsequent task than were men who had not been primed to think about romantic attraction. In addition to the public versus private nature of the situation, the topic being discussed also is important, with both men and women being less likely to conform on topics that they know a lot about, in comparison with topics on which they feel less knowledgeable (Eagly & Chravala, 1986).
When the topic is sports, women tend to conform to men, whereas the opposite is true when the topic is fashion. Thus it appears that the small observed differences between men and women in conformity are due, at least in part, to informational influence. Because men have higher status in most societies, they are more likely to be perceived as effective leaders (Eagly, Makhijani, & Klonsky, 1992; Rojahn & Willemsen, 1994; Shackelford, Wood, & Worchel, 1996).
And men are more likely to be leaders in most cultures. For instance, women hold only about 20% of the key elected and appointed political positions in the world (World Economic Forum, 2013). There are also more men than women in leadership roles, particularly in high-level administrative positions, in many different types of businesses and other organizations.
Women are not promoted to positions of leadership as fast as men are in real working groups, even when actual performance is taken into consideration (Geis, Boston, & Hoffman, 1985; Heilman, Block, & Martell, 1995).6.3 Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity 375 Men are also more likely than women to emerge and act as leaders in small groups, even when other personality characteristics are accounted for (Bartol & Martin, 1986; Megargee, 1969; Porter, Geis, Cooper, & Newman, 1985). In one experiment, Nyquist and Spence (1986) had pairs of same- and mixed-sex students interact. In each pair there was one highly dominant and one low dominant individual, as assessed by previous personality measures.
They found that in pairs in which there was one man and one woman, the dominant man became the leader 90% of the time, but the dominant woman became the leader only 35% of the time. Keep in mind, however, that the fact that men are perceived as effective leaders, and are more likely to become leaders, does not necessarily mean that they are actually better, more effective leaders than women. Indeed, a meta-analysis studying the effectiveness of male and female leaders did not find that there were any gender differences overall (Eagly, Karau, & Makhijani, 1995) and even found that women excelled over men in some domains.
Furthermore, the differences that were found tended to occur primarily when a group was first forming but dissipated over time as the group members got to know one another individually. One difficulty for women as they attempt to lead is that traditional leadership behaviors, such as showing independence and exerting power over others, conflict with the expected social roles for women. The norms for what constitutes success in corporate life are usually defined in masculine terms, including assertiveness or aggressiveness, self-promotion, and perhaps even macho behavior.
It is difficult for women to gain power because to do so they must conform to these masculine norms, and often this goes against their personal beliefs about appropriate behavior (Rudman & Glick, 1999). And when women do take on male models of expressing power, it may backfire on them because they end up being disliked because they are acting nonstereotypically for their gender. A recent experimental study with MBA students simulated the initial public offering (IPO) of a company whose chief executive was either male or female (personal qualifications and company financial statements were held constant across both conditions).
The results indicated a clear gender bias as female chief executive officers were perceived as being less capable and having a poorer strategic position than their male counterparts. Furthermore, IPOs led by female executives were perceived as less attractive investments (Bigelow, Lundmark, McLean Parks, & Wuebker, 2012). Little wonder then that women hold fewer than 5% of Fortune 500 chief executive positions.
One way that women can react to this “double-bind” in which they must take on masculine characteristics to succeed, but if they do they are not liked, is to adopt more feminine leadership styles, in which they use more interpersonally oriented behaviors such as agreeing with others, acting in a friendly manner, and encouraging subordinates to participate in the decision-making process (Eagly & Johnson, 1990; Eagly et al., 1992; Wood, 1987). In short, women are more likely to take on a transformational leadership style than are men—doing so allows them to be effective leaders while not acting in an excessively masculine way (Eagly & Carli, 2007; Eagly, Johannesen-Schmidt, & van Egen, 2003). In sum, women may conform somewhat more than men, although these differences are small and limited to situations in which the responses are made publicly.
In terms of leadership effectiveness, there is no evidence that men, overall, make better leaders than do women. However, men do better as leaders on tasks that are “masculine” in the sense that they require the ability to direct and control people. On the other hand, women do better on tasks that are more “feminine” in the sense that they involve creating harmonious relationships among the group members.376 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming Cultural Differences In addition to gender differences, there is also evidence that conformity is greater in some cultures than others. Your knowledge about the cultural differences between individualistic and collectivistic cultures might lead you to think that collectivists will be more conforming than individualists, and there is some support for this. Bond and Smith (1996) analyzed results of 133 studies that had used Asch’s line- judging task in 17 different countries.
They then categorized each of the countries in terms of the degree to which it could be considered collectivist versus individualist in orientation. They found a significant relationship: conformity was greater in more collectivistic than in individualistic countries. Kim and Markus (1999) analyzed advertisements from popular magazines in the United States and in Korea to see if they differentially emphasized conformity and uniqueness.
As you can see in Figure 6.14, “Culture and Conformity,” they found that while U.S. magazine ads tended to focus on uniqueness (e.g., “Choose your own view!”; “Individualize”) Korean ads tended to focus more on themes of conformity (e.g., “Seven out of 10 people use this product”; “Our company is working toward building a harmonious society”). Figure 6.14 Culture and Conformity Kim and Markus (1999) found that U.S.
magazine ads tended to focus on uniqueness whereas Korean ads tended to focus more on conformity. In summary, although the effects of individual differences on conformity tend to be smaller than those of the social context, they do matter. And gender and cultural differences can also be important.
Conformity, like most other social psychological processes, represents an interaction between the situation and the person. Psychological Reactance Conformity is usually quite adaptive overall, both for the individuals who conform and for the group as a whole. Conforming to the opinions of others can help us enhance and protect ourselves by providing6.3 Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity 377 us with important and accurate information and can help us better relate to others.
Following the directives of effective leaders can help a group attain goals that would not be possible without them. And if only half of the people in your neighborhood thought it was appropriate to stop on red and go on green but the other half thought the opposite—and behaved accordingly—there would be problems indeed. But social influence does not always produce the intended result.
If we feel that we have the choice to conform or not conform, we may well choose to do so in order to be accepted or to obtain valid knowledge. On the other hand, if we perceive that others are trying to force or manipulate our behavior, the influence pressure may backfire, resulting in the opposite of what the influencer intends. Consider an experiment conducted by Pennebaker and Sanders (1976), who attempted to get people to stop writing graffiti on the walls of campus restrooms.
In some restrooms they posted a sign that read “Do not write on these walls under any circumstances!” whereas in other restrooms they placed a sign that simply said “Please don’t write on these walls.” Two weeks later, the researchers returned to the restrooms to see if the signs had made a difference. They found that there was much less graffiti in the second restroom than in the first one. It seems as if people who were given strong pressures to not engage in the behavior were more likely to react against those directives than were people who were given a weaker message.
When individuals feel that their freedom is being threatened by influence attempts and yet they also have the ability to resist that persuasion, they may experience psychological reactance, a strong motivational state that resists social influence (Brehm, 1966; Miron & Brehm, 2006). Reactance is aroused when our ability to choose which behaviors to engage in is eliminated or threatened with elimination. The outcome of the experience of reactance is that people may not conform or obey at all and may even move their opinions or behaviors away from the desires of the influencer.
Reactance represents a desire to restore freedom that is being threatened. A child who feels that his or her parents are forcing him to eat his asparagus may react quite vehemently with a strong refusal to touch the plate. And an adult who feels that she is being pressured by a car sales representative might feel the same way and leave the showroom entirely, resulting in the opposite of the sales rep’s intended outcome.
Of course, parents are sometimes aware of this potential, and even use “reverse psychology”—for example, telling a child that he or she cannot go outside when they really want the child to do so, hoping that reactance will occur. In the musical The Fantasticks, neighboring fathers set up to make the daughter of one of them and the son of the other fall in love with each other by building a fence between their properties. The fence is seen by the children as an infringement on their freedom to see each other, and as predicted by the idea of reactance, they ultimately fall in love.
In addition to helping us understand the affective determinants of conformity and of failure to conform, reactance has been observed to have its ironic effects in a number of real-world contexts. For instance, Wolf and Montgomery (1977) found that when judges give jury members instructions indicating that they absolutely must not pay any attention to particular information that had been presented in a courtroom trial (because it had been ruled as inadmissible), the jurors were more likely to use that information in their judgments. And Bushman and Stack (1996) found that warning labels on violent films (for instance, “This film contains extreme violence—viewer discretion advised”) created more reactance (and thus led participants to be more interested in viewing the film) than did similar labels378 Chapter 6.
Influencing and Conforming that simply provided information (“This film contains extreme violence”). In another relevant study, Kray, Reb, Galinsky, and Thompson (2004) found that when women were told that they were poor negotiators and would be unable to succeed on a negotiation task, this information led them to work even harder and to be more successful at the task. Finally, within clinical therapy, it has been argued that people sometimes are less likely to try to reduce the harmful behaviors that they engage in, such as smoking or drug abuse, when the people they care about try too hard to press them to do so (Shoham, Trost, & Rohrbaugh, 2004).
One patient was recorded as having reported that his wife kept telling him that he should quit drinking, saying, “If you loved me enough, you’d give up the booze.” However, he also reported that when she gave up on him and said instead, “I don’t care what you do anymore,” he then enrolled in a treatment program (Shoham et al., 2004, p. 177). Key Takeaways • Although some person variables predict conformity, overall situational variables are more important.
• There are some small gender differences in conformity. In public situations, men are somewhat more likely to hold their ground, act independently, and refuse to conform, whereas women are more likely to conform to the opinions of others in order to prevent social disagreement. These differences are less apparent when the conformity occurs in private.
• Conformity to social norms is more likely in Eastern, collectivistic cultures than in Western, independent cultures. • Psychological reactance occurs when people feel that their ability to choose which behaviors to engage in is eliminated or threatened with elimination. The outcome of the experience of reactance is that people may not conform or obey at all and may even move their opinions or behaviors away from the desires of the influencer.
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Following this paragraph are some examples of social influence and conformity. In each case, the person who is conforming has changed his or her behavior because of the expressed opinions or behaviors of another person.
In some cases, the influence of the others is more obvious; in other cases, less so. Using the principles discussed in “Chapter 1. Introducing Social Psychology“, first consider the likely role of the social situation versus the individual person.
Did the person freely engage in the behavior, did the social situation force him to engage in the behavior, or was there some combination of both? Then consider the role of underlying human goals—concern for self and concern for others. Did the conformity occur primarily because the person wanted to feel good about himself or herself or because he or she cared for those around him or her?
Then ask yourself about the role of cognition, affect, and behavior. Do you think the conformity was6.3 Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity 379 primarily behavioral, or did it involve a real change in the person’s thoughts and feelings? 1.
Bill laughed at the movie, even though he didn’t think it was all that funny; he realized he was laughing just because all his friends were laughing. 2. Frank realized that he was starting to like jazz music, in part because his roommate liked it.
3. Jennifer went to the mall with her friends so that they could help her choose a gown for the upcoming prom. 4.
Sally tried a cigarette at a party because all her friends urged her to. 5. Phil spent over $150 on a pair of sneakers, even though he couldn’t really afford them, because his best friend had a pair.
References Bartol, K. M., & Martin, D. C.
(1986). Women and men in task groups. In R.
D. Ashmore & F. K.
Del Boca (Eds.), The social psychology of female-male relations. New York, NY: Academic Press. Bigelow, L.
S., Lundmark, L., McLean Parks, J. M., & Wuebker, R. (2012).
Skirting the issues? Experimental evidence of gender bias in IPO prospectus evaluations. Social Science Research Network.
Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1556449 Bond, R., & Smith, P. B. (1996).
Culture and conformity: A meta-analysis of studies using Asch’s (1952b, 1956) line judgment task. Psychological Bulletin, 119(1), 111–137. Bornstein, R.
F. (1992). The dependent personality: Developmental, social, and clinical perspectives.
Psychological Bulletin, 112, 3–23. Brehm, J. (1966).
A theory of psychological reactance. New York, NY: Academic Press; Brewer, M. B.
(2003). Optimal distinctiveness, social identity, and the self. In M.
R. Leary & J. P.
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 480–491). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Bushman, B. J., & Stack, A. D.
(1996). Forbidden fruit versus tainted fruit: Effects of warning labels on attraction to television violence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 2, 207–226.
Eagly, A. H. (1978).
Sex differences in influenceability. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 86–116; Eagly, A. H.
(1983). Gender and social influence: A social psychological analysis. American Psychologist, 38, 971–981.
Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L.
(2007). Through the labyrinth: The truth about how women become leaders. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press; Eagly, A.
H., & Chravala, C. (1986). Sex differences in conformity: Status and gender-role interpretations.
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 10, 203–220. Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B.
T. (1990). Gender and leadership style: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 108, 233–256;380 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming Eagly, A. H., Johannesen-Schmidt, M.
C., & van Engen, M. L. (2003).
Transformational, transactional, and laissez-faire leadership styles: A meta-analysis comparing men and women. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 569–591. Eagly, A.
H., Karau, S. J., & Makhijani, M. G.
(1995). Gender and the effectiveness of leaders: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 125–145.
Eagly, A. H., Makhijani, M. G., & Klonsky, B.
G. (1992). Gender and evaluation of leaders: A meta- analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 111, 3–22; Geis, F. L., Boston, M. B., and Hoffman, N.
(1985). Sex of authority role models and achievement by men and women: Leadership performance and recognition, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 636–653; Griskevicius, V., Goldstein, N. J., Mortensen, C.
R., Cialdini, R. B., & Kenrick, D. T.
(2006). Going along versus going alone: When fundamental motives facilitate strategic (non)conformity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 281–294.
Heilman, M. E., Block, C. J., & Martell, R.
(1995). Sex stereotypes: Do they influence perceptions of managers? Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 10, 237–252.
Jetten, J., Spears, R., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(1997). Strength of identification and intergroup differentiation: The influence of group norms. European Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 603–609; Kim, H., & Markus, H.
R. (1999). Deviance or uniqueness, harmony or conformity?
A cultural analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 785–800. Kray, L.
J., Reb, J., Galinsky, A. D., & Thompson, L. (2004).
Stereotype reactance at the bargaining table: The effect of stereotype activation and power on claiming and creating value. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 399–411. Megargee, E.
I. (1969). Influence of sex roles on the manifestation of leadership.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 53, 377–382; Miron, A. M., & Brehm, J. W.
(2006). Reaktanz theorie—40 Jahre spärer. Zeitschrift fur Sozialpsychologie, 37, 9–18.
doi: 10.1024/0044-3514.37.1.9. Nyquist, L. V., & Spence, J.
T. (1986). Effects of dispositional dominance and sex role expectations on leadership behaviors.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 87–93. Pennebaker, J. W., & Sanders, D.
Y. (1976). American graffiti: Effects of authority and reactance arousal.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2, 264–267. Porter, N., Geis, F. L., Cooper, E., & Newman, E.
(1985). Androgyny and leadership in mixed-sex groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 808–823.
Rojahn, K., & Willemsen, T. M. (1994).
The evaluation of effectiveness and likability of gender-role congruent and gender-role incongruent leaders. Sex Roles, 30, 109–119; Rudman, L. A., & Glick, P.
(1999). Feminized management and backlash toward agentic women: The hidden costs to women of a kinder, gentler image of middle-managers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1004–1010.
Shackelford, S., Wood, W., & Worchel, S. (1996). Behavioral styles and the influence of women in mixed-sex groups.
Social Psychology Quarterly, 59, 284–293.6.3 Person, Gender, and Cultural Differences in Conformity 381 Shoham, V., Trost, S. E., & Rohrbaugh, M. J.
(Eds.). (2004). From state to trait and back again: Reactance theory goes clinical.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Snyder, C. R., & Fromkin, H.
L. (1977). Abnormality as a positive characteristic: The development and validation of a scale measuring need for uniqueness.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86(5), 518–527. Terry, D., & Hogg, M. (1996).
Group norms and the attitude-behavior relationship: A role for group identification. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 776–793. Visser, P.
S., & Krosnick, J. A. (1998).
The development of attitude strength over the life cycle: Surge and decline. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1389–1410. Wolf, S., & Montgomery, D.
A. (1977). Effects of inadmissible evidence and level of judicial admonishment to disregard on the judgments of mock jurors.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 7, 205–219. Wood, W. (1987).
A meta-analytic review of sex differences in group performance. Psychological Bulletin, 102, 53–71. World Economic Forum.
(2013). The global gender gap report 2013. Retrieved from http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2013/6.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Social Influence This chapter has concerned the many and varied ways that social influence pervades our everyday lives.
Perhaps you were surprised about the wide variety of phenomena—ranging from the unaware imitation of others to leadership to blind obedience to authority—that involve social influence. Yet because you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will realize why social influence is such an important part of our everyday life. For example, we conform to better meet the basic goals of self- concern and other-concern.
Conforming helps us do better by helping us make accurate, informed decisions. And conformity helps us be accepted by those we care about. Because you are now more aware of these factors, you will naturally pay attention to the times when you conform to or obey others and when you influence others to conform or obey you.
You will see how important—indeed how amazing—the effects of social influence are. You will realize that almost everything we do involves social influence, or perhaps the desire to avoid being too influenced. Furthermore, you will realize (and hopefully use this knowledge to inform your everyday decisions) that social influence is sometimes an important part of societal functioning and that at other times social influence creates bad—indeed horrible—outcomes.
You can use your understanding of social influence to help understand your own behavior. Do you think you conform too much, or too little? Do you think about when you do or don’t conform?
Are you more of a conformist or an independent thinker—and why do you prefer to be that way? What motivates you to obey the instructions of your professor? Is it expert power, coercive power, or referent power?
And perhaps you will use your understanding of the power of social influence when you judge others. When you think about the behavior of ordinary Germans during World War II, do you now better understand how much they were influenced by the social situation? Your understanding of social influence may also help you develop more satisfying relations with others.
Because you now understand the importance of social influence, you will also understand how to make use of these powers to influence others. If you are in a leadership position, you now have a better idea about the many influence techniques that are available to you and better understand their likely outcomes on others. 3836.5 Chapter Summary Conformity refers to the change in beliefs, opinions, and behaviors that occurs as the result of social influence.
The typical outcome of conformity is that people’s beliefs and behaviors become more similar to those of others around them. The change in opinions or behavior that occurs when we conform to people who we believe have accurate information is known as informational social influence. Informational social influence usually results in private acceptance, which is real change in opinions on the part of the individual.
Normative social influence occurs when we express opinions or behave in ways that help us to be accepted or that keep us from being isolated or rejected by those we care about. The outcome of normative social influence is frequently public compliance—a change in behavior that is not accompanied by an actual change in one’s private opinion. Majority influence occurs when the views or behaviors of a larger number of individuals in the current social group prevail.
Majority influence may frequently produce public compliance. One powerful example of majority influence can be found in the line-judging studies of Solomon Asch. Minority influence occurs when the views of a smaller number of individuals prevail.
Although less frequent than majority influence, minority influence can occur if the minority expresses their views consistently and confidently. An example is Moscovici’s color-judgment study. Because minorities force group members to think more fully about a topic, they can produce more creative thinking.
The extent to which we conform is influenced by the size of the majority group. The increase in the amount of conformity that is produced by adding new members to the majority group, known as the social impact of each group member, is greater for initial majority members than it is for later members. Conformity decreases sharply when there is any disagreement among the members of the group that is trying to create influence.
Unanimity is powerful in part because being the only person who is different is potentially embarrassing, and because we want to be liked by others, we may naturally want to avoid this. Milgram’s study on obedience is an example of the power of an authority to create obedience. Milgram found that when an authority figure accepted responsibility for the behavior of the individuals, 65% of the participants followed his instructions and administered what they thought was a severe and dangerous shock to another person.
The conformity observed in Milgram’s study was due in part to the authority of the experimenter. In a replication when the experimenter had lower status, obedience was reduced. Obedience was also reduced when the experimenter’s ability to express his authority was limited by having him sit in an adjoining room and communicate to the teacher by telephone.
Milgram’s studies also confirmed the role of unanimity in producing conformity. 385386 Chapter 6. Influencing and Conforming Social power is the ability of one individual to create behavioral or belief changes in another person.
Five types of social power—reward, coercive, legitimate, referent, and expert power—vary in terms of whether they are more likely to create private acceptance or public compliance. Leaders use many types of power to influence others. Some approaches to understanding the nature of leadership have focused on the personality of the leader, finding that variables such as intelligence and sociability are associated with good leaders.
Other leadership styles, such as those exhibited by charismatic and transformational leaders, have also been studied. Other approaches, including the contingency model of leadership effectiveness, examine the conditions under which different types of leaders are most likely to be effective. People with lower self-esteem are more likely to conform than are those with higher self-esteem, and people who are dependent on and who have a strong need for approval from others are also more conforming.
Men, on average, are more concerned about appearing to have high status by acting independently from the opinions of others; they are more likely to resist changing their beliefs in public than are women. In contrast, women, on average, are more concerned with connecting to others and maintaining group harmony; they are more likely to conform to the opinions of others in order to prevent social disagreement. Men and women differ in their preferred leadership styles, such that women use more relationship- oriented approaches than men use.
Although men are perceived to be better leaders than women, and often are more likely to become leaders, there is no evidence that either men or women are more effective leaders. When individuals feel that their freedom is being threatened by influence attempts, and yet they also have the ability to resist that persuasion, they may develop psychological reactance and not conform at all. Reactance has been shown to occur in many real-world contexts.Chapter 7.
Liking and Loving Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Initial Attraction • Summarize the variables that lead to initial attraction between people. • Outline the variables that lead us to perceive someone as physically attractive, and explain why physical attractiveness is so important in liking.
• Describe the ways that similarity and complementarity influence our liking for others. • Define the concept of mere exposure, and explain how proximity influences liking. • Explore the relationship between affect and attraction.
2. Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long-Term • Outline the factors that define close relationships. • Distinguish between communal and exchange relationships.
• Explore Sternberg’s triangular theory of love. • Review research on romantic love and attention to others. • Outline the role of attachment style in close relationships.
• Consider the impact of Internet behaviors on intimate relationships. • Review some important factors that can help romantic relationships to be successful. • Explore key factors that contribute to the ending of close relationships.
Britain’s Longest Married Couple Celebrate a Quiet 80th Anniversary Frank and Anita Milford are in some ways your average couple: They met in 1926 at a YMCA dance, married in 1928, had two children, and lived together in the same three-bedroom house their entire lives. But unlike many other couples, Frank and Anita’s marriage lasted—in fact, it really lasted. In May 2008, the pair equaled the record for being Britain’s longest married couple—80 years of marriage.
387388 Dr. Hammond Tarry To celebrate their 80th wedding anniversary, Frank (100 years old), and Anita (99 years old) spent a quiet weekend together—pretty typical of most of their days. “At our age that’s all you need,” said Mr.
Milford. “Just us together, no big fuss.” Frank and Anita indicated that one of the secrets to a successful marriage was to “share a little kiss and cuddle every night before bed. It’s our golden rule.” The Milfords believe that making time for one another is vital to keeping the relationship healthy.
They claimed that respect and a process of “give and take” are great ways to sustain a relationship. “We do everything together even after nearly 80 years.” Like most couples who have been together for a number of years, there are still some cross words and everyday squabbles. Regardless, their relationship remains one that is loving and healthy.
Source: Miller, V. (2008, 24 May). Britain’s longest married couple celebrate a quiet 80th anniversary.
The Telegraph. Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2020233/Britains-longest- married-couple-celebrate-a-quiet-80th-anniversary.html. In prior chapters, we have already begun to talk about some of the ways that we think about and interact with the people in our social worlds.
In Chapter 2, for instance, in our exploration of social cognition, we considered how limited abilities to forecast others’ trading behaviors and overconfidence in the decisions that investors made helped to create the global financial crisis in 2008. In Chapter 3, in examining social influences on the self, we saw how the cultural groups we belong to can influence our sense of who we are. When we discussed person perception processes in Chapter 5, we saw that we often put too much weight on people’s personal characteristics and not enough on the situations they are in when we try to make sense of their behaviors.
A lot of these areas of research, though, have explored our cognition and behaviors regarding other people in general, rather than specific people we are close to. In this chapter, we will turn our attention to our significant others and explore social psychological contributions to our understanding of close relationships. We all have many basic desires and needs that are often met in our close relationships, particularly with those others who provide social support, which is the approval, assistance, advice, and comfort that we receive from those with whom we have developed stable positive relationships (Taylor, 2007).
Close relationships are relationships between people that are characterized by loving, caring, commitment, and intimacy—such as those between adult friends, dating partners, lovers, and married couples (Clark & LeMay, 2010; Hendrick & Hendrick, 2000). These relationships are determined by biological, evolutionary, individual, and cultural factors. Successful close relationships, like Anita and Frank Milford’s 80-year marriage, often involve the positive influence of cognitive variables, including perceptions of similarity with the other, interdependence, commitment, and the incorporation of other into the self-concept, as well as affective variables, including attachment, intimacy, and commitment.
Our close relationships help us meet the goals of self-concern and other-concern. In this chapter, we will consider the benefits that come from our close relationships, the principles that lead people to become attracted to others, and the variables that help create stable, healthy, and happy close relationships. In addition to being vitally important to us in an evolutionary sense (e.g., effectivePrinciples of Social Psychology 389 child rearing requires committed and effective parents), close relationships bring us health and happiness when we are able to create successful ones; they may produce a profound sense of loneliness and sadness when we are not.
Figure 7.1 Close relationships form the basis of human reproduction, child rearing, and life satisfaction. People are well aware of the importance of having other people in their lives. When they are asked what makes them happy, people of all ages indicate that having friendships and good relationships with others is what they care about the most (Baumeister & Leary, 1995).
And, as we saw in Chapter 3, our self-esteem is strongly influenced by how much we feel that we are accepted by others (Leary, 2005; Leary & Cox, 2008). People who do not feel that they are able to develop the types and quality of social relationships that they would prefer to have are lonely—a highly unpleasant and potentially unhealthy state (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Close relationships also keep us healthy.
People who do not have adequate social support in the form of friends and family have more physical and mental health problems than do those with adequate social relationships (Cacioppo, Hawkley, & Bernston, 2003; Cacioppo et al., 2002).390 Dr. Hammond Tarry In summary, our close relationships make us happy and healthy, and the lack of them leaves us lonely and hurting. We experience higher self-efficacy, self-esteem, and positive mood when we believe that our friends and partners are responding to us supportively and with a concern for our needs and our own welfare.
Our relationships with others help us buffer the negative effects of stress, avoid unhealthy behaviors, and cope with serious physical illness. And our close relationships allow us to express our fundamental desires to reach out and respond to other people. References Baumeister, R., & Leary, M.
(1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick, W. (2008).
Loneliness: Human nature and the need for social connection. New York, NY: W. W.
Norton. Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L.
C., & Bernston, G. G. (2003).
The anatomy of loneliness. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12(3), 71–74; Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L.
C., Crawford, E., Ernst, J. M., Burleson, M. H., Kowalewski, R.
B,…Berntson, G. G. (2002).
Loneliness and health: Potential mechanisms. Psychosomatic Medicine, 64(3), 407–417. Clark, M.
S., & Lemay, E. P., Jr. (2010).
Close relationships. In S. T.
Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 898–940).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (Eds.).
(2000). Close relationships: A sourcebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leary, M. R. (2005).
Sociometer theory and the pursuit of relational value: Getting to the root of self- esteem. European Review of Social Psychology, 16, 75–111. Leary, M.
R., & Cox, C. B. (Eds.).
(2008). Belongingness motivation: A mainspring of social action. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Taylor, S. E. (2007).
Social support. In H. S.
Friedman & R. C. Silver (Eds.), Foundations of health psychology (pp.
145–171). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Media Attributions • “family portrait” by Yoni Lerner is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.
• “Love In The Air” by Matt Neighbors is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence. • “Lots of Love” by Aaron Guy Leroux is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.7.1 Initial Attraction Learning Objectives 1. Summarize the variables that lead to initial attraction between people.
2. Outline the variables that lead us to perceive someone as physically attractive, and explain why physical attractiveness is so important in liking. 3.
Describe the ways that similarity and complementarity influence our liking for others. 4. Define the concept of mere exposure, and explain how proximity influences liking.
5. Explore the relationship between affect and attraction. When we say that we like or love someone, we are experiencing interpersonal attraction—the strength of our liking or loving for another person.
Although interpersonal attraction occurs between friends, family members, and other people in general, and although our analysis can apply to these relationships as well, our primary focus in this chapter will be on romantic attraction, whether in opposite-sex or same-sex relationships. There is a large literature on the variables that lead us to like others in our initial interactions with them, and we’ll review the most important findings here (Sprecher, Wenzel, & Harvey, 2008). Physical Attractiveness Although it may seem inappropriate or shallow to admit it, and although it is certainly not the only determinant of liking, people are strongly influenced, at least in initial encounters, by the physical attractiveness of their partners (Swami & Furnham, 2008).
Elaine Walster and her colleagues (Walster, Aronson, Abrahams, & Rottman, 1966) arranged a field study in which college boys and girls were randomly paired with one another at a “computer dance.” After the partners had danced and talked for a couple of hours, they were interviewed separately about their own preferences and characteristics as well as about their perceptions of their date. Walster and her colleagues found that the only important determinant of participants’ liking for their date was his or her physical attractiveness. None of the other characteristics—even the perceived intelligence of the partner—mattered.
Perhaps this finding doesn’t surprise you too much, given the importance of physical attractiveness in popular culture. Movies and TV shows often feature unusually attractive people, TV ads use attractive people to promote their products, and many people spend considerable amounts of money each year to make themselves look more attractive. Even infants who are only a year old prefer to look at faces that adults consider attractive rather than at unattractive faces (Langlois, Ritter, Roggman, & Vaughn, 1991).
391392 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving People who are attractive are also seen as having a variety of positive characteristics, and these traits are activated quickly and spontaneously when we see their faces (Olson & Marshuetz, 2005; van Leeuwen & Macrae, 2004). For instance, more attractive people are seen as more sociable, altruistic, and intelligent than their less attractive counterparts (Griffin & Langlois, 2006).
Similar patterns have been found in relation to online contexts. For example, those judged more attractive on the basis of their online dating site photographs are also rated as having more positive profiles in terms of text content (Brand, Bonatsos, D’Orazio, & DeShong, 2012). Attractive people also have more choices of sex partners (Epstein, Klinkenberg, Scandell, Faulkner, & Claus, 2007), are more likely to be offered jobs (Dubois & Pansu, 2004), and may even live longer (Henderson & Anglin, 2003).
These positive evaluations of and behavior toward attractive people likely relate to the belief that external attractiveness signifies positive internal qualities, which has been referred to as the what is beautiful is good stereotype (Dion, Berscheid, & Walster, 1972). Although it is sometimes said that “beauty is in the eyes of the beholder” (i.e., that each person has his or her own idea about what is beautiful), this is not completely true. There is good agreement among people, including children, and within and across cultures, about which people are most physically attractive (Berry, 2000; Ramsey, Langlois, Hoss, Rubenstein, & Griffin, 2004).
This agreement is in part due to shared norms within cultures about what is attractive, which may of course vary among cultures, but it is also due to evolutionary predispositions to attend to and be influenced by specific characteristics of others. Leslie Zebrowitz and her colleagues have extensively studied the tendency for both men and women to prefer facial features that have youthful characteristics (Zebrowitz, 1996). These features include large, round, and widely spaced eyes, a small nose and chin, prominent cheekbones, and a large forehead.
Zebrowitz has found that individuals who have youthful-looking faces are more liked, are judged as warmer and more honest, and also receive other positive outcomes. Parents give baby-faced children fewer chores and punishments, and people with young-looking faces are also required to pay lower monetary awards in courtroom trials (Zebrowitz & McDonald, 1991). On the other hand, baby-faced individuals are also seen as less competent than their more mature-looking counterparts (Zebrowitz & Montpare, 2005).7.1 Initial Attraction 393 Figure 7.2 Leonardo DiCaprio.
Leonardo DiCaprio may be popular in part because he has a youthful-looking face. The preference for youth is found in our perceptions of both men and women but is somewhat stronger for our perceptions of women (Wade, 2000). This is because for men, although we do tend to prefer youthful faces, we also prefer stereotypically masculine faces—those with low, broad jaws and with pronounced bone ridges and cheekbones—and these men tend to look somewhat older (Rhodes, 2006).
We may like baby-faced people because they remind us of babies, or perhaps because we respond to baby-faced people positively, they may act more positively to us. Some faces are more symmetrical than others. People are more attracted to faces that are more symmetrical in comparison with those that are less symmetrical.
This may be in part because of the perception that people with symmetrical faces are more healthy and thus make better reproductive mates (Rhodes, 2006; Rhodes et al., 2001) and in part because symmetrical faces seem more familiar and thus less threatening to us (Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). The attraction to symmetry is not limited to face perception. Body symmetry is also a likely indicator of good genes, and women favor more symmetrical men as sexual partners (Gangestad & Thornhill, 1997).
Symmeter provides software to check if your own face is perfectly symmetrical.394 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving Figure 7.3 Symmetrical Faces Are Attractive. This model is perhaps seen as so attractive because her face is so perfectly symmetrical.
Although you might think that we would prefer faces that are unusual or unique, in fact the opposite is true (Langlois, Roggman, & Musselman, 1994). Langlois and Roggman (1990) showed college students the faces of men and women. The faces were composites made up of the average of 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 faces.
The researchers found that the more faces that were averaged into the stimulus, the more attractive it was judged (Figure 7.4, “Facial Averageness”). As with the findings for facial symmetry, one possible explanation for our liking of average faces is that because they are more similar to the ones that we have frequently seen, they are thus more familiar to us (Grammer, Fink, Juette, Ronzal, & Thornhill, 2002).7.1 Initial Attraction 395 Figure 7.4 Facial Averageness. These images present differences in facial averageness.
The images at the bottom are more average than those at the top. Other determinants of perceived attractiveness are healthy skin, good teeth, a smiling expression, and good grooming (Jones, Pelham, Carvall, & Mirenberg, 2004; Rhodes, 2006; Willis, Esqueda, & Schacht, 2008). These features may also have evolutionary significance—people with these characteristics probably appear to be healthy.
Although the preferences for youth, symmetry, and averageness appear to be universal, at least some differences in perceived attractiveness are due to social factors. What is seen as attractive in one culture may not be seen as attractive in another, and what is attractive in a culture at one time may not be attractive at another time. To consider one example, in modern Western cultures, people prefer those who have little excess fat and who look physically fit (Crandall, Merman, & Hebl, 2009; Hönekopp, Rudolph, Beier, Liebert, & Müller, 2007; Weeden & Sabini, 2005).
However, the norm of thinness has not always been in place. The preference for women with slender, masculine, and athletic looks has become stronger over the past 50 years in Western cultures, and this can be seen by comparing the figures of female movie stars from the 1940s and 1950s with those of today. In contrast to the relatively universal preferences for youth, symmetry, and averageness, other cultures do not show such a strong propensity for thinness (Anderson, Crawford, Nadeau, & Lindberg, 1992).
In cultures where food is more scarce, for example, being heavier as opposed to thinner is more associated with perceived attractiveness (Nelson & Morrison, 2005).396 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving Gender Differences in Perceived Attractiveness You might wonder whether men and women find different mates attractive. The answer is yes, although as in most cases with gender differences, the differences are outweighed by overall similarities.
Overall, both men and women value physical attractiveness, as well as certain personality characteristics, such as kindness, humor, dependability, intelligence, and sociability; this is true across many different cultures (Berry, 2000; Li, Bailey, Kenrick, & Linsenmeier, 2002). For men, however, the physical attractiveness of women is most important; women, although also interested in the attractiveness of men, are relatively more interested in the social status of a potential partner. When they are forced to choose one or the other, women from many different cultures have been found to more often prioritize a man’s status over his physical attractiveness, whereas men tend to prioritize a woman’s attractiveness over her status (Li, Bailey, Kenrick, & Linsenmeier, 2002).
The differences between the preferences of men and women for opposite-sex romantic partners have been demonstrated in archival research that has analyzed the ads placed in the classifieds of newspapers and online profiles. The personal ads that men place when they are searching for women tend to focus on the preferred physical appearance of the desired partner. Personal ads placed by women seeking men, on the other hand, are more likely to specify the preferred partner’s status and material resources (Harrison & Saeed, 1977; Wiederman, 1993).
Furthermore, women actually respond more to men who advertise their (high) income and educational levels, whereas men are less interested in this information in women’s ads (Baize & Schroeder, 1995). These findings seem to be due to universal preferences of men and women, because similar patterns have been found across cultures, and also in ads seeking same-sex partners (Buss, 1989). Age also matters, such that the preference for youthful partners is more important for men than for women.
Women have been found to be more likely to respond to personal ads placed by relatively older men, whereas men tend to respond to ads placed by younger women—men of all ages (even teenagers) are most attracted to women who are in their 20s. Younger people (and particularly younger women) are more fertile than older people, and research suggests that men may thus be evolutionarily predisposed to like them more (Buunk, Dijkstra, Kenrick, & Warntjes, 2001; Dunn, Brinton, & Clark, 2010; Kenrick & Li, 2000). Another research finding consistent with the idea that men are looking for cues to fertility in their partners is that across many cultures, men have a preference for women with a low waist-to-hip ratio (i.e., large hips and a small waist), a shape that is likely to indicate fertility.
On the other hand, women prefer men with a more masculine-appearing waist-to-hip ratio (similar waist and hip size; Singh, 1995; Swami, 2006). Recent research, however, has suggested that these preferences, too, may be in part due to a preference for averageness, rather than to a specific preference for a particular waist-to-hip ratio (Donohoe, von Hippel, & Brooks, 2009). Men across a wide range of cultures are more willing, on average, to have casual sex than are women, and their standards for sex partners tend to be lower (Petersen & Hyde, 2010; Saad, Eba, & Sejan, 2009).
And when asked about their regrets in life, men are more likely to wish they had had sex with more partners, whereas women more often than men wished they had tried harder to avoid getting involved with men who did not stay with them (Roese et al., 2006). These differences may be influenced by differential evolutionary-based predispositions of men and women. Evolutionary arguments suggest that women should be more selective than men in their choices of sex partners7.1 Initial Attraction 397 because they must invest more time in bearing and nurturing their children than do men (most men do help out, of course, but women simply do more; Buss & Kenrick, 1998).
Because they do not need to invest a lot of time in child rearing, men may be evolutionarily predisposed to be more willing and desiring of having sex with many different partners and may be less selective in their choice of mates. Women on the other hand, because they must invest substantial effort in raising each child, should be more selective. But gender differences in mate preferences may also be accounted for in terms of social norms and expectations.
Overall, on average, across the world as a whole, women still tend to have lower status than men, and as a result, they may find it important to attempt to raise their status by marrying men who have more of it. Men who, on average, already have higher status may be less concerned in this regard, allowing them to focus relatively more on physical attractiveness. Consistent with these arguments, some studies show that women’s preference for men of high status, rather than for physically attractive men, is greatest in cultures in which women are less well educated, poorer, and have less control over conception and family size (Petersen & Hyde, 2010).
Why Is Physical Attractiveness So Important? You might find yourself wondering why people find physical attractiveness so important when it seems to say so little about what the person is really like as a person. If beauty is really only “skin deep,” as the proverb goes, why are we so concerned with it?
One reason that we like attractive people is because they are rewarding. We like being around attractive people because they are enjoyable to look at and because being with them makes us feel good about ourselves. Attractiveness can imply high status, and we naturally like being around people who have it.
Furthermore, the positive features of attractive people tend to “rub off” on those around them as a result of associational learning (Sigall & Landy, 1973). As we touched on earlier in our discussion of the what is beautiful is good heuristic, we may also like attractive people because they are seen as better friends and partners. Physically more attractive people are seen as more dominant, sexually warm, mentally healthy, intelligent, and socially skilled than are physically less attractive people (Eagly, Ashmore, Makhijani, & Longo, 1991).
These assumptions about the internal qualities of attractive people also show some cross-cultural consistency. For example, individuals from Eastern and Western cultures tend to agree that attractiveness signifies qualities like sociability and popularity. On the other hand, there is some evidence that those from collectivistic cultures, which stress interdependence, tend to equate attractiveness with traits related to concern for others than those from more independently oriented, individualistic cultures (Wheeler & Kim, 1997).
The opposite was found in regards to traits stressing independence. One outcome of favorable evaluations of and behaviors toward attractive people is that they receive many social benefits from others. Attractive people are given better grades on essay exams, are more successful on job interviews, and receive lighter sentences in court judgments in comparison with their less attractive counterparts (Hosoda, Stone-Romero, & Coats, 2003).
We are all of course aware of the physical attractiveness stereotype and make use of it when we can. We try to look our best on dates, at job interviews, and (not necessary, we hope!) for court appearances.398 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving As with many stereotypes, there may be some truth to the what is beautiful is good stereotype.
Research has found at least some evidence for the idea that attractive people are actually more sociable, more popular, and less lonely compared with less attractive individuals (Diener, Wolsic, & Fujita, 1995). These results are probably partly the result of self-fulfilling prophecies. Because people expect attractive others to be friendly and warm, and because they want to be around them, they treat attractive people more positively than they do unattractive people.
In the end, this may lead attractive people to develop these positive characteristics (Zebrowitz, Andreoletti, Collins, Lee, & Blumenthal, 1998). However, as with most stereotypes, our expectations about the different characteristics of attractive and unattractive individuals are much stronger than the real differences between them. Similarity: We Like Those Who Are Like Us Although it is a very important variable, finding someone physically attractive is of course often only the first stage in developing a close relationship with another person.
If we find someone attractive, we may want to pursue the relationship. And if we are lucky, that person will also find us attractive and be interested in the possibility of developing a closer relationship. At this point, we will begin to communicate, sharing our values, beliefs, and interests, and begin to determine whether we are compatible in a way that leads to increased liking.
Relationships are more likely to develop and be maintained to the extent that the partners share external, demographic characteristics, and internal ones like values and beliefs. Research across many cultures has found that people tend to like and associate with others who share their age, education, race, religion, level of intelligence, and socioeconomic status (Watson et al., 2004). It has even been found that taller people tend to like other tall people, that happy people tend to like other happy people, and that people particularly enjoy being with others who have the same birthday and a similar sense of humor (Jones, Pelham, Carvallo, & Mirenberg, 2004; Pinel, Long, Landau, Alexander, & Pyszczynski, 2006).
One classic study (Newcomb, 1961) arranged for male undergraduates, all strangers, to live together in a house while they were going to school. The men whose attitudes were similar during the first week ended up being friends, whereas those who did not initially share attitudes were significantly less likely to become friends. Why Does Similarity Matter?
Similarity leads to attraction for a variety of reasons. For one, similarity makes things easier. You can imagine that if you only liked to go to action movies but your partner only liked to go to foreign films, this would create difficulties in choosing an evening activity.
Things would be even more problematic if the dissimilarity involved something even more important, such as your attitudes toward the relationship itself. Perhaps you want to have sex but your partner doesn’t, or perhaps your partner wants to get married but you don’t. These dissimilarities are going to create real problems.
Romantic relationships in which the partners hold different religious and political orientations or different attitudes toward important issues such as premarital sex, marriage, and child rearing are of course not impossible—but they are more complicated and take more effort to maintain. In addition to being easier, relationships with those who are similar to us are also reinforcing. Imagine you are going to a movie with your very best friend.
The movie begins, and you realize that you are starting to like it a lot. At this point, you might look over at your friend and wonder how she is reacting7.1 Initial Attraction 399 to it. One of the great benefits of sharing beliefs and values with others is that those others tend to react the same way to events as you do.
Wouldn’t it be painful if every time you liked a movie, your best friend hated it, and every time your friend liked it, you hated it? But you probably don’t need to worry too much about this, because your friend is probably your friend in good part because he or she likes the same things you like. Odds are that if you like the movie, your friend will too, and because he or she does, you can feel good about yourself and about your opinions of what makes a good movie.
Sharing our values with others and having others share their values with us help us validate the worthiness of our self-concepts. Finding similarities with another makes us feel good and makes us feel that the other person will reciprocate our liking for them (Singh, Yeo, Lin, & Tan, 2007). Status Similarity Many people want to have friends and form relationships with people who have high status.
They prefer to be with people who are healthy, attractive, wealthy, fun, and friendly. But their ability to attract such high-status partners is limited by the principles of social exchange. It is no accident that attractive people are more able to get dates with other attractive people, for example.
The basic principles of social exchange and equity dictate that there will be general similarity in status among people in close relationships because attractiveness is a resource that allows people to attract other people with resources (Kalick & Hamilton, 1986; Lee, Loewenstein, Ariely, Hong, & Young, 2008). Of course, there are exceptions to every rule, and although it seems surprising to us when one partner appears much more attractive than the other, we may well assume that the less attractive partner is offering some type of (perhaps less visible) social status in return. There is still one other type of similarity that is important in determining whether a relationship will grow and continue, and it is also based on the principles of social exchange and equity.
The finding is rather simple—we tend to prefer people who seem to like us about as much as we like them. Imagine, for instance, that you have met someone and you are hoping to pursue a relationship with that person. You begin to give yourself to the relationship by opening up to the other person, telling him or her about yourself and making it clear that you would like to pursue a closer relationship.
You make yourself available to spend time with the person and contact him or her regularly. You hope that he or she feels the same amount of liking, and that you will receive the same type of behaviors in return. If the person does not return the openness and giving, the relationship is not going to go very far.
Relationships in which one person likes the other much more than the other likes him or her can be inherently unstable because they are not balanced or equitable. An unfortunate example of such an imbalanced relationship occurs when one individual continually attempts to contact and pursue a relationship with another person who is not interested in one. It is difficult for the suitor to give up the pursuit because he or she feels passionately in love with the other, and his or her self-esteem will be hurt if the other person is rejecting.
But the situation is also not comfortable for the individual who is being pursued because that person feels both guilty about rejecting the suitor and angry that the suitor continues the pursuit (Baumeister & Wotman, 1992). Such situations are not uncommon and require that the individual who is being pursued make it completely clear that he or she is not interested in any further contact. There is a clear moral to the importance of liking similarity, and it pays to remember it in everyday life.
If we act toward others in a positive way, this expresses liking and respect for them, and the others will likely return the compliment. Being liked, praised, and even flattered by others is rewarding, and400 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving (unless it is too blatant and thus ingratiating, as we saw when we discussed self-presentation) we can expect that others will enjoy it.
In sum, similarity is probably the most important single determinant of liking. Although we may sometimes prefer people who have different interests and skills from ours (Beach, Whitaker, Jones, & Tesser, 2001; Tiedens & Jimenez, 2003), when it comes to personality traits, it is similarity that matters—complementarity (being different from the other) just does not generally have much influence on liking. Proximity If someone were to ask you who you might end up marrying (assuming you are not married already and would like to get married), they would guess that you’d respond with a list of perhaps the preferred personality traits or an image of your desired mate.
You’d probably say something about being attractive, rich, creative, fun, caring, and so forth. And there is no question that such individual characteristics matter. But social psychologists realize that there are other aspects that are perhaps even more important.
Consider this: You’ll never marry someone whom you never meet! Although that seems obvious, it’s also really important. There are about 7 billion people in the world, and you are only going to have the opportunity to meet a tiny fraction of those people before you marry.
This also means that you are likely to marry someone who’s pretty similar to you because, unless you travel widely, most of the people you meet are going to share at least part of your cultural background and therefore have some of the values that you hold. In fact, the person you marry probably will live in the same city as you, attend the same school, take similar classes, work in a similar job and be similar to you in other respects (Kubitschek & Hallinan, 1998). Although meeting someone is an essential first step, simply being around another person also increases liking.
People tend to become better acquainted with, and more fond of, each other when the social situation brings them into repeated contact, which is the basic principle of proximity liking. For instance, research has found that students who sit next to each other in class are more likely to become friends, and this is true even when the seating is assigned by the instructor (Back, Schmukle, & Egloff, 2008). Festinger, Schachter, and Back (1950) studied friendship formation in people who had recently moved into a large housing complex.
They found not only that people became friends with those who lived near them but that people who lived nearer the mailboxes and at the foot of the stairway in the building (where they were more likely to come into contact with others) were able to make more friends than those who lived at the ends of the corridors in the building and thus had fewer social encounters with others. The mere exposure effect refers to the tendency to prefer stimuli (including, but not limited to, people) that we have seen frequently. Consider the research findings presented in Figure 7.5, “Mere Exposure in the Classroom.”In this study, Moreland and Beach (1992) had female confederates attend a large lecture class of over 100 students 5, 10, or 15 times or not at all during a semester.
At the end of the term, the students were shown pictures of the confederates and asked to indicate if they recognized them and also how much they liked them. The number of times the confederates had attended class7.1 Initial Attraction 401 didn’t influence the other students’ recognition of them, but it did influence their liking for them. As predicted by the mere-exposure hypothesis, students who had attended more often were liked more.
Figure 7.5 Mere Exposure in the Classroom Richard Moreland and Scott Beach had female confederates visit a class 5, 10, or 15 times or not at all over the course of a semester. Then the students rated their liking of the confederates. The mere exposure effect is clear.
Data are from Moreland and Beach (1992). The effect of mere exposure is powerful and occurs in a wide variety of situations (Bornstein, 1989). Infants tend to smile at a photograph of someone they have seen before more than they smile at someone they are seeing for the first time (Brooks-Gunn & Lewis, 1981).
And people have been found to prefer left-to-right reversed images of their own face over their normal (nonreversed) face, whereas their friends prefer their regular face over the reversed one (Mita, Dermer, & Knight, 1977). This also is expected on the basis of mere exposure, since people see their own faces primarily in mirrors and thus are exposed to the reversed face more often. Mere exposure may well have an evolutionary basis.
We have an initial and potentially protective fear of the unknown, but as things become more familiar, they produce more positive feelings and seem safer (Freitas, Azizian, Travers, & Berry, 2005; Harmon-Jones & Allen, 2001). When the stimuli are people, there may well be an added effect—familiar people are more likely to be seen as part of the ingroup rather than the outgroup, and this may lead us to like them even more. Leslie Zebrowitz and her colleagues showed that we like people of our own race in part because they are perceived as familiar to us (Zebrowitz, Bronstad, & Lee, 2007).
Keep in mind that mere exposure applies only to the change that occurs when one is completely unfamiliar with another person (or object) and subsequently becomes more familiar with him or her. Thus mere exposure applies only in the early stages of attraction. Later, when we are more familiar with someone, that person may become too familiar and thus boring.
You may have experienced this effect when you first bought some new songs and began to listen to them. Perhaps you didn’t really like all the songs at first, but you found yourself liking them more and more as you played them more often. If this has happened to you, you have experienced mere exposure.
But perhaps one day you discovered that you were really tired of the songs—they had become too familiar. You put the songs away for a402 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving while, only bringing them out later, when you found that liked them more again (they were now less familiar).
People prefer things that have an optimal level of familiarity—neither too strange nor too well known (Bornstein, 1989). Affect and Attraction Because our relationships with others are based in large part on emotional responses, it will come as no surprise to you to hear that affect is particularly important in interpersonal relationships. The relationship between mood and liking is pretty straightforward.
We tend to like people more when we are in good moods and to like them less when we are in bad moods. This prediction follows directly from the expectation that affective states provide us with information about the social context—in this case, the people around us. Positive affect signals that it is safe and desirable to approach the other person, whereas negative affect is more likely to indicate danger and to suggest avoidance.
Moods are particularly important and informative when they are created by the person we are interacting with. When we find someone attractive, for instance, we experience positive affect, and we end up liking the person even more. However, mood that is created by causes other than the other person can also influence liking.
Alice Isen and her colleagues (Isen & Levin, 1972) created a variety of situations designed to put people in good moods. They had participants unexpectedly find a coin in a phone booth, played them some soothing music, or provided them a snack of milk and cookies at an experimental session. In each of these cases, the participants who had been provided with the pleasant experience indicated more positive mood in comparison with other participants who had not received the positive experience—and they also expressed more liking for other things and other people.
The moral of the story is clear—if you want to get someone to like you, put that person in a good mood. Furthermore, it is pretty easy to do so—simply bringing flowers, looking your best, or telling a funny joke might well be enough to be effective. Research Focus Arousal and Attraction Although the relationship between mood and liking is very simple, the relationship between our current state of physiological arousal and liking is more complex.
Consider an experiment by Gregory White and his colleagues (White, Fishbein, & Rutsein, 1981) in which the participants, male college students, were asked to complete a number of different tasks in a laboratory setting. In one part of the study, the men were asked to run in place for either a short time (15 seconds) or a longer time (120 seconds). Then the men viewed a videotape of either an attractive or an unattractive woman who was supposedly a sophomore at the college.
In the video, she talked about her hobbies and career interests and indicated that she was interested in meeting people and did not have a boyfriend. The men, who thought that they would soon be meeting the woman, rated how romantically attracted they were to her. Confirming that the experimental manipulation had created high and low levels of arousal, White and his colleagues found that the heart rate and other signs of physiological arousal were higher for the participants who had exercised longer.
They did not find that the arousal created by running in place for 120 seconds increased or decreased liking directly, but they did find an interaction between arousal7.1 Initial Attraction 403 level and the attractiveness of the woman being judged. As you can see in the following figure, the men who had been aroused by running in place liked the attractive woman more and the unattractive woman less than the men who were less aroused. Figure 7.6 [Image description] Arousal polarizes judgments.
In this experiment, male college students rated an attractive or an unattractive woman after they had run in place for 15 seconds (low arousal) or for 120 seconds (high arousal). The judgments under arousal are polarized. Data are from White, Fishbein, and Rutstein (1981).
In another interesting field study, Dutton and Aron (1974) had an attractive young woman approach individual young men as they crossed a long, wobbly suspension bridge hanging over 200 feet above the Capilano River in British Columbia. The woman asked each man to help her fill out a questionnaire for a class project. When he had finished, she wrote her name and phone number on a piece of paper and invited him to call if he wanted to hear more about the project.
Over half of the men who had been interviewed on the bridge later called her. In contrast, men who were approached on a low solid bridge by the same experimenter, or who were interviewed on the suspension bridge by men, called to learn about the project significantly less frequently. Echoing our discussion of social cognition and affect, one interpretation of this finding is that the men who were interviewed on the bridge were experiencing arousal as a result of being on the bridge but that they misattributed their arousal as liking for the female interviewer.404 Chapter 7.
Liking and Loving Figure 7.7 Arousal caused by the height of this bridge was misattributed as attraction by the men who were interviewed by an attractive woman as they crossed the bridge. These studies and many others like them demonstrate that arousal polarizes liking (Foster, Witcher, Campbell, & Green, 1998). When we are aroused, everything seems more extreme.
This effect is not unexpected because the function of arousal in emotion is to increase the strength of an emotional response. Love that is accompanied by arousal (sexual or otherwise) is stronger love than love that has a lower level of arousal. And our feelings of anger, dislike, or disgust are also stronger when they are accompanied by high arousal.
As with mood states, arousal may sometimes come directly from the partner. Both very attractive and very unattractive people are likely to be more arousing than are people who are more average in attractiveness, and this arousal may create strong feelings of like or dislike. In other cases, the arousal may come from another source, such as from exercising, walking across a high bridge, or a roller- coaster ride.
The strong feelings that we experience toward another person that are accompanied by increases in arousal and sexual attraction are called passion, and the emotionally intense love that is based on passion is known as passionate love—the kind of love that we experience when we are first getting to know a romantic partner. Again, there is a clear take-home lesson for you: If you like a person and think that the person likes you in return, and if you want to get that person to like you more, then it will be helpful to create some extra arousal in that person, perhaps by going to a scary movie, taking them up a tall building for dinner, or even meeting for a workout at the gym. On the other hand, you need to be sure that the other person is initially positively inclined toward you.
If not, arousing experiences could make matters even worse!7.1 Initial Attraction 405 Key Takeaways • Particularly in initial encounters, people are strongly influenced by the physical attractiveness of the other person. • People tend to prefer people who are young, who have symmetrical facial features and bodies, and who appear average. These preferences may be because these features suggest to us that the person is healthy.
• Although men and women agree on many aspects of what they find attractive, women are relatively more focused on the social status of their romantic partners, whereas men are more focused on the youth and attractiveness of their partners. • We tend to like people who share our values and beliefs, both because similarity makes things easier and because similarity reinforces our own values and beliefs. • Proximity and the principle of mere exposure are two important determinants of interpersonal attraction.
• We tend to like people more when we are in a good mood. • Our current state of physiological arousal tends to polarize our liking. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Consider some people that you find most attractive. Which of the characteristics that social psychologists have found to be important do you think apply here? Which do not?
What other characteristics do you think are important in determining how attractive you perceive others as being? 2. Describe a time when you saw or knew a couple in which one person was much more attractive than the other.
To what degree do you think this was an exception to the rule of status similarity? What possible reasons can you think of why they were in a relationship together? 3.
What cross-cultural differences do you see in perceptions of physical attractiveness? What potential reasons can you think of to explain these differences? 4.
Describe a time when you experienced the mere exposure effect. Why do you think it affected your degree of liking of the other person? 5.
Outline a situation where you experienced polarization of arousal. What were the outcomes of this situation for you and why?406 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving References Anderson, J.
L., Crawford, C. B., Nadeau, J., & Lindberg, T. (1992).
Was the Duchess of Windsor right? A cross-cultural review of the socioecology of ideals of female body shape. Ethology and Sociobiology, 13(3), 197–227.
Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B.
(2008). Becoming friends by chance. Psychological Science, 19(5), 439–440.
Baize, H. R., & Schroeder, J. E.
(1995). Personality and mate selection in personal ads: Evolutionary preferences in a public mate selection process. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 10(3), 517–536.
Baumeister, R. F., & Wotman, S. R.
(1992). Breaking hearts: The two sides of unrequited love. New York, NY: Guilford Press Beach, S.
R. H., Whitaker, D. J., Jones, D.
J., & Tesser, A. (2001). When does performance feedback prompt complementarity in romantic relationships?
Personal Relationships, 8(3), 231–248; Berry, D. S. (2000).
Attractiveness, attraction, and sexual selection: Evolutionary perspectives on the form and function of physical attractiveness. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 273–342; Bornstein, R. F.
(1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968–1987. Psychological Bulletin, 106(2), 265–289.
Brand, R. J., Bonatsos, A., D’Orazio, R., & DeShong, H. (2012).
What is beautiful is good, even online: Correlations between photo attractiveness and text attractiveness in men’s online dating profiles.Computers In Human Behavior, 28(1), 166-170. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.08.023 Brooks-Gunn, J., & Lewis, M. (1981).
Infant social perception: Responses to pictures of parents and strangers. Developmental Psychology, 17(5), 647–649. Buss, D.
M. (1989). Sex differences in human mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12(1), 1–49. Buss, D., & Kenrick, D. (1998).
Evolutionary social psychology. In D. T.
Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 982–1026).
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill. Buunk, B. P., Dijkstra, P., Kenrick, D.
T., & Warntjes, A. (2001). Age preferences for mates as related to gender, own age, and involvement level.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 22(4), 241–250; Crandall, C. S., Merman, A., & Hebl, M. (2009).
Anti-fat prejudice. In T. D.
Nelson (Ed.), Handbook of prejudice, stereotyping, and discrimination (pp. 469–487). New York, NY: Psychology Press; Diener, E., Wolsic, B., & Fujita, F.
(1995). Physical attractiveness and subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(1), 120–129; Dion, K., Berscheid, E., & Walster, E.
(1972). What is beautiful is good. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24(3), 285–290.
Donohoe, M. L., von Hippel, W., & Brooks, R. C.
(2009). Beyond waist-hip ratio: Experimental multivariate evidence that average women’s torsos are most attractive. Behavioral Ecology, 20(4), 716–721.7.1 Initial Attraction 407 Dubois, M., & Pansu, P.
(2004). Facial attractiveness, applicants’ qualifications, and judges’ expertise about decisions in preselective recruitment. Psychological Reports, 95(3, Pt.
2), 1129–1134. Dunn, M. J., Brinton, S., & Clark, L.
(2010). Universal sex differences in online advertisers age preferences: Comparing data from 14 cultures and 2 religious groups. Evolution and Human Behavior, 31(6), 383–393; Dutton, D., & Aron, A.
(1974). Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction under conditions of high anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 510–517.
Eagly, A. H., Ashmore, R. D., Makhijani, M.
G., & Longo, L. C. (1991).
What is beautiful is good, but…: A meta-analytic review of research on the physical attractiveness stereotype. Psychological Bulletin, 110(1), 109–128. Epstein, J., Klinkenberg, W.
D., Scandell, D. J., Faulkner, K., & Claus, R. E.
(2007). Perceived physical attactiveness, sexual history, and sexual intentions: An internet study. Sex Roles, 56(1–2), 23–31.
Festinger, L., Schachter, S., & Back, K. (1950). Social pressures in informal groups.
New York, NY: Harper. Foster, C. A., Witcher, B.
S., Campbell, W. K., & Green, J. D.
(1998). Arousal and attraction: Evidence for automatic and controlled processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(1), 86–101.
Freitas, A. L., Azizian, A., Travers, S., & Berry, S. A.
(2005). The evaluative connotation of processing fluency: Inherently positive or moderated by motivational context? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41(6), 636–644; Gangestad, S.
W., & Thornhill, R. (1997). The evolutionary psychology of extra-pair sex: The role of fluctuating asymmetry.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 18(2), 69–88. Grammer, K., Fink, B., Juette, A., Ronzal, G., & Thornhill, R. (2002).
Female faces and bodies: N- dimensional feature space and attractiveness. In G. Rhodes & L.
A. Zebrowitz (Eds.), Facial attractiveness: Evolutionary, cognitive, and social perspectives (pp. 91–125).
Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing. Griffin, A. M., & Langlois, J.
H. (2006). Stereotype directionality and attractiveness stereotyping: Is beauty good or is ugly bad?
Social Cognition, 24(2), 187–206. Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J.
B. (2001). The role of affect in the mere exposure effect: Evidence from psychophysiological and individual differences approaches.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27(7), 889–898. Harrison, A. A., & Saeed, L.
(1977). Let’s make a deal: An analysis of revelations and stipulation in lonely hearts advertisements. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 257–264; Henderson, J.
J. A., & Anglin, J. M.
(2003). Facial attractiveness predicts longevity. Evolution and Human Behavior, 24(5), 351–356.
Hönekopp, J., Rudolph, U., Beier, L., Liebert, A., & Müller, C. (2007). Physical attractiveness of face and body as indicators of physical fitness in men.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 28(2), 106–111; Hosoda, M., Stone-Romero, E. F., & Coats, G. (2003).
The effects of physical attractiveness on job- related outcomes: A meta-analysis of experimental studies. Personnel Psychology, 56(2), 431–462.408 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving Isen, A.
M., & Levin, P. F. (1972).
Effect of feeling good on helping: Cookies and kindness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 384–388. Jones, J.
T., Pelham, B. W., Carvallo, M., & Mirenberg, M. C.
(2004). How do I love thee? Let me count the Js: Implicit egotism and interpersonal attraction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(5), 665–683; Kalick, S. M., & Hamilton, T. E.
(1986). The matching hypothesis reexamined. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(4), 673–682; Kenrick, D.
T., & Li, N. (2000). The Darwin is in the details.
American Psychologist, 55(9), 1060–1061. Kubitschek, W. N., & Hallinan, M.
T. (1998). Tracking and students’ friendships.
Social Psychology Quarterly, 61(1), 1–15. Langlois, J. H., Ritter, J.
M., Roggman, L. A., & Vaughn, L. S.
(1991). Facial diversity and infant preferences for attractive faces. Developmental Psychology, 27, 79–84.
Langlois, J. H., & Roggman, L. A.
(1990). Attractive faces are only average. Psychological Science, 1(2), 115-121.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.1990.tb00079.x Langlois, J. H., Roggman, L. A., & Musselman, L.
(1994). What is average and what is not average about attractive faces? Psychological Science, 5(4), 214–220.
Lee, L., Loewenstein, G., Ariely, D., Hong, J., & Young, J. (2008). If I’m not hot, are you hot or not?
Physical-attractiveness evaluations and dating preferences as a function of one’s own attractiveness. Psychological Science, 19(7), 669–677. Li, N.
P., Bailey, J. M., Kenrick, D. T., & Linsenmeier, J.
A. W. (2002).
The necessities and luxuries of mate preferences: Testing the tradeoffs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(6), 947–955. Mita, T.
H., Dermer, M., & Knight, J. (1977). Reversed facial images and the mere-exposure hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(8), 597–601. Moreland, R. L., & Beach, S.
R. (1992). Exposure effects in the classroom: The development of affinity among students.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 28(3), 255–276. Nelson, L. D., & Morrison, E.
L. (2005). The Symptoms of Resource Scarcity: Judgments of Food and Finances Influence Preferences for Potential Partners.
Psychological Science, 16(2), 167-173. Newcomb, T. M.
(1961). The acquaintance process. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Olson, I. R., & Marshuetz, C. (2005).
Facial attractiveness is appraised in a glance. Emotion, 5(4), 498–502; Petersen, J. L., & Hyde, J.
S. (2010). A meta-analytic review of research on gender differences in sexuality, 1993–2007.
Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 21–38; Pinel, E. C., Long, A. E., Landau, M.
J., Alexander, K., & Pyszczynski, T. (2006). Seeing I to I: A pathway to interpersonal connectedness.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(2), 243–257. Ramsey, J. L., Langlois, J.
H., Hoss, R. A., Rubenstein, A. J., & Griffin, A.
M. (2004). Origins of a stereotype: Categorization of facial attractiveness by 6-month-old infants.
Developmental Science, 7(2), 201–211.7.1 Initial Attraction 409 Rhodes, G. (2006). The evolutionary psychology of facial beauty.
Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 199–226. Rhodes, G., Zebrowitz, L. A., Clark, A., Kalick, S.
M., Hightower, A., & McKay, R. (2001). Do facial averageness and symmetry signal health?
Evolution and Human Behavior, 22(1), 31–46. Roese, N. J., Pennington, G.
L., Coleman, J., Janicki, M., Li, N. P., & Kenrick, D. T.
(2006). Sex differences in regret: All for love or some for lust? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32(6), 770–780.
Saad, G., Eba, A., & Sejean, R. (2009). Sex differences when searching for a mate: A process-tracing approach.
Journal of Behavioral Decision making, 22(2), 171–190. Sigall, H., & Landy, D. (1973).
Radiating beauty: Effects of having a physically attractive partner on person perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28(2), 218–224. Singh, D.
(1995). Female judgment of male attractiveness and desirability for relationships: Role of waist-to-hip ratio and financial status. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(6), 1089–1101; Singh, R., Yeo, S.
E. L., Lin, P. K.
F., & Tan, L. (2007). Multiple mediators of the attitude similarity- attraction relationship: Dominance of inferred attraction and subtlety of affect.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 29(1), 61–74. Sprecher, S., Wenzel, A., & Harvey, J. (2008).
Handbook of relationship initiation. New York, NY: Psychology Press. Swami, V.
(2006). The influence of body weight and shape in determining female and male physical attractiveness. In M.
V. Kindes (Ed.), Body image: New research (pp. 35–61).
Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science. Swami, V., & Furnham, A. (2008).
The psychology of physical attraction. New York, NY: Routledge/ Taylor & Francis Group. Tiedens, L.
Z., & Jimenez, M. C. (2003).
Assimilation for affiliation and contrast for control: Complementary self-construals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(6), 1049–1061. van Leeuwen, M.
L., & Macrae, C. N. (2004).
Is beautiful always good? Implicit benefits of facial attractiveness. Social Cognition, 22(6), 637–649.
Wade, T. J. (2000).
Evolutionary theory and self-perception: Sex differences in body esteem predictors of self-perceived physical and sexual attractiveness and self-esteem. International Journal of Psychology, 35(1), 36–45. Walster, E., Aronson, V., Abrahams, D., & Rottmann, L.
(1966). Importance of physical attractiveness in dating behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4(5), 508–516.
Watson, D., Klohnen, E. C., Casillas, A., Nus, S. E., Haig, J., Berry, D.
S. (2004). Match makers and deal breakers: Analyses of assortative mating in newlywed couples.
Journal of Personality, 72, 1029–1068. doi: 10.1111/j.0022-3506.2004.00289.x Weeden, J., & Sabini, J. (2005).
Physical attractiveness and health in Western societies: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 131(5), 635–653. Wheeler, L., & Kim, Y.
(1997). What is beautiful is culturally good: The physical attractiveness stereotype has different content in collectivistic cultures. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin,23(8), 795-800.
doi:10.1177/0146167297238001410 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving White, G. L., Fishbein, S., & Rutsein, J.
(1981). Passionate love and the misattribution of arousal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(1), 56–62.
Wiederman, M. W. (1993).
Evolved gender differences in mate preferences: Evidence from personal advertisements. Ethology and Sociobiology, 14(5), 331–351. Willis, M.
S., Esqueda, C. W., & Schacht, R. N.
(2008). Social perceptions of individuals missing upper front teeth. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 106(2), 423–435.
Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2001).
Mind at ease puts a smile on the face: Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilitation elicits positive affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(6), 989–1000. Zebrowitz, L.
A. (1996). Physical appearance as a basis of stereotyping.
In C. N. Macrae, C.
Stangor, & M. Hewstone (Eds.), Stereotypes and stereotyping (pp. 79–120).
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Zebrowitz, L. A., Andreoletti, C., Collins, M.
A., Lee, S. Y., & Blumenthal, J. (1998).
Bright, bad, baby-faced boys: Appearance stereotypes do not always yield self-fulfilling prophecy effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(5), 1300–1320. Zebrowitz, L.
A., Bronstad, P. M., & Lee, H. K.
(2007). The contribution of face familiarity to in- group favoritism and stereotyping. Social Cognition, 25(2), 306–338.
doi: 10.1521/ soco.2007.25.2.306 Zebrowitz, L. A., & McDonald, S. M.
(1991). The impact of litigants’ baby-facedness and attractiveness on adjudications in small claims courts. Law and Human Behavior, 15(6), 603–623.
Zebrowitz, L. A., & Montepare, J. M.
(2005). Appearance does matter. Science, 308(5728), 1565–1566.
Image Descriptions Figure 7.6 A bar graph with arousal level on the x-axis and rated attractiveness on the y-axis. At low arousal level, rated attractiveness for the attractive is between 25 to 30, for unattractive is 15. At high arousal level, rated attractiveness for the attractive is between 30 to 35, for the unattractive is between 5 and 10.
[Return to Figure 7.6] Media Attributions • “LeonardoDiCaprioNov08” by Colin Chou is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “Nicole-Covergirl” by TeamEdward4ever001 is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “Attractive Face Scale” by Pierre Tourigny is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “CapilanoBridge” by Leonard G is licensed under a CC SA 1.0 licence.7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term Learning Objectives 1. Outline the factors that define close relationships. 2.
Distinguish between communal and exchange relationships. 3. Explore Sternberg’s triangular model of love.
4. Review research on romantic love and attention to others. 5.
Outline the role of attachment style in close relationships. 6. Consider the impact of Internet behaviors on intimate relationships.
7. Review some important factors that can help romantic relationships to be successful. 8.
Explore key factors that contribute to the ending of close relationships. To this point in the chapter, we have focused upon the attraction that occurs between people who are initially getting to know one another. But the basic principles of social psychology can also be applied to help us understand relationships that last longer.
When good friendships develop, when people get married and plan to spend the rest of their lives together, and when families grow closer over time, the relationships take on new dimensions and must be understood in somewhat different ways. Yet the principles of social psychology can still be applied to help us understand what makes these relationships last. The factors that keep people liking and loving each other in long-term relationships are at least in part the same as the factors that lead to initial attraction.
For instance, regardless of how long they have been together, people remain interested in the physical attractiveness of their partners, although it is relatively less important than for initial encounters. And similarity remains essential. Relationships are also more satisfactory and more likely to continue when the individuals develop and maintain similar interests and continue to share their important values and beliefs over time (Davis & Rusbult, 2001).
Both actual and assumed similarity between partners tend to grow in long-term relationships and are related to satisfaction in opposite-sex marriages (Schul & Vinokur, 2000). Some aspects of similarity, including that in terms of positive and negative affectivity, have also been linked to relationship satisfaction in same-sex marriages (Todosijevic, Rothblum, & Solomon, 2005). However, some demographic factors like education and income similarity seem to relate less to satisfaction in same-sex partnerships than they do in opposite sex ones (Todosijevic, Rothblum, & Solomon, 2005).
Proximity also remains important—relationships that undergo the strain of the partners being apart from each other for very long are more at risk for breakup. For example, recall our chapter case study 411412 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving about Frank and Anita Milford’s 80-year marriage; the couple said that “We do everything together even after nearly 80 years.” But what about passion?
Does it still matter over time? Yes and no. People in long-term relationships who are most satisfied with their partners report that they still feel passion for their partners—they still want to be around them as much as possible, and they enjoy making love with them (Simpson, 1987; Sprecher, 2006).
And they report that the more they love their partners, the more attractive they find them (Simpson, Gangestad, & Lerma, 1990). On the other hand, the high levels of passionate love that are experienced in initial encounters are not likely to be maintained throughout the course of a long- term relationship (Acker & Davis, 1992). Recall, though, that physical intimacy continues to be important.
Frank and Anita from our case study, for example, said that they still put great importance on sharing a kiss and a cuddle every night before bed. Over time, cognition becomes relatively more important than emotion, and close relationships are more likely to be based on companionate love, defined as love that is based on friendship, mutual attraction, common interests, mutual respect, and concern for each other’s welfare. This does not mean that enduring love is less strong—rather, it may sometimes have a different underlying structure than initial love based more on passion.
Closeness and Intimacy Although it is safe to say that many of the variables that influence initial attraction remain important in longer-term relationships, other variables also come into play over time. One important change is that as a relationship progresses, the partners come to know each other more fully and care about each other to a greater degree. In successful relationships, the partners feel increasingly close to each other over time, whereas in unsuccessful relationships, closeness does not increase and may even decrease.
The closeness experienced in these relationships is marked in part by reciprocal self-disclosure—the tendency to communicate frequently, without fear of reprisal, and in an accepting and empathetic manner. When the partners in a relationship feel that they are close, and when they indicate that the relationship is based on caring, warmth, acceptance, and social support, we can say that the relationship is intimate (Sternberg, 1986). Partners in intimate relationships are likely to think of the couple as “we” rather than as two separate individuals.
People who have a sense of closeness with their partner are better able to maintain positive feelings about the relationship while at the same time are able to express negative feelings and to have accurate (although sometimes less than positive) judgments of the other (Neff & Karney, 2002). People may also use their close partner’s positive characteristics to feel better about themselves (Lockwood, Dolderman, Sadler, & Gerchak, 2004). Arthur Aron and his colleagues (Aron, Aron, & Smollan, 1992) have assessed the role of closeness in relationships directly, using the simple measure shown in Figure 7.8, “Measuring Relationship Closeness.” You might try completing the measure yourself for some different people that you know—for instance, your family members, your friends, your spouse, or your girlfriend or boyfriend.
The measure is simple to use and to interpret. If a person chooses a circle that represents the self and the other as more overlapping, this means that the relationship is close. But if they choose a circle that is less overlapping, then the relationship is less so.7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 413414 Chapter 7.
Liking and Loving Figure 7.8 Measuring Relationship Closeness This measure is used to determine how close two partners feel to each other. The respondent simply circles which of the figures he or she feels characterizes the relationship. From Aron, Aron, and Smollan (1992).
Although the closeness measure is simple, it has been found to be highly predictive of people’s satisfaction with their close relationships and of the tendency for couples to stay together. In fact, the perceived closeness between romantic partners can be a better predictor of how long a relationship will last than is the number of positive feelings that the partners indicate having for each other. In successful close relationships, cognitive representations of the self and the other tend to merge together into one, and it is this tie—based on acceptance, caring, and social support—that is so important (Aron, Aron, Tudor, & Nelson, 1991).
Aron and his colleagues (Aron, Melinat, Aron, & Vallone, 1997) used an experimental design to test whether self-disclosure of intimate thoughts to others would increase closeness. In a laboratory, they paired college students with another student, one whom they did not know. Some of the students were asked to share some intimate thoughts with each other by asking and answering questions such as “When did you last cry in front of another person?” In comparison with control participants who only engaged in small talk with their partners (answering questions such as “What is your favorite holiday?”), the students who disclosed more intimate experiences reported feeling significantly closer to each other at the end of the conversation.
Communal and Exchange Relationships In intimate close relationships, the partners can become highly attuned to each other’s needs, such that the desires and goals of the other become as important as, or more important than, one’s own needs. When people are attentive to the needs of others—for instance, parents’ attentiveness to the needs of their children or the attentiveness of partners in a romantic relationship—and when they help the other person meet his or her needs without explicitly keeping track of what they are giving or expecting to get in return, we say that the partners have a communal relationship. Communal relationships are close relationships in which partners suspend their need for equity and exchange, giving support to the partner in order to meet his or her needs, and without consideration of the costs to themselves.
Communal relationships are contrasted with exchange relationships, relationships in which each of the partners keeps track of his or her contributions to the partnership. Research suggests that communal relationships can be beneficial, with findings showing that happier couples are less likely to “keep score” of their respective contributions (Buunk, Van Yperen, Taylor, & Collins, 1991). And when people are reminded of the external benefits that their partners provide them, they may experience decreased feelings of love for them (Seligman, Fazio, & Zanna, 1980).
Although partners in long-term relationships are frequently willing and ready to help each other meet their needs, and although they will in some cases forgo the need for exchange and reciprocity, this does not mean that they always or continually give to the relationship without expecting anything in return. Partners often do keep track of their contributions and received benefits. If one or both of the partners feel that they are unfairly contributing more than their fair share, and if this inequity continues over a7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 415 period of time, the relationship will suffer.
Partners who feel that they are contributing more will naturally become upset because they will feel that they are being taken advantage of. But the partners who feel that they are receiving more than they deserve might feel guilty about their lack of contribution to the partnership. Members of long-term relationships focus to a large extent on maintaining equity, and marriages are happiest when both members perceive that they contribute relatively equally (Van Yperen & Buunk, 1990).
Interestingly, it is not just our perception of the equity of the ratio of rewards and costs we have in our relationships that is important. It also matters how we see this ratio in comparison to those that we perceive people of the same sex as us receiving in the relationships around us. Buunk and Van Yperen (1991), for example, found that people who saw themselves as getting a better deal than those around them were particularly satisfied with their relationships.
From the perspective of social comparison theory, which we discussed in chapter 3 in relation to the self, this makes perfect sense. When we contrast our own situation with that of similar others and we perceive ourselves as better off, then this means we are making a downward social comparison, which will tend to make us feel better about ourselves and our lot in life. There are also some individual differences in the extent to which perceptions of equity are important.
Buunk and Van Yperen, for example, found that the relationship between perceptions of equity and relationship satisfaction only held for people who were high in exchange orientation. In contrast, those low in exchange orientation did not show an association between equity and satisfaction, and, perhaps even more tellingly, were more satisfied with their relationships than those high in exchange orientation. People generally stay in relationships longer when they feel that they are being rewarded by them (Margolin & Wampold, 1981).
In short, in relationships that last, the partners are aware of the needs of the other person and attempt to meet them equitably. But partners in the best relationships are also able to look beyond the rewards themselves and to think of the relationship in a communal way. Interdependence and Commitment Another factor that makes long-term relationships different from short-term ones is that they are more complex.
When a couple begins to take care of a household together, has children, and perhaps has to care for elderly parents, the requirements of the relationship become correspondingly bigger. As a result of this complexity, the partners in close relationships increasingly turn to each other not only for social support but also for help in coordinating activities, remembering dates and appointments, and accomplishing tasks (Wegner, Erber, & Raymond, 1991). The members of a close relationship are highly interdependent, relying to a great degree on each other to meet their goals.
It takes a long time for partners in a relationship to develop the ability to understand the other person’s needs and to form positive patterns of interdependence in which each person’s needs are adequately met. The social representation of a significant other is a rich, complex, and detailed one because we know and care so much about him or her and because we have spent so much time in his or her company (Andersen & Cole, 1990). Because a lot of energy has been invested in creating the relationship, particularly when the relationship includes children, breaking off the partnership becomes more and more costly with time.
After spending a long time with one person, it may also become more and more difficult to imagine ourselves with anyone else.416 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving In relationships in which a positive rapport between the partners is developed and maintained over a period of time, the partners are naturally happy with the relationship and they become committed to it. Commitment refers to the feelings and actions that keep partners working together to maintain the relationship.
In comparison with those who are less committed, partners who are more committed to the relationship see their mates as more attractive than others, are less able to imagine themselves with another partner, express less interest in other potential mates, are less aggressive toward each other, and are less likely to break up (Simpson, 1987; Slotter et al., 2011). Commitment may in some cases lead individuals to stay in relationships that they could leave, even though the costs of remaining in the relationship are very high. On the surface, this seems puzzling because people are expected to attempt to maximize their rewards in relationships and would be expected to leave them if they are not rewarding.
But in addition to evaluating the outcomes that one gains from a given relationship, the individual also evaluates the potential costs of moving to another relationship or not having any relationship at all. We might stay in a romantic relationship, even if the benefits of that relationship are not high, because the costs of being in no relationship at all are perceived as even higher. We may also remain in relationships that have become dysfunctional in part because we recognize just how much time and effort we have invested in them over the years.
When we choose to stay in situations largely because we feel we have put too much effort in to be able to leave them behind, this is known as the sunk costs bias (Eisenberg, Harvey, Moore, Gazelle, & Pandharipande, 2012). In short, when considering whether to stay or leave, we must consider both the costs and benefits of the current relationship and the costs and benefits of the alternatives to it (Rusbult, Olsen, Davis, & Hannon, 2001). Although the good news about interdependence and commitment is clear—they help relationships last longer—they also have a potential downside.
Breaking up, should it happen, is more difficult in relationships that are interdependent and committed. The closer and more committed a relationship has been, the more devastating a breakup will be. What Is Love?
Although we have talked about it indirectly, we have not yet tried to define love itself—and yet it is obviously the case that love is an important part of many close relationships. Social psychologists have studied the function and characteristics of romantic love, finding that it has cognitive, affective, and behavioral components and that it occurs cross-culturally, although how it is experienced may vary. Robert Sternberg and others (Arriaga & Agnew, 2001; Sternberg, 1986) have proposed a triangular model of love, an approach that suggests that there are different types of love and that each is made up of different combinations of cognitive and affective variables, specified in terms of passion, intimacy, and commitment.
The model, shown in Figure 7.9, “Triangular Model of Love,” suggests that only consummate love has all three of the components (and is probably experienced only in the very best romantic relationships), whereas the other types of love are made up of only one or two of the three components. For instance, people who are good friends may have liking (intimacy) only or may have known each other so long that they also share commitment to each other (companionate love). Similarly, partners who are initially dating might simply be infatuated with each other (passion only) or may be experiencing romantic love (both passion and liking but not commitment).7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 417 Figure 7.9 Triangular Model of Love The triangular model of love, proposed by Robert Sternberg.
Note that there are seven types of love, which are defined by the combinations of the underlying factors of intimacy, passion, and commitment. From Sternberg (1986). Research into Sternberg’s theory has revealed that the relative strength of the different components of love does tend to shift over time.
Lemieux and Hale (2002) gathered data on the three components of the theory from couples who were either casually dating, engaged, or married. They found that while passion and intimacy were negatively related to relationship length, that commitment was positively correlated with duration. Reported intimacy and passion scores were highest for the engaged couples.
As well as these differences in what love tends to look like in close relationships over time, there are some interesting gender and cultural differences here. Contrary to some stereotypes, men, on average, tend to endorse beliefs indicating that true love lasts forever, and to report falling in love more quickly than women (Sprecher & Metts, 1989). In regards to cultural differences, on average, people from collectivistic backgrounds tend to put less emphasis on romantic love than people from more individualistic countries.
Consequently, they may place more emphasis on the companionate aspects of love, and relatively less on those based on passion (Dion & Dion, 1993).418 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving Research Focus Romantic Love Reduces Our Attention to Attractive Others Evolutionary psychologists have proposed that we experience romantic love to help increase our evolutionary fitness (Taylor & Gonzaga, 2006). According to this idea, love helps couples work together to improve the relationship by coordinating and planning activities and by increasing commitment to the partnership.
If love acts as a “commitment device,” it may do so in part by helping people avoid being attracted to other people who may pose a threat to the stability of the relationship (Gonzaga, Haselton, Smurda, Davies, & Poore, 2008; Sabini & Silver, 2005). Jon Maner and his colleagues (Maner, Rouby, & Gonzaga, 2008) tested this idea by selecting a sample of participants who were currently in a committed relationship and manipulating the extent to which the participants were currently experiencing romantic love for their partners. They predicted that the romantic love manipulation would decrease attention to faces of attractive opposite-sex people.
One half of the participants (the romantic love condition) were assigned to write a brief essay about a time in which they experienced strong feelings of love for their current partner. Participants assigned to the control condition wrote a brief essay about a time in which they felt extremely happy. After completing the essay, participants completed a procedure in which they were shown a series of attractive and unattractive male and female faces.
The procedure assessed how quickly the participants could shift their attention away from the photo they were looking at to a different photo. The dependent variable was the reaction time (in milliseconds) with which participants could shift their attention. Figure 7.10 shows the key findings from this study.
Figure 7.10 Romantic Love and Attention to Faces [Image description] Activating thoughts and feelings of romantic love reduced attention to faces of attractive alternatives. Attention to other social targets remained unaffected. Data are from Maner et al.
(2008).As you can see in Figure 7.10, the participants who had been asked to think about their thoughts and feelings of love for their partner were faster at moving their attention from the attractive opposite-sex photos than were participants in any of the other conditions. When experiencing feelings of romantic love,7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 419 participants’ attention seemed repelled, rather than captured, by highly attractive members of the opposite sex. These findings suggest that romantic love may inhibit the perceptual processing of physical attractiveness cues—the very same cues that often pose a high degree of threat to the relationship.
Individual Differences in Loving: Attachment Styles One of the important determinants of the quality of close relationships is the way that the partners relate to each other. These approaches can be described in terms of attachment style—individual differences in how people relate to others in close relationships. We display our attachment styles when we interact with our parents, our friends, and our romantic partners (Eastwick & Finkel, 2008).
Attachment styles are learned in childhood, as children develop either a healthy or an unhealthy attachment style with their parents (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978; Cassidy & Shaver, 1999). Most children develop a healthy or secure attachment style, where they perceive their parents as safe, available, and responsive caregivers and are able to relate easily to them. For these children, the parents successfully create appropriate feelings of affiliation and provide a secure base from which the child feels free to explore and then to return to.
However, for children with unhealthy attachment styles, the family does not provide these needs. Some children develop an insecure attachment pattern known as the anxious/ambivalent attachment style, where they become overly dependent on the parents and continually seek more affection from them than they can give. These children are anxious about whether the parents will reciprocate closeness.
Still other children become unable to relate to the parents at all, becoming distant, fearful, and cold (the avoidant attachment style). These three attachment styles that we develop in childhood remain to a large extent stable into adulthood (Caspi, 2000; Collins, Cooper, Albino, & Allard, 2002; Rholes, Simpson, Tran, Martin, & Friedman, 2007). Fraley (2002) conducted a meta-analysis of 27 studies that had looked at the relationship between attachment behavior in infants and in adults over 17 years of age and found a significant correlation between the two measures.
A fourth infant attachment style has been identified more recently, the disorganized attachment style, which is a blend of the other two insecure styles. This style also shows some links to adulthood patterns, in this case an avoidant-fearful attachment style. The consistency of attachment styles over the life span means that children who develop secure attachments with their parents as infants are better able to create stable, healthy interpersonal relationships with other individuals, including romantic partners, as adults (Hazan & Diamond, 2000).
They stay in relationships longer and are less likely to feel jealousy about their partners. But the relationships of anxious and avoidant partners can be more problematic. Insecurely attached men and women tend to be less warm with their partners, are more likely to get angry at them, and have more difficulty expressing their feelings (Collins & Feeney, 2000).
They also tend to worry about their partner’s love and commitment for them, and they interpret their partner’s behaviors more negatively (Collins & Feeney, 2004; Pierce & Lydon, 2001). Anxious partners also see more conflict in their420 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving relationships and experience the conflicts more negatively (Campbell, Simpson, Boldry, & Kashy, 2005).
In addition, people with avoidant and fearful attachment styles can often have trouble even creating close relationships in the first place (Gabriel, Carvallo, Dean, Tippin, & Renaud, 2005). They have difficulty expressing emotions, and experience more negative affect in their interactions (Tidwell, Reis, & Shaver, 1996). They also have trouble understanding the emotions of others (Fraley, Garner, & Shaver, 2000) and show a relative lack of interest in learning about their romantic partner’s thoughts and feelings (Rholes, Simpson, Tran, Martin, & Friedman, 2007).
One way to think about attachment styles, shown in Table 7.1, “Attachment as Self-Concern and Other- Concern,” is in terms of the extent to which the individual is able to successfully meet the important goals of self-concern and other-concern in his or her close relationships. People with a secure attachment style have positive feelings about themselves and also about others. People with avoidant attachment styles feel good about themselves (the goal of self-concern is being met), but they do not have particularly good relations with others.
People with anxious/ambivalent attachment styles are primarily other-concerned. They want to be liked, but they do not have a very positive opinion of themselves; this lack of self-esteem hurts their ability to form good relationships. The fourth cell in the table, lower right, represents the avoidant-fearful style, which describes people who are not meeting goals of either self-concern or other-concern.
This way of thinking about attachment shows, again, the importance of both self-concern and other- concern in successful social interaction. People who cannot connect have difficulties being effective partners. But people who do not feel good about themselves also have challenges in relationships—self-concern goals must be met before we can successfully meet the goals of other- concern.
Table 7.1 Attachment as Self-Concern and Other-Concern Other-concern Goals are met Goals are not met Goals Avoidant attachment (Healthy feelings Secure attachment (Healthy feelings are about the self but fears about connecting about the self and about important others) met with others) Self-Concern Goals Anxious/ambivalent attachment (Desires are Fearful attachment (Relationships with to reach out to others but also anxious not others are poor but so is the self-concept) about the self) met Because attachment styles have such an important influence on relationships, you should think carefully about your potential partner’s interactions with the other people in his or her life. The quality of the relationships that people have with their parents and close friends will predict the quality of their romantic relationships. But although they are very important, attachment styles do not predict everything.
People have many experiences as adults, and these interactions can influence, both positively and negatively, their ability to develop close relationships (Baldwin & Fehr, 1995; Scharfe & Bartholomew, 1994). There is also some diversity in the distribution of attachment styles across7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 421 different groups. For example, in a multicultural sample including people from over 50 different countries of origin, Agishtein and Brumbaugh (2013) found that attachment style varied as a function of ethnicity, religion, individualism-collectivism, and acculturation.
For instance, anxious attachment was found to be significantly higher in those whose countries of origin were in East Asia, the Middle East, and Eastern Europe, compared with those from nations in South America, the Caribbean, North America, Western Europe, and South Asia. These types of findings clearly remind us of the need to consider cultural diversity when we are reviewing the research on attachment. They also raise the interesting possibility that some types of attachment may be more normative and adaptive in some cultures than others.
As well as showing some cross-cultural diversity, attachment styles within individuals may be more diverse over time and across situations than previously thought. Some evidence suggests that overall attachment style in adults may not always predict their attachment style in specific relationships. For instance, people’s attachment styles in particular relationships, for example those with their mothers, brothers, and partners, although often correlated, can also be somewhat distinct (Pierce & Lydon, 2001; Ross & Spinner, 2001).
As well as showing this variability across relationships, attachment styles can also shift over time and with changing relationship experiences. For example, there are some age- related trends in attachment, with younger adults higher in anxious attachment than middle-aged and older adults, and middle-aged adults higher in avoidant attachment than the other two groups (Chopik, Edelstein, & Fralay, 2013). In regards to changing experiences, people with an anxious style who find a very trusting and nurturing romantic relationship may, over time, come to feel better about themselves and their own needs, and shift toward a more secure style (Davila & Cobb, 2003).
These findings have many potential psychotherapeutic settings. For example, couples who are attending therapy to address relationship issues can benefit from this process in part by developing more secure attachments to each other (Solomon, 2009). Therapists can also try to help their clients to develop a more secure attachment style, by creating a trusting and supportive relationship with them (Obegi, 2008).
Social Psychology in the Public Interest Internet Relationships As we saw in the chapter on Self, many of us are spending more time than ever connecting with others electronically. Online close relationships are also becoming more popular. But you might wonder whether meeting and interacting with others online can create the same sense of closeness and caring that we experience through face-to-face encounters.
And you might wonder whether people who spend more time on Facebook, Twitter, and the Internet might end up finding less time to engage in activities with the friends and loved ones who are physically close by (Kraut et al., 1998). Despite these potential concerns, research shows that using the Internet can relate to positive outcomes in our close relationships (Bargh, 2002; Bargh & McKenna, 2004). In one study, Kraut et al.
(2002) found that people who reported using the Internet more frequently also reported spending more time with their family and friends and indicated having better psychological health. The Internet also seems to be useful for helping people develop new relationships, and the quality of those relationships can be as good as or better than those formed face-to-face (Parks & Floyd, 1996). McKenna, Green, and Gleason (2002) found that many people who participated in news and user groups online reported having formed a close relationship with someone they had originally met on the422 Chapter 7.
Liking and Loving Internet. Over half of the participants said that they had developed a real-life relationship with people they had first met online, and almost a quarter reported that they had married, had become engaged to, or were living with someone they initially met on the Internet. McKenna, Green, and Gleason (2002) studied how relationships developed online using laboratory studies.
In their research, a previously unacquainted male and female college student met each other for the first time either in what they thought was an Internet chat room or face-to-face. Those who met first on the Internet reported liking each other more than those who met first face-to-face—even when it was the same partner that they had met both times. People also report being better able to express their own emotions and experiences to their partners online than in face-to-face meetings (Bargh, McKenna, & Fitzsimons, 2002).
There are probably a number of reasons why Internet relationships can be so successful. For one, relationships grow to the extent that the partners self-disclose by sharing personal information with each other, and the relative anonymity of Internet interactions may allow people to self-disclose more readily. Another characteristic of Internet relationships is the relative lack of physical cues to a person’s attractiveness.
When physical attractiveness is taken out of the picture, people may be more likely to form relationships on the basis of other more important characteristics, such as similarity in values and beliefs. Another advantage of the Internet is that it allows people to stay in touch with friends and family who are not nearby and to maintain better long-distance relationships (Wellman, Quan Haase, Witte, & Hampton, 2001). The Internet also may be helpful in finding others with shared interests and values.
Finally, the major purpose of many Internet activities is to make new friends. In contrast, most face-to-face interactions are less conducive to starting new conversations and friendships. Online interactions can also help to strengthen offline relationships.
A recent study by Fox, Warber, & Makstaller (2013) explored the effects of publically posting one’s relationship status to Facebook, or going “Facebook official” (FBO) on romantic relationships between college students. They found that offline discussions between partners often preceded going FBO, and, that once couples had gone FBO, they reported more perceived relationship commitment and stability. Overall, then, the evidence suggests that rather than being an isolating activity, interacting with others over the Internet helps us maintain close ties with our family and friends and in many cases helps us form intimate and rewarding relationships.
Making Relationships Last Now that you have a better idea of the variables that lead to interpersonal attraction and that are important in close relationships, you should be getting a pretty good idea of the things that partners need to do to help them stay together. It is true that many marriages end in divorce, and this number is higher in individualistic cultures, where the focus is on the individual, than it is in collectivistic cultures, where the focus is on maintaining group togetherness. But even in many Western countries, for instance, the United States, the number of divorces is falling, at least for the most educated segments of society (Kreider & Fields, 2001).
Successful relationships take work, but the work is worth it. People who are happily married are also happier overall and have better psychological and physical health. And at least for men, marriage leads to a longer life (Kiecolt-Glaser & Newton, 2001).
In part the ideas that Britain’s long-married couple Frank and Anita Milford have about what made7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 423 their relationship so successful are probably correct. Let’s look at some of the things that they seem to have done and compare them with what we might expect on the basis of social psychological research. • Be prepared for squabbles.
Every relationship has conflict. This is not unexpected or always bad. Working through minor conflicts can help you and your partner improve your social skills and make the relationship stronger (Pickett & Gardner, 2005).
• Don’t be negative. Negative cognitions and emotions have an extremely harmful influence on relationships (Gottman, 1994). Don’t let a spiral of negative thinking and negative behaviors get started.
Do whatever you can to think positively. • Be fair in how you evaluate behaviors. Many people in close relationships, as do most people in their everyday lives, tend to inflate their own self-worth.
They rate their own positive behaviors as better than their partner’s, and rate their partner’s negative behaviors as worse than their own. Try to give your partner the benefit of the doubt—remember that you are not perfect either. • Do things that please your partner.
The principles of social exchange make it clear that being nice to others leads them to be nice in return. • Have fun. Relationships in which the partners have positive moods and in which the partners are not bored tend to last longer (Tsapelas, Aron, & Orbuch, 2009).
Partners who are able to remain similar in their values and other beliefs are going to be more successful. This seems to have been the case for Frank and Anita—they continued to share activities and interests. Partners must also display positive affect toward each other.
Happy couples are in positive moods when they are around each other—they laugh together, and they express approval rather than criticism of each other’s behaviors. Partners are happier when they view the other person in a positive or even “idealized” sense rather than in a more realistic and perhaps more negative one (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 1996). Anita and Frank talked in their interview about how their time together was characterized by positive feelings and romance, and perhaps that helped them stay together.
Next, the partners must share, in the sense that they are willing to express their thoughts about each other. Successful relationships involve individuals self-disclosing their own needs and desires, which allows their partners to become aware of their needs and attempt to meet them if possible. If the partners are not able to express their concerns, then the relationship cannot become more intimate.
Successful relationships have successful communication patterns. Finally, but not least important, are sexual behaviors. Compatibility of sexual preferences and attitudes are an important predictor of relationship success.
For instance, it is very important that partners are on the same page about how they feel about pursuing sex outside of the relationship, as infidelity in relationships is linked to increased risk of divorce (Wiederman, 1997). Even if a partner does not actually have sex with someone else, his or her partner may still be jealous, and jealously can harm relationships. Jealousy is a powerful emotion that has been evolutionarily selected to help maintain close relationships.
Both men and women experience jealousy, although they experience it to different extents and in different ways. Men are more jealous than women overall. And men are more concerned than women about sexual infidelities of their partners, whereas women are relatively more concerned about emotional infidelities of their partners (Buss, Larsen, Westen, &424 Chapter 7.
Liking and Loving Semmelroth, 1992). Men’s concern with sexual cheating is probably due in part to evolutionary factors related to kin selection: men need to be particularly sure that their partners are sexually faithful to them to ensure that the time they spend raising children is spent on raising their own children, not those of others. And women’s concern with emotional fidelity fits with a focus on maintaining the relationship intact.
Flirting suggests that the man is not really committed to the relationship and may leave it. When Relationships End Inevitably, some relationships do break up, and these separations may cause substantial pain. When the partners have been together for a long time, particularly in a relationship characterized by interdependence and commitment, the pain is even greater (Simpson, 1987).
The pain of a breakup is in part due to the loneliness that results from it. People who lose someone they care about also lose a substantial amount of social support, and it takes time to recover and develop new social connections. Lonely people sleep more poorly, take longer to recover from stress, and show poorer health overall (Cacioppo et al., 2002).
The pain of a loss may be magnified when people feel that they have been rejected by the other. The experience of rejection makes people sad, angry, more likely to break social norms, and more focused on self-concern. The ability to effectively self-regulate is lowered, and people are more likely to act on their impulses (Baumeister, DeWall, Ciarocco, & Twenge, 2005).
But people who have been rejected are also more motivated by other-concern; they are particularly likely to try to make new friends to help make up for the rejection (Gardner, Pickett, & Brewer, 2000). Although people who have been rejected are particularly hurt, people who have rejected others may feel guilty about it. Breaking up is painful, but people do recover from it, and they usually move on to find new relationships.
Margaret Stroebe and her colleagues (Stroebe, Hansson, Schut, & Stroebe, 2008) found that people adjusted to the loss of a partner, even one with whom they had been with for a long time, although many did have increased psychological difficulties, at least in the short term. Key Takeaways • The factors that keep people liking each other in long-term relationships are at least in part the same as the factors that lead to initial attraction. • Over time, cognition becomes relatively more important than passion, and close relationships are more likely to be based on companionate love than on passionate love.
• In successful relationships, the partners begin to feel close to each other and become attuned to each other’s needs. • Partners in close relationships become interdependent and develop a commitment to the relationship. • Attachment styles, formed in infancy, to some extent predict how people relate to others in close relationships as adults.7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 425 Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Imagine that you are in a romantic relationship with someone you really care about and that you would really like the relationship to last. List three strategies based on the research described in this section that you might use to help keep the relationship happy and harmonious. 2.
Analyze a well-known Hollywood romance that has lasted (or that has not lasted). Which of the variables that we have considered in this chapter seem to help explain the outcome of the relationship? 3.
What do you think your main attachment style was as a child toward your caregivers? How similar or different do you think your attachment style is now? What impacts does your current main attachment style have on your relationships?
4. Identify two different people with whom you think that you have a different attachment style. What reasons can you identify for this difference, and how does it affect the quality of each relationship?
5. Based on your experiences of your own close relationships, or those of people around you, which do you think are the three most important factors covered in this section that promote relationship satisfaction and why? References Acker, M., & Davis, M.
H. (1992). Intimacy, passion and commitment in adult romantic relationships: A test of the triangular theory of love.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 9(1), 21–50. Agishtein, P., & Brumbaugh, C. (2013).
Cultural variation in adult attachment: The impact of ethnicity, collectivism, and country of origin. Journal Of Social, Evolutionary, And Cultural Psychology, 7(4), 384-405. doi:10.1037/h0099181 Ainsworth, M.
S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation. Oxford, England: Lawrence Erlbaum. Andersen, S.
M., & Cole, S. W. (1990).
“Do I know you?” The role of significant others in general social perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(3), 384–399. Aron, A., Aron, E.
N., & Smollan, D. (1992). Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure of interpersonal closeness.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63(4), 596–612. Aron, A., Aron, E. N., Tudor, M., & Nelson, G.
(1991). Close relationships as including other in the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(2), 241–253.
Aron, A., Melinat, E., Aron, E. N., & Vallone, R. D.
(1997). The experimental generation of interpersonal closeness: A procedure and some preliminary findings. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(4), 363–377.
Arriaga, X. B., & Agnew, C. R.
(2001). Being committed: Affective, cognitive, and conative426 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving components of relationship commitment.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27(9), 1190–1203. Baldwin, M. W., & Fehr, B.
(1995). On the instability of attachment style ratings. Personal Relationships, 2(3), 247–261.
Bargh, J. A. (2002).
Beyond simple truths: The human-Internet interaction. Journal of Social Issues, 58(1), 1–8. Bargh, J.
A., & McKenna, K. Y. A.
(2004). The Internet and social life. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 573–590.
Bargh, J. A., McKenna, K. Y.
A., & Fitzsimons, G. M. (2002).
Can you see the real me? Activation and expression of the “true self” on the Internet. Journal of Social Issues, 58(1), 33–48.
Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Ciarocco, N.
J., & Twenge, J. M. (2005).
Social exclusion impairs self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(4), 589–604. Buss, D.
M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., & Semmelroth, J. (1992).
Sex differences in jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and psychology. Psychological Science, 3(4), 251–255. Buunk, B.
P., & Van Yperen, N. W. (1991).
Referential comparisons, relational comparisons, and exchange orientation: Their relation to marital satisfaction. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin,17(6), 709-717. doi:10.1177/0146167291176015 Buunk, B.
P., Van Yperen, N. W., Taylor, S. E., & Collins, R.
L. (1991). Social comparison and the drive upward revisited: Affiliation as a response to marital stress.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 21(6), 529–546. Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L.
C., Crawford, E., Ernst, J. M., Burleson, M. H., Kowalewski, R.
B.,…Berntson, G. G. (2002).
Loneliness and health: Potential mechanisms. Psychosomatic Medicine, 64(3), 407–417. Campbell, L., Simpson, J.
A., Boldry, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2005).
Perceptions of conflict and support in romantic relationships: The role of attachment anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(3), 510–531. Caspi, A.
(2000). The child is father of the man: Personality continuities from childhood to adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(1), 158–172.
Cassidy, J. E., & Shaver, P. R.
E. (1999). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications.
New York, NY: Guilford Press. Chopik, W. J., Edelstein, R.
S., & Fraley, R. (2013). From the cradle to the grave: Age differences in attachment from early adulthood to old age.
Journal Of Personality, 81(2), 171-183. doi:10.1111/ j.1467-6494.2012.00793.x Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B.
C. (2000). A safe haven: An attachment theory perspective on support seeking and caregiving in intimate relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(6), 1053–1073. Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B.
C. (2004). Working models of attachment shape perceptions of social support: Evidence from experimental and observational studies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(3), 363–383. Collins, N. L., Cooper, M.
L., Albino, A., & Allard, L. (2002). Psychosocial vulnerability from7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 427 adolescence to adulthood: A prospective study of attachment style differences in relationship functioning and partner choice.
Journal of Personality, 70, 965–1008. Davila, J., & Cobb, R. J.
(2003). Predicting change in self-reported and interviewer-assessed adult attachment: Tests of the individual difference and life stress models of attachment change. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(7), 859-870.
doi:10.1177/ 0146167203029007005 Davis, J. L., & Rusbult, C. E.
(2001). Attitude alignment in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(1), 65–84.
Dion, K. L., & Dion, K. K.
(1993). Gender and ethnocultural comparisons in styles of love. Psychology Of Women Quarterly, 17(4), 463-473.
doi:10.1111/j.1471-6402.1993.tb00656.x Eastwick, P. W., & Finkel, E. J.
(2008). The attachment system in fledgling relationships: An activating role for attachment anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(3), 628–647.
Eisenberg, J., Harvey, H. B., Moore, D. A., Gazelle, C.
S., & Pandharipande, P. (2012). Falling prey to the sunk cost bias: a potential harm of patient radiation dose histories.
Radiology, 263(3), 626-628. Fox, J., Warber, K. M., & Makstaller, D.
C. (2013). The role of Facebook in romantic relationship development: An exploration of Knapp’s relational stage model.
Journal Of Social And Personal Relationships, 30(6), 771-794. doi:10.1177/0265407512468370 Fraley, R. C.
(2002). Attachment stability from infancy to adulthood: Meta-analysis and dynamic modeling of developmental mechanisms. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(2), 123–151.
Fraley, R. C., Garner, J. P., & Shaver, P.
R. (2000). Adult attachment and the defensive regulation of attention and memory: Examining the role of preemptive and postemptive defensive processes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(5), 816–826. Gabriel, S., Carvallo, M., Dean, K. K., Tippin, B., & Renaud, J.
(2005). How I see me depends on how I see we: The role of attachment style in social comparison. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(11), 1561–1572.
Gardner, W. L., Pickett, C. L., & Brewer, M.
B. (2000). Social exclusion and selective memory: How the need to belong influences memory for social events.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(4), 486–496. Gonzaga, G. C., Haselton, M.
G., Smurda, J., Davies, M. S., & Poore, J. C.
(2008). Love, desire, and the suppression of thoughts of romantic alternatives. Evolution and Human Behavior, 29(2), 119–126.
Gottman, J. M. (1994).
What predicts divorce? Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Hazan, C., & Diamond, L.
M. (2000). The place of attachment in human mating.
Review of General Psychology, 4(2), 186–204. Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Newton, T.
L. (2001). Marriage and health: His and hers.
Psychological Bulletin, 127(4), 472-503. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.127.4.472 Kraut, R., Kiesler, S., Boneva, B., Cummings, J., Helgeson, V., & Crawford, A. (2002).
Internet paradox revisited. Journal of Social Issues, 58(1), 49–74. Kraut, R., Patterson, M., Lundmark, V., Kiesler, S., Mukophadhyay, T., & Scherlis, W.
(1998).428 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving Internet paradox: A social technology that reduces social involvement and psychological well- being? American Psychologist, 53(9), 1017–1031.
Kreider, R.M., & Fields, J. M. (2001).
Number, timing, and duration of marriages and divorces. Current Population Reports, 70-80, (Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, 2005).
Lemieux, R., & Hale, J. L. (2002).
Cross-sectional analysis of intimacy, passion, and commitment: Testing the assumptions of the triangular theory of love. Psychological Reports, 90(3,Pt1), 1009-1014. doi:10.2466/PR0.90.3.1009-1014 Lockwood, P., Dolderman, D., Sadler, P., & Gerchak, E.
(2004). Feeling better about doing worse: Social comparisons within romantic relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(1), 80–95.
Maner, J. K., Miller, S. L., Rouby, D.
A., & Gailliot, M. T. (2009).
Intrasexual vigilance: The implicit cognition of romantic rivalry. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(1), 74–87. Maner, J.
K., Rouby, D. A., & Gonzaga, G. C.
(2008). Automatic inattention to attractive alternatives: The evolved psychology of relationship maintenance. Evolution and Human Behavior, 29(5), 343–349.
Margolin, G., & Wampold, B. E. (1981).
Sequential analysis of conflict and accord in distressed and nondistressed marital partners. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 49(4), 554–567. McKenna, K.
Y. A., Green, A. S., Gleason, M.
J. (2002). Relationship formation on the Internet: What’s the big attraction?
Journal of Social Issues, 58(1), 9–31. Murray, S. L., Holmes, J.
G., & Griffin, D. W. (1996).
The benefits of positive illusions: Idealization and the construction of satisfaction in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(1), 79–98. Neff, L.
A., & Karney, B. R. (2002).
Self-evaluation motives in close relationships: A model of global enhancement and specific verification. In P. Noller & J.
A. Feeney (Eds.), Understanding marriage: Developments in the study of couple interaction (pp. 32–58).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Obegi, J. H.
(2008). The development of the client-therapist bond through the lens of attachment theory. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 45(4), 431-446.
doi:10.1037/ a0014330 Parks, M. R., & Floyd, K. (1996).
Making friends in cyberspace. Journal of Communication, 46(1), 80–97. Pickett, C.
L., & Gardner, W. L. (2005).
The social monitoring system: Enhanced sensitivity to social cues as an adaptive response to social exclusion. In K. D.
Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W.
von Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp. 213–226). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Pierce, T., & Lydon, J. E. (2001).
Global and specific relational models in the experience of social interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4), 613–631. Rholes, W.
S., Simpson, J. A., Tran, S., Martin, A. M., III, & Friedman, M.
(2007). Attachment and information seeking in romantic relationships. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33(3), 422–438.
Ross, L. R., & Spinner, B. (2001).
General and specific attachment representations in adulthood: Is7.2 Close Relationships: Liking and Loving over the Long Term 429 there a relationship?. Journal Of Social And Personal Relationships, 18(6), 747-766. doi:10.1177/ 0265407501186001 Rusbult, C.
E., Olsen, N., Davis, J. L., & Hannon, P. A.
(2001). Commitment and relationship maintenance mechanisms. In J.
Harvey & A. Wenzel (Eds.), Close romantic relationships: Maintenance and enhancement (pp. 87–113).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Sabini, J., & Silver, M. (2005).
Gender and jealousy: Stories of infidelity. Cognition and Emotion, 19(5), 713–727. Scharfe, E., & Bartholomew, K.
(1994). Reliability and stability of adult attachment patterns. Personal Relationships, 1(1), 23–43.
Schul, Y., & Vinokur, A. D. (2000).
Projection in person perception among spouses as a function of the similarity in their shared experiences. Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(8), 987-1001. doi:10.1177/01461672002610008 Seligman, C., Fazio, R.
H., & Zanna, M. P. (1980).
Effects of salience of extrinsic rewards on liking and loving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38(3), 453–460. Simpson, J.
A. (1987). The dissolution of romantic relationships: Factors involved in relationship stability and emotional distress.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(4), 683–692. Simpson, J. A., Gangestad, S.
W., & Lerma, M. (1990). Perception of physical attractiveness: Mechanisms involved in the maintenance of romantic relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1192–1201. Slotter, B., Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C.
N., Pond, R. S., Jr., Lambert, N. M., Bodenhausen, G.
V., & Fincham, F. D. (2011, August 8).
Putting the brakes on aggression toward a romantic partner: The inhibitory influence of relationship commitment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (in press). Sprecher, S.
(2006). Sexuality in close relationships. In P.
Noller & J. A. Feeney (Eds.), Close relationships: Functions, forms and processes (pp.
267–284). Hove, England: Psychology Press/ Taylor & Francis (UK). Sprecher, S., & Metts, S.
(1989). Development of the ‘Romantic Beliefs Scale’ and examination of the effects of gender and gender-role orientation. Journal Of Social And Personal Relationships, 6(4), 387-411.
doi:10.1177/0265407589064001 Solomon, M. F. (2009).
Attachment repair in couples therapy: A prototype for treatment of intimate relationships. Clinical Social Work Journal, 37(3), 214-223. doi:10.1007/s10615-009-0217-1 Sternberg, R.
(1986). A triangular theory of love. Psychological Review, 93, 119–135.
Stroebe, M. S., Hansson, R. O., Schut, H., & Stroebe, W.
(2008). Bereavement research: Contemporary perspectives. In M.
S. Stroebe, R. O.
Hansson, H. Schut, W. Stroebe, & E.
Van den Blink (Eds.), Handbook of bereavement research and practice: Advances in theory and intervention (pp. 3–25). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Taylor, S. E., & Gonzaga, G. C.
(2006). Evolution, relationships, and health: The social shaping hypothesis. In M.
Schaller, J. A. Simpson, & D.
T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and social psychology (pp. 211–236).
Madison, CT: Psychosocial Press. Tidwell, M.-C. O., Reis, H.
T., & Shaver, P. R. (1996).
Attachment, attractiveness, and social interaction: A diary study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71(4), 729–745.430 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving Todosijevic, J., Rothblum, E.D., & Solomon, S.E.
(2005). Relationship satisfaction, affectivity, and gay specific stressors in same-sex couples joined in civil unions. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29, 158-166-223.
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2005.00178.x Tsapelas, I., Aron, A., & Orbuch, T. (2009). Marital boredom now predicts less satisfaction 9 years later.
Psychological Science, 20(5), 543–545. doi: 10.1111/j.1467–9280.2009.02332.x Van Yperen, N. W., & Buunk, B.
P. (1990). A longitudinal study of equity and satisfaction in intimate relationships.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 20(4), 287–309. Wegner, D. M., Erber, R., & Raymond, P.
(1991). Transactive memory in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(6), 923–929.
Wellman, B., Quan Haase, A., Witte, J., & Hampton, K. (2001). Does the Internet increase, decrease, or supplement social capital?
Social networks, participation, and community commitment. American Behavioral Scientist, 45(3), 436–455. Wiederman, M.
W. (1997). Extramarital sex: Prevalence and correlates in a national survey.
Journal of Sex Research, 34(2), 167–174. Image Descriptions Figure 7.10 Romantic Love and Attention to Faces A bar graph illustrating the control prime’s and love prime’s attention to faces of different targets. • Attention to faces of attractive opposite sex target: ◦ control prime: 750 ◦ love prime: between 550 and 500 • Attention to faces of average opposite sex target: ◦ control prime: between 600 and 650, slightly higher than love prime ◦ love prime: between 600 and 650, slightly lower than control prime • Attention to faces of attractive same sex targets: ◦ control prime: between 625 and 650 ◦ love prime: between 600 and 625 • Attention to faces of average same sex targets: ◦ control prime: 650 ◦ love prime: between 600 and 650 [Return to Figure 7.10]7.3 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Liking and Loving There is no part of human experience that is more important to our survival than our close relationships with others.
Without close relationships, we could not successfully reproduce, and without the social support provided by others who care about us, our lives would be less meaningful and we would be less mentally and physically healthy. Hopefully, this chapter has reminded you of the importance of your relationships with others or perhaps taught you to think differently about those relationships. Perhaps you are already in a happy, close relationship, and this chapter may have given you some ideas about how to keep that relationship happy and healthy.
Perhaps you are thinking more now about your commitment to the relationship, the benefits and costs you receive from the relationship, the equity between you and your partner, and the costs or benefits you and your partner gain from the relationship. Is your relationship a communal relationship or is it more of an exchange relationship? What can you do to help ensure that you and your partner remain together as one interrelated pair?
Or perhaps you are not currently in a relationship and are hoping to develop a new close relationship. In this case, this chapter may have provided you with some ideas about how to get someone to like you and to see you as an appropriate partner. Maybe you will think more about the important role of actual and assumed similarity and reciprocal disclosure on liking, and the role of proximity in attraction.
In any case, hopefully you can now see that even close relationships can be considered in terms of the basic principles of social psychology, the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition, and the goals of self- concern and other-concern. Close relationships are particularly interesting in terms of the last factor because they are one of the ways that we can feel good about ourselves by connecting with others. 4317.4 Chapter Summary Relationships between people that are characterized by loving, caring, commitment, and intimacy, such as those between adult friends, dating partners, lovers, and married couples, are known as close relationships.
Our close relationships make us happy and healthy. We experience higher self-efficacy, self-esteem, and positive mood when we believe that our friends and partners are responding to us supportively and with a concern for our needs and our welfare. When we say that we like or love someone, we are experiencing interpersonal attraction.
People are strongly influenced by the physical attractiveness of their partners in initial encounters. On average, we find younger people more attractive than older people, we are more attracted to faces that are more symmetrical in comparison with those that are less symmetrical, and we prefer faces that are more, rather than less, average. Although the preferences for youth, symmetry, and averageness appear to be universal, there is evidence that at least some differences in perceived attractiveness are due to social and cultural factors.
Overall, both men and women value physical attractiveness. However, for men, the physical attractiveness of women is more important than it is for women judging men, whereas women are relatively more interested in the social status of men. These gender differences may have evolutionary origins.
The tendency to perceive attractive people as having positive characteristics, such as sociability and competence, is known as the what is beautiful is good stereotype. Relationships are more likely to develop and be maintained to the extent that the partners share values and beliefs. The basic principles of social exchange and equity dictate that there will be general similarity in status among people in close relationships.
And we tend to prefer people who seem to like us about as much as we like them. Simply being around another person also increases our liking for that individual. The tendency to prefer stimuli (including, but not limited to, people) that we have seen more frequently is known as mere exposure.
We tend to like people more when we are in a good mood and to like them less when we are in a bad mood. And it has been found that arousal polarizes our liking of others. The strong feelings that we experience toward another person that are accompanied by increases in arousal are called passion, and the emotionally intense love that is based on arousal and sexual attraction is known as passionate love.
As partners stay together over time, cognition becomes relatively more important than passion, and close relationships are more likely to be based on companionate love than on passionate love. As a relationship progresses, the partners in the relationship come to know each other more fully and care about each other to a greater degree—they become closer to each other. Intimacy is marked in large part by reciprocal self-disclosure—that is, the tendency to communicate frequently and openly.
433434 Chapter 7. Liking and Loving The partners in close relationships increasingly turn to each other for social support and for other needs. The members of a close relationship are highly interdependent and rely to a great degree on effective social exchange.
When partners are attentive to the needs of the other person, and when they help the other meet his or her needs without explicitly keeping track of what they are giving or expecting to get in return, we say that the partners have a communal relationship. In relationships in which a positive rapport between the partners is developed and maintained over a period of time, the partners are naturally happy with the relationship and they become committed to it. The triangular model of love proposes that there are different types of love, each made up of different combinations of the basic components of passion, intimacy, and commitment.
Children have been found to develop either a secure or insecure attachment style with their caregivers, and individual differences in these styles remain somewhat stable into adulthood. People with secure attachment styles may make better partners. Attachment styles, though, do show some diversity across different cultural and age groups.
They can also shift somewhat, even during adulthood, and so people who are currently showing insecure attachment can move toward being more securely attached in their relationships.Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns • Understand the differences between altruism and helping, and explain how social psychologists try to differentiate the two.
• Review the roles of reciprocity and social exchange in helping. • Describe the evolutionary factors that influence helping. • Summarize how the perceptions of rewards and costs influence helping.
• Outline the social norms that influence helping. 2. The Role of Affect: Moods and Emotions • Summarize the effects of positive and negative moods on helping.
• Explain how the affective states of guilt, empathy, and personal distress influence helping. 3. How the Social Context Influences Helping • Review Bibb Latané and John Darley’s model of helping behavior and indicate the social psychological variables that influence each stage.
4. Other Determinants of Helping • Review the person, gender, and cultural variables that relate to altruism. • Explain how the reactions of the person being helped may influence the benefits of helping.
• Outline the ways that we might be able to increase helping. 435436 Dr. Hammond Tarry Brad Pitt Helping in New Orleans Figure 8.1 Brad Pitt.
The film actor Brad Pitt has been personally involved in helping rebuild the U.S. city of New Orleans after it was devastated by Hurricane Katrina in 2005. As one who has always been interested in architecture, Pitt created a rebuilding project and donated $5 million of his own money to get it started.
With the help of some architectural firms, he produced a wide variety of ecologically friendly homes and flood-proof designs. Make it Right Foundation asks businesses, religious groups, and individuals to provide grants and donations for house projects. Pitt says the primary goal of his work is to replace homes, although many officials and politicians wonder whether it is a good idea to rebuild these houses in area that is likely to be flooded again.
To publicize his cause, Pitt had 150 huge pink Monopoly-shaped houses built around New Orleans. The pink blocks, which he described as a work of art, emphasize the needs of the area and his ideas for redesign. Pitt said at the time that rebuilding the areas hit by the hurricane was a bigger priority than his movie career, a project he was going to see through to the end.
Source: Brad Pitt unveils plans for New Orleans homes. In the fall of 2005, Hurricane Katrina hit the southern coast of the United States. The hurricane created billions of dollars in damage, destroyed a good part of the city of New Orleans and other southern towns, and caused the dislocation of thousands of people.
The hurricane made news across the world,Principles of Social Psychology 437 and the disaster was not ignored. Hundreds of thousands of people made financial contributions to help rebuild the cities and repair the lives that were devastated by the storm. During the first few months after the storm, thousands more people came from across the country, and even from around the world, to help clean up the mess and repair the damage that the storm had caused.
Many of these volunteers had been to New Orleans, and some had families and friends there. Others came simply because they had heard about the disaster and wanted to help the people who were so profoundly affected by it. When you hear about this type of behavior, you may wonder about its meaning for human nature.
Why would people sacrifice so much of themselves for others who cannot help them in return? Is helping part of the normal human experience, or are these acts unusual, unexpected, and rare? Who is most likely to help, who are we most likely to help, and under what social circumstances do we help or not help?
And what biological, personal, social, and cultural factors influence helping? On the other hand, perhaps you are skeptical about altruism. You may have noticed the many cases in which people seem oblivious to the needs of others.
We allow tens of millions of people around the world to live in poverty, we do little to help those who are homeless, and often we seem to be more concerned with ourselves that we are with others. You might wonder whether people ever perform behaviors that are not designed—at least in some way—to benefit themselves. Perhaps at least some of the Katrina volunteers, and even Brad Pitt himself, were really helping—at least in part—for themselves.
The money and time that they volunteered might have been motivated by the desire to avoid being seen as selfish, or by the fear of feeling guilty if they did not help. Perhaps our seemingly altruistic behaviors are actually motivated not by the desire to increase another’s welfare but by the desire to enhance the self. Human nature has created a general tendency for people to enjoy the company of others and to trust, care for, and respect other people.
This idea leads us to expect that we will, in most cases, be helpful and cooperative, and perhaps even altruistic. In support of this idea, the 2010 Canada Survey of Giving, Volunteering, and Participating found that 47 percent of Canadians (including 58 percent of Canadian youth) volunteer their time to help others. This adds up to roughly 2.1 billion total volunteer hours every year!
Similar results were found in the United States according to independent sector, where a survey given by an established coalition that studies and encourages volunteering found that over 83 million American adults reported that they helped others by volunteering and did so an average of 3.6 hours per week. The survey estimated that the value of the volunteer time that was given was over $239 billion. Taken together it seems that many people are helpful to others.
Indeed, although few of us are likely to have the opportunity to engage in an act of helpful heroism, we are all likely to have the opportunity to help somebody sometime, and it is likely that—if the costs are not too great—we will do so. If you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will realize that whether we help or don’t help is not likely to be determined completely by random factors. Rather, these decisions are influenced by the underlying human motivations of protecting the self and reaching out to others.
Some of our altruistic behavior is part of our genetic endowment—we help because we are human beings, and human beings (as are many other species) are helpful. In other cases, our helping is more selfish, designed to make ourselves feel better or even to gain rewards such as praise, status, or money. Although we may not completely understand the characteristics of altruism and we cannot always predict who will or will not help others, social psychologists nevertheless have learned a great deal about these determinants.438 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Because we spend so much time in the presence of others, we have the opportunity to react to them in either positive or negative ways. To some people we are friendly, caring, and helpful; to others we are wary, unfriendly, or even mean and aggressive. The goal of this chapter and “Chapter 9.
Aggression” is to understand when and why people engage in either prosocial or antisocial behaviors. Let’s begin by focusing on the positive side of the equation—what makes us help others. “Chapter 9.
Aggression” will discuss the flip side—the causes of human aggression. Media Attributions • “Brad Pitt at Incirlik2” by Airman 1st Class Tanaya M. Harms is licensed under a CC0 1.0 licence.8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns Learning Objectives 1.
Understand the differences between altruism and helping, and explain how social psychologists try to differentiate the two. 2. Review the roles of reciprocity and social exchange in helping.
3. Describe the evolutionary factors that influence helping. 4.
Summarize how the perceptions of rewards and costs influence helping. 5. Outline the social norms that influence helping.
Altruism refers to any behavior that is designed to increase another person’s welfare, and particularly those actions that do not seem to provide a direct reward to the person who performs them (Batson, Ahmad, & Stocks, 2011; Dovidio, Piliavin, Schroeder, & Penner, 2006; Penner, Dovidio, Piliavin, & Schroeder, 2005). Rather than being the exception to the rule, recent research seems to indicate that these kinds of behaviors are intuitive, reflexive, and even automatic (Zaki & Mitchell, 2013). Altruism occurs when we donate blood, when we stop to help a stranger who has been stranded on the highway, when we volunteer at a homeless shelter or donate to a charity, or when we get involved to prevent a crime from occurring.
Every day there are numerous acts of helping that occur all around us. As we will see, some of these represent true altruism, whereas others represent helping that is motivated more by self-concern. And, of course, there are also times when we do not help at all, seeming to not care about the needs of others.
Helping is strongly influenced by affective variables. Indeed, the parts of the brain that are most involved in empathy, altruism, and helping are the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex, areas that are responsible for emotion and emotion regulation (Figure 8.2, “Empathy and Helping in the Human Brain”). 439440 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism Figure 8.2 Empathy and Helping in the Human Brain. This figure shows the areas of the human brain that are known to be important in empathy and helping. They include the amygdala (area 1) and sections of the prefrontal cortex (areas 2 and 3).
From Lieberman (2010). Kinship Is the tendency to help others, at least in part, a basic feature of human nature? Evolutionary psychologists believe so.
They argue that although helping others can be costly to us as individuals, altruism does have a clear benefit for the group as a whole. Remember that in an evolutionary sense the survival of the individual is less important than the survival of the individual’s genes (McAndrew, 2002). Therefore, if a given behavior such as altruism enhances our reproductive success by helping the8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 441 species as a whole survive and prosper, then that behavior is likely to increase fitness, be passed on to subsequent generations, and become part of human nature.
If we are altruistic in part to help us pass on our genes, then we should be particularly likely try to care for and to help our relatives. Research has found that we are indeed particularly helpful to our kin (Madsen et al., 2007; Stewart-Williams, 2007). Burnstein, Crandall, and Kitayama (1994) asked students in the United States and Japan to report how they would respond to a variety of situations in which someone needed help.
The students indicated that in cases in which a person’s life was at stake and the helping involved a lot of effort, time, and danger, they would be more likely to help a person who was closely related to them (for instance, a sibling, parent, or child) than they would be to help a person who was more distantly related (for example, a niece, nephew, uncle, or grandmother). People are more likely to donate kidneys to relatives than to strangers (Borgida, Conner, & Manteufel, 1992), and even children indicate that they are more likely to help their siblings than they are to help a friend (Tisak & Tisak, 1996). Figure 8.3 We are particularly helpful to people who share our genetic background.
Table 8.1, “Percentage of Genetic Material Shared by the Members of Each Category,” shows the average extent to which we share genes with some of the people we are genetically related to. According to evolutionary principles, this degree of genetic closeness should be positively correlated with the likelihood that we will help each of those people. Do you think that your own likelihood of helping each of the people listed corresponds to the degree to which you are genetically related to that person?
Table 8.1 Percentage of Genetic Material Shared by the Members of Each Category Category Percentage Identical monozygotic twins 100% Parents, children, siblings, and fraternal (dizygotic) twins 50% Half-sibling, grandparent, and grandchild 25% Cousins, great-grandchildren, great-grandparents, great-aunts, great-uncles 12.5% Unrelated persons, such as a marital partner, brother-in-law or sister-in-law, adopted or 0% step-sibling, friend, or acquaintance *Source: Neyer and Lang (2003).442 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism Our reactions to others are influenced not only by our genetic relationship to them but also by their perceived similarity to us. We help friends more than we help strangers, we help members of our ingroups more than we help members of outgroups, and we are even more likely to help strangers who are more similar to us (Dovidio et al., 1997; Krupp, DeBruine, & Barclay, 2008; Sturmer, Snyder, Kropp, & Siem, 2006).
It is quite possible that similarity is an important determinant of helping because we use it as a marker—although not a perfect one—that people share genes with us (Park & Schaller, 2005; Van Vugt & Van Lange, 2006). Cialdini, Brown, Lewis, Luce, and Neuberg (1997) have proposed that it is the sense of perceived similarity—the sense of ‘‘oneness’’ between the helper and the individual in need—that motivates most helping. Reciprocity and Social Exchange Although it seems logical that we would help people we are related to or those we perceive as similar to us, why would we ever help people to whom we are not related?
One explanation for such behavior is based on the principle of reciprocal altruism (Trivers, 1971). Reciprocal altruism is the idea that if we help other people now, they will return the favor should we need their help in the future. Thus by helping others, we both increase our chances of survival and reproductive success and help others increase their chances of survival too.
Over the course of evolution, those who engage in reciprocal altruism should be able to reproduce more often than those who do not, thus enabling this kind of altruism to continue. Reciprocal altruism means that people even may help total strangers, based on the assumption that doing so is useful because it may lead others to help them (when help is most needed) in the future. One fact that might help convince you that altruism is in fact evolutionarily adaptive is that many animals also engage in reciprocal altruism.
Birds emit an alarm to nearby birds to warn them of a predator even at a potential cost to themselves. Dolphins may support sick or injured animals by swimming under them and pushing them to the surface so they can breathe. Male baboons threaten predators and guard the rear of the troop as it retreats.
And even bats have a buddy system in which a bat that has had a successful night of feeding will regurgitate food for its less fortunate companion (Wilkinson, 1990). Altruism can even be found in low-level organisms, such as the cellular slime molds (Figure 8.4, “Altruism”). Slime molds are groups of cells that live as individuals until they are threatened by a lack of food, at which point they come together and form a multicellular organism in which some of the cells sacrifice themselves to promote the survival of other cells in the organism.
Altruism, then, is truly all around us.8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 443 Figure 8.4 Altruism is found in many organisms including even cellular slime molds (upper right). Reciprocal altruism is one example of the general principle of social exchange. We frequently use each other to gain rewards and to help protect ourselves from harm, and helping is one type of benefit that we can provide to others.
In some cases, this exchange reflects overt cooperation, such as when two students take notes for each other in classes that they miss or when neighbors care for each other’s pets while one of them is away. In other cases, the exchange may be more subtle and indirect: for instance, when we help someone we don’t really know, with the expectation that someone else may help us in return someday. Social Reinforcement and Altruism: The Role of Rewards and Costs Although there continues to be a lively debate within the social psychological literature about the relative contributions of each factor, it is clear that helping is both part of our basic human biological nature and also in part learned through our social experiences with other people (Batson, 2011).444 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism The principles of social learning suggest that people will be more likely to help when they receive rewards for doing so. Parents certainly realize this—children who share their toys with others are praised, whereas those who act more selfishly are reprimanded. And research has found that we are more likely to help attractive rather than unattractive people of the other sex (Farrelly, Lazarus, & Roberts, 2007)—again probably because it is rewarding to do so.
Darley and Batson (1973) demonstrated the effect of the costs of helping in a particularly striking way. They asked students in a religious seminary to prepare a speech for presentation to other students. According to random assignment to conditions, one half of the seminarians prepared a talk on the parable of the altruistic Good Samaritan; the other half prepared a talk on the jobs that seminary students like best.
The expectation was that preparing a talk on the Good Samaritan would prime the concept of being helpful for these students. After they had prepared their talks, the religion students were then asked to walk to a nearby building where the speech would be recorded. However, and again according to random assignment, the students were told that they had plenty of time to get to the recording session, that they were right on time, or that they should hurry because they were already running late.
On the way to the other building, the students all passed a person in apparent distress (actually a research confederate) who was slumped in a doorway, coughing and groaning, and clearly in need of help. The dependent variable in the research was the degree of helping that each of the students gave to the person who was in need (Figure 8.5, “The Costs of Helping”). Darley and Batson found that the topic of the upcoming speech did not have a significant impact on helping.
The students who had just prepared a speech about the importance of helping did not help significantly more than those who had not. Time pressure, however, made a difference. Of those who thought they had plenty of time, 63% offered help, compared with 45% of those who believed they were on time and only 10% of those who thought they were late.
You can see that this is exactly what would be expected on the basis of the principles of social reinforcement—when we have more time to help, then helping is less costly and we are more likely to do it. Figure 8.5 The Costs of Helping [Image description]8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 445 The seminary students in the research by Darley and Batson (1973) were less likely to help a person in need when they were in a hurry than when they had more time, even when they were actively preparing a talk on the Good Samaritan. The dependent measure is a 5-point scale of helping, ranging from “failed to notice the victim at all” to “after stopping, refused to leave the victim or took him for help.” Of course, not all helping is equally costly.
The costs of helping are especially high when the situation is potentially dangerous or when the helping involves a long-term commitment to the person in need, such as when we decide to take care of a very ill person. Because helping strangers is particularly costly, some European countries have enacted Good Samaritan laws that increase the costs of not helping others. These laws require people to provide or call for aid in an emergency if they can do so without endangering themselves in the process, with the threat of a fine or other punishment if they do not.
Many countries and states also have passed “angel of mercy” laws that decrease the costs of helping and encourage people to intervene in emergencies by offering them protection from the law if their actions turn out not to be helpful or even harmful. For instance, in Germany, a failure to provide first aid to someone in need is punishable by a fine. Furthermore, to encourage people to help in any way possible, the individual providing assistance cannot be prosecuted even if he or she made the situation worse or did not follow proper first aid guidelines (Bundesministerium der Justiz und für Verbraucherschutz, 2014).
In addition to learning through reinforcement, we are also likely to help more often when we model the helpful behavior of others (Bryan & Test, 1967). In fact, although people frequently worry about the negative impact of the violence that is seen on TV, there is also a great deal of helping behavior shown on TV. Smith et al.
(2006) found that 73% of TV shows had some altruism and that about three altruistic behaviors were shown every hour. Furthermore, the prevalence of altruism was particularly high in children’s shows.446 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism Figure 8.6 Altruism and Observational Learning.
Altruism is learned in part through observational learning of positive role models. Viewing positive role models provides ideas about ways to be helpful to others and gives us information about appropriate helping behaviors. Research has found a strong correlation between viewing helpful behavior on TV and helping.
Hearold (1980) concluded on the basis of a meta-analysis that watching altruism on TV had a larger effect on helping than viewing TV violence had on aggressive behavior. She encouraged public officials and parents to demand more TV shows with prosocial themes and positive role models. But just as viewing altruism can increase helping, modeling of behavior that is not altruistic can decrease altruism.
Anderson and Bushman (2001) found that playing violent video games led to a decrease in helping. There are still other types of rewards that we gain from helping others. One is the status we gain as a result of helping.
Altruistic behaviors serve as a type of signal about the altruist’s personal qualities. If good people are also helpful people, then helping implies something good about the helper. When we act altruistically, we gain a reputation as a person with high status who is able and willing to help others, and this status makes us better and more desirable in the eyes of others.
Hardy and Van Vugt (2006) found that both men and women were more likely to make cooperative rather than competitive choices in games that they played with others when their responses were public rather than private. Furthermore, when the participants made their cooperative choices in public, the participants who had been more cooperative were also judged by the other players as having higher social status than were the participants who had been less cooperative. Finally, helpers are healthy!
Research has found that people who help are happier and even live longer than those who are less helpful (Brown, Nesse, Vinokur, & Smith, 2003).8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 447 Social Norms for Helping The outcome of reinforcement for and modeling of helping is the development of social norms of morality—standards of behavior that we see as appropriate and desirable regarding helping (Eisenberg & Fabes, 1998). One norm that we all are aware of and that we attempt to teach our children is based on the principles of equity and exchange. The reciprocity norm is a social norm reminding us that we should follow the principles of reciprocal altruism—if someone helps us, then we should help that person in the future, and we should help people now with the expectation that they will help us later if we need it.
The reciprocity norm is found in everyday adages like “Scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours” and in religious and philosophical teachings such as the golden rule: “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” The reciprocity norm forms the basis of human cooperation and is found in every culture. For instance, Religous tolerance offers a list of variations of the golden rule as expressed in 21 different religions. Because the rule is normally followed, people generally do help others who have helped them (Whatley, Webster, Smith, & Rhodes, 1999).
Because helping following the reciprocity norm is based on the return of earlier help and the expectation of a future return from others, it might not seem so much like true altruism to you. But we might also hope that our children internalize another relevant social norm that seems more altruistic—the social responsibility norm. The social responsibility norm tells us that we should try to help others who need assistance, even without any expectation of future paybacks.
The social responsibility norm involves a sense of duty and obligation, in which people are expected to respond to others by giving help to those in need of assistance. The teachings of many religions are based on the social responsibility norm that we should, as good human beings, reach out and help other people whenever we can. Research Focus Moral Hypocrisy We have seen that the reciprocity norm teaches us that we should help others, with the expectation of a future return, and that the social responsibility norm teaches us that we should do the right thing by helping other people whenever we can, without the expectation of a payback.
And most of us believe that we should be helpful to others. The problem is that these goals may not always be easy for us to follow because they represent a classic case in which one of the basic human motives (other-concern) conflicts with another basic human motive (self-concern). Trying to do the best thing for ourselves in the short term may lead us to take the selfish road—taking advantage of the benefits that others provide us without returning the favor.
Furthermore, we may be particularly likely to act selfishly when we can get away with it. Perhaps you can remember a time when you did exactly that—you acted in a selfish way but attempted nevertheless to appear to others not to have done so. Daniel Batson and his colleagues (Batson, Thompson, Seuferling, Whitney, & Strongman, 1999) created a simple moral dilemma in the laboratory that pitted the desires of individual student research participants against the interests of other students.
They compared what the students said they should do with what they actually did. Each participant was told that there were two tasks being used in the research: in the positive task the participants would engage in an interesting task and have an opportunity to compete for a $30 prize, but448 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism in the neutral task the task was described as boring and there was no opportunity to win anything.
The moral dilemma was created when the experimenter informed the student participants that there was another student who had supposedly come to the experiment at the same time, and that each student had to be assigned to one of the two tasks. Furthermore, it was the job of the student participant to determine who should get which task. The students were told that they could make the decision however they wanted and that the other student would never know who had made the decision.
And they were also given a coin that they could use to help them make the decision if they wanted to use it. The coin was clearly marked—on one side it said “SELF to POSITIVE” and on the other side it said “OTHER to POSITIVE.” The participants were then left alone in a room and asked to determine who should get the positive task and then to indicate what they thought the right decision should be. In terms of what they thought they should do, Batson and his colleagues found that of the 40 students who participated in the experiment, 31 said that flipping the coin was the most morally right thing to do, five said assigning the other participant to the positive consequences task was the most morally right decision, and four said that there was no morally right way to assign the tasks.
These results show that the students believed that being generous, or at least fair, was appropriate. This would suggest that most students would have flipped the coin and chosen whatever side came up. It turned out that 12 of the participants decided not to flip the coin at all.
Of these 12, 10 assigned themselves to the positive task and two gave the positive task to others. These students were clearly putting self-concern ahead of other-concern. But what about the 28 students who chose to flip the coin?
They were clearly trying to do the “right” thing by being fair. By chance, we would have expected that about 14 of these 28 students would have assigned the other person to the positive task, because the coin would have come up “OTHER to POSITIVE” about half of the time. But in fact only four actually did so; the other 24 took the positive task themselves, a significant difference from what would have been expected by chance if the participants had fairly used the actual results of the coin flip.
It appears that the students who flipped the coin wanted to be fair—they flipped the coin to see who would get the positive task. But in the end, they did not act on the principles of fairness when doing so conflicted with their self-interest. Rather, they tended to accept the results of the coin toss when it favored them but rejected it when it did not.
Batson’s research makes clear the trade-offs that exist between helping ourselves and helping others. We know that helping is the right thing to do, but it hurts! Key Takeaways • Altruism refers to any behavior that is designed to increase another person’s welfare, and particularly those actions that do not seem to provide a direct reward to the person who performs them.
• The tendency to help others is at least in part an evolutionary adaptation. We are particularly helpful to our kin and to people we perceive as being similar to us. We also help people who are not related or similar as the result of reciprocal altruism.
By cooperating with others, we increase8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 449 our and others’ chances of survival and reproductive success. • We are more likely to help when we are rewarded and less likely when the perceived costs of helping are high. • Social norms for helping include the reciprocity norm, which reminds us that we should follow the principles of reciprocal altruism, and the social responsibility norm, which tells us that we should try to help others who need assistance, even without any expectation of future payback.
• Helping frequently involves a trade-off between self-concern and other-concern. We want to help, but self-interest often keeps us from doing so. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Determine whether the following behaviors are, or are not, altruism. Consider your answer in terms of your ideas about altruism, but also consider the role of the person and the situation as well as the underlying human motivations of self-concern and other-concern. • Idris donates a litre of blood in exchange for $10.
• Bill stops to help an attractive woman on the highway change a flat tire. • In 2007, the U.K. band Radiohead decided to buck the recording industry system and offer its new album In Rainbows directly to fans at whatever price they felt like paying.
Although they could have downloaded the songs for free, thousands of people paid something anyway. • When Sherry renews her driver’s license, she checks off the box that indicates that she is willing to donate her organs to others when she dies. • Nawaz volunteers once a week at a local soup kitchen.
• George is a Buddhist and believes that true self-understanding comes only from selflessly helping others. References Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B.
J. (2001). Effects of violent video games on aggressive behavior, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and prosocial behavior: A meta- analytic review of the scientific literature.
Psychological Science, 12(5), 353–359. Batson, C. D.
(2011). Altruism in humans. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Batson, C. D., Ahmad, N., & Stocks, E. L.
(2011). Four forms of prosocial motivation: Egoism,450 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism altruism, collectivism, and principalism.
In D. Dunning (Ed.), Social motivation. (pp.
103–126). New York, NY: Psychology Press. Batson, C.
D., Thompson, E. R., Seuferling, G., Whitney, H., & Strongman, J. A.
(1999). Moral hypocrisy: Appearing moral to oneself without being so. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(3), 525–537.
Borgida, E., Conner, C., & Manteufel, L. (Eds.). (1992).
Understanding living kidney donation: A behavioral decision-making perspective. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Brown, S.
L., Nesse, R. M., Vinokur, A. D., & Smith, D.
M. (2003). Providing social support may be more beneficial than receiving it: Results from a prospective study of mortality.
Psychological Science, 14(4), 320–327. Bryan, J. H., & Test, M.
A. (1967). Models and helping: Naturalistic studies in aiding behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6(4, Pt.1), 400–407. Bundesministerium der Justiz und für Verbraucherschutz. (2014).
German criminal code. (M. Bohlander, Trans.).
Retrieved from http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_stgb/ englisch_stgb.html#p2729 Burnstein, E., Crandall, C., & Kitayama, S. (1994). Some neo-Darwinian decision rules for altruism: Weighing cues for inclusive fitness as a function of the biological importance of the decision.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(5), 773–789. Cialdini, R. B., Brown, S.
L., Lewis, B. P., Luce, C., & Neuberg, S. L.
(1997). Reinterpreting the empathy-altruism relationship: When one into one equals oneness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(3), 481–494.
Darley, J. M., & Batson, C. D.
(1973). “From Jerusalem to Jericho”: A study of situational and dispositional variables in helping behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27(1), 100–108.
Dovidio, J. F., Gaertner, S. L., Validzic, A., Matoka, K., Johnson, B., & Frazier, S.
(1997). Extending the benefits of recategorization: Evaluations, self-disclosure, and helping. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33(4), 401–420.
Dovidio, J. F., Piliavin, J. A., Schroeder, D.
A., & Penner, L. (2006). The social psychology of prosocial behavior.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Eisenberg, N., & Fabes, R. A.
(Eds.). (1998). Prosocial development.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Farrelly, D., Lazarus, J., & Roberts, G. (2007).
Altruists attract. Evolutionary Psychology, 5(2), 313–329. Hardy, C.
L., & Van Vugt, M. (2006). Nice guys finish first: The competitive altruism hypothesis.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32(10), 1402–1413. Hearold, S. L.
(1980). Meta-analysis of the effects of television on social behavior. Dissertation Abstracts International, 40(8-B), 3902–3903.
Krupp, D. B., Debruine, L. M., & Barclay, P.
(2008). A cue of kinship promotes cooperation for the public good. Evolution and Human Behavior, 29(1), 49–55.
Lieberman, M. D. (2010).
Social cognitive neuroscience. In S. T.
Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G.
Lindzey8.1 Understanding Altruism: Self and Other Concerns 451 (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 143–193).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Madsen, E. A., Tunney, R.
J., Fieldman, G., Plotkin, H. C., Dunbar, R. I.
M., Richardson, J.-M., & McFarland, D. (2007). Kinship and altruism: A cross-cultural experimental study.
British Journal of Psychology, 98(2), 339–359. McAndrew, F. T.
(2002). New evolutionary perspectives on altruism: Multilevel-selection and costly- signaling theories. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11(2), 79–82.
Neyer, F. J., & Lang, F. R.
(2003). Blood is thicker than water: Kinship orientation across adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(2), 310–321.
Park, J. H., & Schaller, M. (2005).
Does attitude similarity serve as a heuristic cue for kinship? Evidence of an implicit cognitive association. Evolution and Human Behavior, 26(2), 158–170.
Penner, L. A., Dovidio, J. F., Piliavin, J.
A., & Schroeder, D. A. (2005).
Prosocial behavior: Multilevel perspectives. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 365–392. Smith, S.
W., Smith, S. L., Pieper, K. M., Yoo, J.
H., Ferris, A. L., Downs, E., & Bowden, B. (2006).
Altruism on American television: Examining the amount of, and context surrounding, acts of helping and sharing. Journal of Communication, 56(4), 707–727. Stewart-Williams, S.
(2007). Altruism among kin vs. nonkin: Effects of cost of help and reciprocal exchange.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 28(3), 193–198. Sturmer, S., Snyder, M., Kropp, A., & Siem, B. (2006).
Empathy-motivated helping: The moderating role of group membership. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32(7), 943–956. Tisak, M.
S., & Tisak, J. (1996). My sibling’s but not my friend’s keeper: Reasoning about responses to aggressive acts.
Journal of Early Adolescence, 16(3), 324–339. Trivers, R. L.
(1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 35–57.
Van Vugt, M., & Van Lange, P. A. M.
(2006). Psychological adaptations for prosocial behavior: The altruism puzzle. In M.
Schaller, J. Simpson, & D. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and social psychology (pp.
237–262). New York, NY: Psychology Press. Whatley, M.
A., Webster, J. M., Smith, R. H., & Rhodes, A.
(1999). The effect of a favor on public and private compliance: How internalized is the norm of reciprocity? Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 21(3), 251–259.
Wilkinson, G. S. (1990, February).
Food sharing in vampire bats. Scientific American, 262, 76–82. Zaki, J., & Mitchell, J.
P. (2013). Intuitive prosociality.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22(6), 466-470. Image Descriptions Figure 8.5 The Costs of Helping452 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism A bar graph demonstrating the degree of helping of seminarians who prepared a good Samaritan lecture and who prepared a lecture on jobs at different levels of need to hurry.
• Degree of helping when need to hurry is low: ◦ Good Samaritan lecture: between 3 and 4 ◦ Jobs lecture: between 1 and 2 • Degree of helping when need to hurry is medium: ◦ Good Samaritan lecture: 2 ◦ Jobs lecture: between 1 and 2 • Degree of helping when need to hurry is high: ◦ Good Samaritan lecture: 1 ◦ Jobs lecture: between 0 and 1 [Return to Figure 8.5] Media Attributions • Figure 8.2 • “Father/Son A and B” by heymarchetti is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “sharing raspberries with grandpa chips at breakfast – _MG_1622” by sean dreilinger is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence. • “Cooking With Nana” by Eden, Janine and Jim is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “Macaca fuscata, grooming, Iwatayama, 20090201” by Noneotuho is licensed under a GNU Free Documentation License. • “Acrasis rosea 31330” by Shirley Chio is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “IMG_0692” by Peter Békési is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence.
• “Cheetahs” by William Warby is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “Papa’s Workshop” by vicki watkins is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “Fishing with Dad” by Randy Griffin is licensed under a CC BY-ND 2.0 licence.8.2 The Role of Affect: Moods and Emotions Learning Objectives 1.
Summarize the effects of positive and negative moods on helping. 2. Explain how the affective states of guilt, empathy, and personal distress influence helping.
Because our ability to successfully interact with other people is so important to our survival, these skills have become part of human nature. We determine whether to help in large part on the basis of how other people make us feel, and how we think we will feel if we help or do not help them. Positive Moods Increase Helping I do not need to tell you that people help more when they are in good mood.
We ask our parents to use their car, and we ask our boss for a raise, when we think they are in a positive mood rather than a negative one. Positive moods have been shown to increase many types of helping behavior, including contributing to charity, donating blood, and helping coworkers (Isen, 1999). It is also relatively easy to put people in a good mood.
You might not be surprised to hear that people are more likely to help after they’ve done well on a test or just received a big bonus in their paycheck. But research has found that even more trivial things, such as finding a coin in a phone booth, listening to a comedy recording, having someone smile at you, or even smelling the pleasant scent of perfume is enough to put people in a good mood and to cause them to be helpful (Baron & Thomley, 1994; Gueguen & De Gail, 2003; Isen & Levin, 1972). In another study, van Baaren, Holland, Kawakami, and van Knippenberg (2004) had students interact with an experimenter who either mimicked them by subtly copying their behaviors outside of their awareness or did not mimic them.
The researchers found that people who had been mimicked were more likely to help, by picking up pens that had fallen on the floor and by donating to a charity. It is quite possible that this effect is due to the influence of positive moods on helping—we like people we see as similar to us and that puts us in a good mood, making us more likely to help. In sum, the influence of mood on helping is substantial (Carlson, Charlin, & Miller, 1988), so if you’re looking for help, ask on a nice day, subtly mimic the person’s behaviors, or prepare some good jokes.
But why does being in a good mood make us helpful? There are probably several reasons. For one, a positive mood indicates that the environment is not dangerous and therefore that we can safely help others.
Second, we like other people more when we are in good moods, and that may lead us to help them. Finally, and perhaps most important, is the possibility the helping makes us feel good about ourselves, thereby maintaining our positive mood. In fact, people who are in good moods are 453454 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism particularly likely to help when the help that they are going to give seems likely to maintain their positive mood. But if they think that the helping is going spoil their good mood, even people in good moods are likely to refuse to help (Erber & Markunas, 2006). Relieving Negative Emotions: Guilt Increases Helping Although positive moods can increase helping, negative emotions can do so too.
The idea is that if helping can reduce negative feelings we are experiencing, then we may help in order to get rid of those bad feelings (Cialdini, Darby, & Vincent, 1973). One emotion that is particularly important in this regard is guilt. We feel guilt when we think that we (or others we feel close to) may have caused harm to another person (Tangney, 2003).
The experience of guilt increases our desire to create positive relationships with other people. Because we hate to feel guilty, we will go out of our way to reduce any feelings of guilt that we may be experiencing. And one way to relieve our guilt is by helping.
Put simply, feelings of guilt lead us to try to make up for our transgressions in any way possible, including by helping others. In research by Dennis Regan and his colleagues (Regan, Williams, & Sparling, 1972), students were led to believe that they had broken another person’s camera, which in turn made them feel guilty. Then another person presented a need for help.
As predicted, the students who were feeling guilty were more likely to help the second person than were those who were not feeling guilty. Thus, participants who unintentionally harmed one person ended up being more helpful to another person who had nothing to do with the original source of the guilt. This situation illustrates the function of guilt: we feel guilty when we think we have harmed our relationships with others, and the guilt reminds us that we need to work to repair these transgressions (Baumeister, Stillwell, & Heatherton, 1994).
It is no coincidence that advertisers sometimes try to invoke guilt to get people to contribute to charitable causes. This approach is particularly effective when people feel that they are able to engage in the necessary helping (Basil, Ridgway, & Basil, 2008). An interesting twist on our need to wash away our sins by helping concerns the so-called “Macbeth effect,” the observation that people tend to want to cleanse themselves when they perceive that they have violated their own ethical standards (Zhong & Liljenquist, 2006).
Fascinatingly, if people are actually given the opportunity to wash their hands (or even watch someone else wash their hands), this reduces the amount of guilt they experience, along with amount of prosocial behavior they subsequently engage in (Xu, Bègue, & Bushman, 2014). The amount of guilt that we experience thus appears to be an important determinant of our helping behavior. But what about other emotions, such as sadness, anger, and fear?
It turns out that we also may be more likely to help when we are fearful or sad—again to make ourselves feel better. Jonas, Schimel, Greenberg, and Pyszczynski (2002) found that people who were induced to think about their own death—for instance, when they were interviewed in front of a funeral home—became more altruistic. Personal Distress and Empathy as Determinants of Helping Imagine that you arrive upon the scene of a serious car accident that has just occurred.
The driver of the car has been thrown out on the highway and is seriously injured. He is bleeding, has many broken8.2 The Role of Affect: Moods and Emotions 455 bones, and may be near death. Other cars are just driving by the scene, but you could easily pull over to help.
Would you be likely to just drive by, or would you stop to help? The negative emotions that we may experience when we are perceiving another person’s distress have a big influence on our helping. In some cases, people feel rather sickened or disgusted by the victim of an emergency—for instance, when the person is seriously injured and bleeding.
Personal distress refers to the negative emotions that we may experience when we view another person’s suffering. Because we feel so uncomfortable, when we feel personal distress we may simply leave the scene rather than stopping. In other cases, we may not feel so many negative emotions upon viewing another person in need but rather more positive feelings of a close connection with the person who is suffering.
When we vicariously experience the pain and the needs of the other person, we say that we are feeling empathy for the other. Empathy refers to an affective response in which a person understands, and even feels, another person’s distress and experiences events the way the other person does. Empathy seems to be a biological aspect of human nature—an emotion that is an integral part of being human—and that is designed to help us help.
Empathy allows us to quickly and automatically perceive and understand the emotional states of others and to regulate our behavior toward others in coordinated and cooperative ways (de Waal, 2008). Empathy may also create other emotions, such as sympathy, compassion, and tenderness. You can well imagine that we are more likely to help someone when we are feeling empathy for them—in this case, we want to comfort and help the victim of the car accident.
Research Focus Personal Distress versus Empathy as Determinants of Helping We have seen that people may experience either positive or negative emotions when they see someone who needs help. They may help others in part for selfish reasons—for instance, to relieve their own negative feelings about the suffering of the other—and in part for truly altruistic reasons—because they are experiencing empathy for the distress of the other person. But which type of emotion leads us to help in which situations?
Daniel Batson and his colleagues (Batson, O’Quin, Fultz, Varnderplas, & Isen, 1983) attempted to answer this question by finding out if the ability to easily leave the scene of the suffering might matter. In the study, male and female college students watched another person of the same sex who they thought was working on series of tasks in the next room (the person was actually on a prerecorded videotape, although the participants did not know that). The women were told the person was named Elaine, and the men were told the person was named Charlie.
During the time the students were watching, and as part of the experiment, the other person also supposedly received some mild electric shocks. The students who were observing were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions. The students who were in the easy-escape condition were told that although the other person would be completing 10 shock trials, they only needed to watch the first two, after which they could leave.
The students in the difficult-escape condition, however, were told that they would need to watch all 10 of the shock trials.456 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism During the second trial, the person in other room began to look as if he or she was experiencing some discomfort. As the participants looked on, the assistant administering the shocks to the person asked whether he or she was all right, and the person hesitantly said yes but also asked for a glass of water before going on.
During this break, the experimenter entered the observation room and gave the research participant a questionnaire. The questionnaire asked the participant to indicate the feelings he or she was experiencing at the moment, and the responses to these questions allowed the experimenters to determine whether the person was feeling more personal distress (if they indicated that they were primarily feeling alarmed, grieved, upset, worried, disturbed, distressed, troubled, or perturbed) or more empathy (if they indicated that they were primarily feeling sympathetic, moved, compassionate, warm, softhearted, or tender). Then the experimenter pointed out to the research participant that the other person was feeling uncomfortable and asked if he or she might be willing to change places with that person.
The dependent measure in the research was the average number of trials that the participant agreed to take for Elaine or Charlie. As you can see in the Figure 8.7, Batson and the team found a person-situation interaction effect, such that when the participants knew that they could leave relatively quickly (the easy-escape condition), then the people who were feeling empathy helped, whereas those who were feeling distress did not. This makes sense because empathy involves a real concern for other person—a concern that could not be reduced even by leaving the scene.
On other hand, when the participants knew that they were going to have to view all the trials (the difficult-escape condition), the participants who felt distress were more likely to help than were those who were feeling empathy. Batson and his colleagues interpreted this to mean that these people helped to avoid having to feel the negative emotion of personal distress which they were certain to experience as they continued to watch the other person suffer the shocks. Figure 8.7 Mean Number of Shock Trials This figure shows the mean number of shock trials participants in each condition agreed to take for Elaine or Charlie.
Data are from Batson et al. (1983), Study 2. In subsequent research, Batson and his colleagues have tested this same hypothesis in other ways, such as by having the experimenter or the person in need of help appeal to the participants either to remain objective and “not get caught up” in what the person in need is experiencing (low empathy) or8.2 The Role of Affect: Moods and Emotions 457 to try to imagine what the person in need is feeling (high empathy).
In many experiments, they have found that when empathy is high, most people help regardless of whether or not they can easily escape the situation. On other hand, people who feel primarily distress tend to help only if they cannot avoid the negative affect they are experiencing by leaving the scene of the person in need. Although help that occurs as a result of experiencing empathy for the other seems to be truly altruistic, it is difficult even in this case to be sure.
There is ample evidence that we do help to make those that we help feel better, but there is just as much evidence that we help in order to feel good about ourselves. Even when we are feeling empathy, we may help in part because we know that we will feel sad or guilty if we do not help (Schaller & Cialdini, 1988). Thus the distinction between an egoistic, self- concerned motive and an altruistic, other-concerned motive is not always completely clear; we help for both reasons.
In the end, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that people help in large part for selfish reasons. But does it really matter? If we give money to the needy because we will feel bad about ourselves if we do not, or if we give money to the needy because we want them to feel good, we have nevertheless made the contribution in both cases.
Key Takeaways • We react to people in large part on the basis of how they make us feel and how we think we will feel if we help them. • Both positive mood states and negative affective states (particularly guilt) can increase helping. • Personal distress refers to the negative feelings and emotions that we may experience when we view another person’s distress.
• Empathy refers to an affective response in which the person understands, and even feels, the other person’s emotional distress, and when he or she experiences events the way the other person does. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Think about the times that you have considered helping other people or were actually helping them.
What emotions did you feel while you were helping? 2. Describe one time when you helped out of a) guilt, b) personal distress, and c) empathy.
3. Watch “This is Roots of Empathy” and browse through the Roots empthay website. What do you458 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism think about the implementation of this technique in local schools? References Baron, R. A., & Thomley, J.
(1994). A whiff of reality: Positive affect as a potential mediator of the effects of pleasant fragrances on task performance and helping. Environment and Behavior, 26(6), 766–784.
Basil, D. Z., Ridgway, N. M., & Basil, M.
D. (2008). Guilt and giving: A process model of empathy and efficacy.
Psychology and Marketing, 25(1), 1–23. Batson, C. D., O’Quin, K., Fultz, J., Varnderplas, M., & Isen, A.
M. (1983). Influence of self-reported distress and empathy on egoistic versus altruistic motivation to help.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(3), 706–718. Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A.
M., & Heatherton, T. F. (1994).
Guilt: An interpersonal approach. Psychological Bulletin, 115(2), 243–267. Carlson, M., Charlin, V., & Miller, N.
(1988). Positive mood and helping behavior: A test of six hypotheses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55(2), 211–229.
Cialdini, R. B., Darby, B. L., & Vincent, J.
E. (1973). Transgression and altruism: A case for hedonism.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 9(6), 502–516. de Waal, F. B.
M. (2008). Putting the altruism back into altruism: The evolution of empathy.
Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 279–300. Erber, R., & Markunas, S. (Eds.).
(2006). Managing affective states. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Gueguen, N., & De Gail, M.-A. (2003). The effect of smiling on helping behavior: Smiling and Good Samaritan behavior.
Communication Reports, 16(2), 133–140. Isen, A. M.
(Ed.). (1999). Positive affect.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. Isen, A. M., & Levin, P.
F. (1972). Effect of feeling good on helping: Cookies and kindness.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 384–388. Jonas, E., Schimel, J., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (2002).
The Scrooge effect: Evidence that mortality salience increases prosocial attitudes and behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(10), 1342–1353. Regan, D.
T., Williams, M., & Sparling, S. (1972). Voluntary expiation of guilt: A field experiment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24(1), 42–45. Schaller, M., & Cialdini, R. B.
(1988). The economics of empathic helping: Support for a mood management motive. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 24(2), 163–181.
Tangney, J. P. (Ed.).
(2003). Self-relevant emotions. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
van Baaren, R. B., Holland, R. W., Kawakami, K., & van Knippenberg, A.
(2004). Mimicry and prosocial behavior. Psychological Science, 15(1), 71–74.8.2 The Role of Affect: Moods and Emotions 459 Xu, H., Bègue, L., & Buchman, B.
J. (2014). Washing the guilt away: effects of personal versus vicarious cleansing on guilty feelings and prosocial behavior.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8(97), 1-5. Zhong, C., & Liljenquist, K. (2006).
Washing away your sins: Threatened morality and physical cleansing. Science, 313(5792), 1451-1452.8.3 How the Social Context Influences Helping Learning Objectives 1. Review Bibb Latané and John Darley’s model of helping behavior and indicate the social psychological variables that influence each stage.
Although emotional responses such as guilt, personal distress, and empathy are important determinants of altruism, it is the social situation itself—the people around us when we are deciding whether or not to help—that has perhaps the most important influence on whether and when we help. Consider the unusual case of the killing of 28-year-old Katherine “Kitty” Genovese in New York City at about 3:00 a.m. on March 13, 1964.
Her attacker, Winston Moseley, stabbed and sexually assaulted her within a few yards of her apartment building in the borough of Queens. During the struggle with her assailant, Kitty screamed, “Oh my God! He stabbed me!
Please help me!” But no one responded. The struggle continued; Kitty broke free from Moseley, but he caught her again, stabbed her several more times, and eventually killed her. The murder of Kitty Genovese shocked the nation, in large part because of the (often inaccurate) reporting of it.
Stories about the killing in the New York Times and other papers indicated that as many as 38 people had overheard the struggle and killing, that none of them had bothered to intervene, and that only one person had even called the police, long after Genovese was dead. Although these stories about the lack of concern by people in New York City proved to be false (Manning, Levine, & Collins, 2007), they nevertheless led many people to think about the variables that might lead people to help or, alternatively, to be insensitive to the needs of others. Was this an instance of the uncaring and selfish nature of human beings?
Or was there something about this particular social situation that was critical? It turns out, contrary to most people’s expectations, that having many people around during an emergency can in fact be the opposite of helpful—it can reduce the likelihood that anyone at all will help. Latané and Darley’s Model of Helping Two social psychologists, Bibb Latané and John Darley, found themselves particularly interested in, and concerned about, the Kitty Genovese case.
As they thought about the stories that they had read about it, they considered the nature of emergency situations, such as this one. They realized that emergencies are unusual and that people frequently do not really know what to do when they encounter 461462 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism one.
Furthermore, emergencies are potentially dangerous to the helper, and it is therefore probably pretty amazing that anyone helps at all. Figure 8.8 Latané and Darley’s Stages of Helping [Image description] To better understand the processes of helping in an emergency, Latané and Darley developed a model of helping that took into consideration the important role of the social situation. Their model, which is shown in Figure 8.8, “Latané and Darley’s Stages of Helping,” has been extensively tested in many studies, and there is substantial support for it.
Noticing Latané and Darley thought that the first thing that had to happen in order for people to help is that they had to notice the emergency. This seems pretty obvious, but it turns out that the social situation has a big impact on noticing an emergency. Consider, for instance, people who live in a large city such as New York City, Bangkok, or Beijing.
These cities are big, noisy, and crowded—it seems like there are a million things going at once. How could people living in such a city even notice, let alone respond to, the needs of all the people around them? They are simply too overloaded by the stimuli in the city (Milgram, 1970).
Many studies have found that people who live in smaller and less dense rural towns are more likely to help than those who live in large, crowded, urban cities (Amato, 1983; Levine, Martinez, Brase, & Sorenson, 1994). Although there are a lot of reasons for such differences, just noticing the emergency is critical. When there are more people around, it is less likely that the people notice the needs of others.
You may have had an experience that demonstrates the influence of the social situation on noticing. Imagine that you have lived with a family or a roommate for a while, but one night you find yourself alone in your house or apartment because your housemates are staying somewhere else that night. If you are like me, I bet you found yourself hearing sounds that you never heard before—and they might have made you pretty nervous.
Of course, the sounds were always there, but when other people were around you, you were simply less alert to them. The presence of others can divert our attention from the environment—it’s as if we are unconsciously, and probably quite mistakenly, counting on the others to take care of things for us.8.3 How the Social Context Influences Helping 463 Latané and Darley (1968) wondered if they could examine this phenomenon experimentally. To do so, they simply asked their research participants to complete a questionnaire in a small room.
Some of the participants completed the questionnaire alone, while others completed the questionnaire in small groups in which two other participants were also working on questionnaires. A few minutes after the participants had begun the questionnaires, the experimenters started to release some white smoke into the room through a vent in the wall while they watched through a one-way mirror. The smoke got thicker as time went on, until it filled the room.
The experimenters timed how long it took before the first person in the room looked up and noticed the smoke. The people who were working alone noticed the smoke in about five seconds, and within four minutes most of the participants who were working alone had taken some action. But what about the participants working in groups of three?
Although we would certainly expect that having more people around would increase the likelihood that someone would notice the smoke, on average, the first person in the group conditions did not notice the smoke until over 20 seconds had elapsed. And although 75% of the participants who were working alone reported the smoke within four minutes, the smoke was reported in only 12% of the three-person groups by that time. In fact, in only three of the eight three-person groups did anyone report the smoke at all, even after it had entirely filled the room!
Interpreting Even if we notice an emergency, we might not interpret it as one. The problem is that events are frequently ambiguous, and we must interpret them to understand what they really mean. Furthermore, we often don’t see the whole event unfolding, so it is difficult to get a good handle on it.
Is a man holding an iPhone and running away from a group of pursuers a criminal who needs to be apprehended, or is this just a harmless prank? Is someone stumbling around outside a nightclub drunk, or going into a diabetic coma? Were the cries of Kitty Genovese really calls for help, or were they simply an argument with a boyfriend?
It’s hard for us to tell when we haven’t seen the whole event (Piliavin, Piliavin, & Broll, 1976). Moreover, because emergencies are rare and because we generally tend to assume that events are benign, we may be likely to treat ambiguous cases as not being emergencies. The problem is compounded when others are present because when we are unsure how to interpret events we normally look to others to help us understand them (this is informational social influence).
However, the people we are looking toward for understanding are themselves unsure how to interpret the situation, and they are looking to us for information at the same time we are looking to them. When we look to others for information we may assume that they know something that we do not know. This is often a mistake, because all the people in the situation are doing the same thing.
None of us really know what to think, but at the same time we assume that the others do know. Pluralistic ignorance occurs when people think that others in their environment have information that they do not have and when they base their judgments on what they think the others are thinking. Pluralistic ignorance seems to have been occurring in Latané and Darley’s studies, because even when the smoke became really heavy in the room, many people in the group conditions did not react to it.
Rather, they looked at each other, and because nobody else in the room seemed very concerned, they each assumed that the others thought that everything was all right. You can see the problem—each bystander thinks that other people aren’t acting because they don’t see an emergency. Of course,464 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism everyone is confused, but believing that the others know something that they don’t, each observer concludes that help is not required. Pluralistic ignorance is not restricted to emergency situations (Miller, Turnbull, & McFarland, 1988; Suls & Green, 2003). Maybe you have had the following experience: You are in one of your classes and the instructor has just finished a complicated explanation.
He is unsure whether the students are up to speed and asks, “Are there any questions?” All the class members are of course completely confused, but when they look at each other, nobody raises a hand in response. So everybody in the class (including the instructor) assumes that everyone understands the topic perfectly. This is pluralistic ignorance at its worst—we are all assuming that others know something that we don’t, and so we don’t act.
The moral to instructors in this situation is clear: wait until at least one student asks a question. The moral for students is also clear: ask your question! Don’t think that you will look stupid for doing so—the other students will probably thank you.
Taking Responsibility Even if we have noticed the emergency and interpret it as being one, this does not necessarily mean that we will come to the rescue of the other person. We still need to decide that it is our responsibility to do something. The problem is that when we see others around, it is easy to assume that they are going to do something and that we don’t need to do anything.
Diffusion of responsibility occurs when we assume that others will take action and therefore we do not take action ourselves. The irony, of course, is that people are more likely to help when they are the only ones in the situation than they are when there are others around. Darley and Latané (1968) had study participants work on a communication task in which they were sharing ideas about how to best adjust to college life with other people in different rooms using an intercom.
According to random assignment to conditions, each participant believed that he or she was communicating with either one, two, or five other people, who were in either one, two, or five other rooms. Each participant had an initial chance to give his or her opinions over the intercom, and on the first round one of the other people (actually a confederate of the experimenter) indicated that he had an “epileptic-like” condition that had made the adjustment process very difficult for him. After a few minutes, the subject heard the experimental confederate say, I-er-um-I think I-I need-er-if-if could-er-er-somebody er-er-er-er-er-er-er give me a liltle-er-give me a little help here because-er-I-er-I’m-er-er having a-a-a real problcm-er-right now and I-er-if somebody could help me out it would-it would-er-er s-s-sure be-sure be good…because there-er-er-a cause I-er-I-uh-I’ve got a-a one of the-er-sei er-er-things coming on and-and-and I could really-er-use some help so if somebody would- er-give me a little h-help-uh-er-er-er-er-er c-could somebody-er-er-help-er-uh-uh-uh (choking sounds).…I’m gonna die-er-er-I’m…gonna die-er-help-er-er-seizure-er- (chokes, then quiet).
(Darley & Latané, 1968, p. 379) As you can see in Table 8.2, “Effects of Group Size on Likelihood and Speed of Helping,” the participants who thought that they were the only ones who knew about the emergency (because they were only working with one other person) left the room quickly to try to get help. In the larger groups, however, participants were less likely to intervene and slower to respond when they did.
Only 31% of the participants in the largest groups responded by the end of the six-minute session.8.3 How the Social Context Influences Helping 465 You can see that the social situation has a powerful influence on helping. We simply don’t help as much when other people are with us. Table 8.2 Effects of Group Size on Likelihood and Speed of Helping Group size Average helping (%) Average time to help (in seconds) 2 (Participant and victim) 85 52 3 (Participant, victim, and 1 other) 62 93 6 (Participant, victim, and 4 others) 31 166 *Source: Darley and Latané (1968).
Perhaps you have noticed diffusion of responsibility if you have participated in an Internet users’ group where people asked questions of the other users. Did you find that it was easier to get help if you directed your request to a smaller set of users than when you directed it to a larger number of people? Consider the following: In 1998, Larry Froistad, a 29-year-old computer programmer, sent the following message to the members of an Internet self-help group that had about 200 members.
“Amanda I murdered because her mother stood between us…when she was asleep, I got wickedly drunk, set the house on fire, went to bed, listened to her scream twice, climbed out the window and set about putting on a show of shock and surprise.” Despite this clear online confession to a murder, only 3 of the 200 newsgroup members reported the confession to the authorities (Markey, 2000). To study the possibility that this lack of response was due to the presence of others, the researchers (Markey, 2000) conducted a field study in which they observed about 5,000 participants in about 400 different chat groups. The experimenters sent a message to the group, from either a male or female screen name (JakeHarmen or SuzyHarmen).
Help was sought by either asking all the participants in the chat group, “Can anyone tell me how to look at someone’s profile?” or by randomly selecting one participant and asking “[name of selected participant], can you tell me how to look at someone’s profile?” The experimenters recorded the number of people present in the chat room, which ranged from 2 to 19, and then waited to see how long it took before a response was given. It turned out that the gender of the person requesting help made no difference, but that addressing to a single person did. Assistance was received more quickly when help was asked for by specifying a participant’s name (in only about 37 seconds) than when no name was specified (51 seconds).
Furthermore, a correlational analysis found that when help was requested without specifying a participant’s name, there was a significant negative correlation between the number of people currently logged on in the group and the time it took to respond to the request. Garcia, Weaver, Moskowitz, and Darley (2002) found that the presence of others can promote diffusion of responsibility even if those other people are only imagined. In these studies, the researchers had participants read one of three possible scenarios that manipulated whether participants thought about dining out with 10 friends at a restaurant (group condition) or whether they thought about dining at a restaurant with only one other friend (one-person condition).
Participants in the group condition were asked to “Imagine you won a dinner for yourself and 10 of your friends at your favorite restaurant.” Participants in the one-person condition were asked to “Imagine you won a dinner for yourself and a friend at your favorite restaurant.”466 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism After reading one of the scenarios, the participants were then asked to help with another experiment supposedly being conducted in another room. Specifically, they were asked: “How much time are you willing to spend on this other experiment?” At this point, participants checked off one of the following minute intervals: 0 minutes, 2 minutes, 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes, 20 minutes, 25 minutes, and 30 minutes.
Figure 8.9 Helping as a Function of Imagined Social Context Garcia et al. (2002) found that the presence of others reduced helping, even when those others were only imagined. As you can see in Figure 8.9, “Helping as a Function of Imagined Social Context,” simply imagining that they were in a group or alone had a significant effect on helping, such that those who imagined being with only one other person volunteered to help for more minutes than did those who imagined being in a larger group.
Implementing Action The fourth step in the helping model is knowing how to help. Of course, for many of us the ways to best help another person in an emergency are not that clear; we are not professionals and we have little training in how to help in emergencies. People who do have training in how to act in emergencies are more likely to help, whereas the rest of us just don’t know what to do and therefore may simply walk by.
On the other hand, today most people have cell phones, and we can do a lot with a quick call. In fact, a phone call made in time might have saved Kitty Genovese’s life. The moral: you might not know exactly what to do, but you may well be able to contact someone else who does.
Latané and Darley’s decision model of bystander intervention has represented an important theoretical framework for helping us understand the role of situational variables on helping. Whether or not we help depends on the outcomes of a series of decisions that involve noticing the event, interpreting the situation as one requiring assistance, deciding to take personal responsibility, and deciding how to help. Fischer and colleagues (2011) analyzed data from over 105 studies using over 7,500 participants who had been observed helping (or not helping) in situations in which they were alone or with others.
They8.3 How the Social Context Influences Helping 467 found significant support for the idea that people helped more when fewer others were present. And supporting the important role of interpretation, they also found that the differences were smaller when the need for helping was clear and dangerous and thus required little interpretation. They also found that there were at least some situations (such as when bystanders were able to help provide the needed physical assistance) in which having other people around increased helping.
Although the Latané and Darley model was initially developed to understand how people respond in emergencies requiring immediate assistance, aspects of the model have been successfully applied to many other situations, ranging from preventing someone from driving drunk to making a decision about whether to donate a kidney to a relative (Schroeder, Penner, Dovidio, & Piliavin, 1995). Key Takeaways • The social situation has an important influence on whether or not we help. • Latané and Darley’s decision model of bystander intervention has represented an important theoretical framework for helping us understand the role of situational variables on helping.
According to the model, whether or not we help depends on the outcomes of a series of decisions that involve noticing the event, interpreting the situation as one requiring assistance, deciding to take personal responsibility, and implementing action. • Latané and Darley’s model has received substantial empirical support and has been applied not only to helping in emergencies but to other helping situations as well. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Read the recent article about the Kitty Genovese case published in the New Yorker and Excerpts from Letters Received by Bibb Latané. Write a brief reflection on this new information. 2.
Recount a situation in which you did or did not help, and consider how that decision might have been influenced by the variables specified in Latané and Darley’s model. 3. If you ever find yourself in a public situation in which you need help, what could you do to increase the likelihood that a bystander will actually help you?468 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism References Amato, P. R. (1983).
The helpfulness of urbanites and small town dwellers: A test between two broad theoretical positions. Australian Journal of Psychology, 35(2), 233–243; Darley, J. M., & Latané, B.
(1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8(4, Pt.1), 377–383.
Fischer, P., Krueger, J. I., Greitemeyer, T., Vogrincic, C., Kastenmüller, A., Frey, D.,…Kainbacher, M. (2011).
The bystander-effect: A meta-analytic review on bystander intervention in dangerous and non-dangerous emergencies. Psychological Bulletin, 137(4), 517–537. Garcia, S.
M., Weaver, K., Moskowitz, G. B., & Darley, J. M.
(2002). Crowded minds: The implicit bystander effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(4), 843–853.
Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1968).
Group inhibition of bystander intervention in emergencies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 10(3), 215–221. Levine, R.
V., Martinez, T. S., Brase, G., & Sorenson, K. (1994).
Helping in 36 U.S. cities. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(1), 69–82.
Manning, R., Levine, M., & Collins, A. (2007). The Kitty Genovese murder and the social psychology of helping: The parable of the 38 witnesses.
American Psychologist, 62(6), 555–562. Markey, P. M.
(2000). Bystander intervention in computer-mediated communication. Computers in Human Behavior, 16(2), 183–188.
Milgram, S. (1970). The experience of living in cities.
Science, 167(3924), 1461–1468. Miller, D. T., Turnbull, W., & McFarland, C.
(1988). Particularistic and universalistic evaluation in the social comparison process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 908–917; Piliavin, J.
A., Piliavin, I. M., & Broll, L. (1976).
Time of arrival at an emergency and likelihood of helping. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2(3), 273–276. Schroeder, D.
A., Penner, L. A., Dovidio, J. F., & Piliavin, J.
A. (1995). The psychology of helping and altruism: Problems and puzzles.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Suls, J., & Green, P. (2003).
Pluralistic ignorance and college student perceptions of gender-specific alcohol norms. Health Psychology, 22(5), 479–486. Image Descriptions Figure 8.8 Latané and Darley’s Stages of Helping From the time an emergency occurs, people have to notice the event, interpret the event as an emergency, assume responsibility, and know appropriate from of assistance, then they would intervene.
No intervention or help is given throughout these stages. [Return to Figure 8.8]8.4 Other Determinants of Helping Learning Objectives 1. Review the person, gender, and cultural variables that relate to altruism.
2. Explain how the reactions of the person being helped may influence the benefits of helping. 3.
Outline the ways that we might be able to increase helping. Although we have discussed many of the most important factors, there are still other variables that determine our willingness to help others. These include characteristics of the people who are potentially providing help as well as the ways that others respond to the help they may receive.
Let us consider them now. Some People Are More Helpful Than Others: The Altruistic Personality We have seen that the social situation is a very strong determinant of whether or not we help. But although the effects of personality may not generally be as strong as those of the social context, person variables do matter.
Some people are indeed more helpful than others across a variety of situations, and we say that these people have an altruistic or prosocial personality (Penner, Fritzsche, Craiger, & Freifeld, 1995). To see how you stand on this variable read the statements in Figure 8.10, “Measuring the Altruistic Personality,” and consider the extent to which you agree with them. Figure 8.10 Measuring the Altruistic Personality.
This scale measures individual differences in willingness to provide help—the prosocial personality. The scale includes questions on four dimensions of altruism. Adapted from Penner, Fritzsche, Craiger, and Freifeld (1995).
Social Responsibility • No matter what a person has done to us, there is no excuse for taking advantage of them. • It makes sense to be very concerned about how we act when we are sick and feeling miserable. 469470 Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism Empathy • I sometimes try to understand my friends better by imagining how things look from their perspective. • When I’m upset at someone, I usually try to “put myself in their shoes” for a while. Moral Reasoning • My decisions are usually based on my concern for other people.
• My decisions are usually based on what is the most fair and just way to act. Self-Reported Altrusim • I have helped carry a stranger’s belongings (e.g., books, parcels, etc.). • I have allowed someone to go ahead of me in a line (e.g., supermarket, copying machine, etc.) The altruistic personality involves both the cognitive and the emotional responses that we experience around others.
People with altruistic personalities tend to show empathy and sympathy for others and feel that it is appropriate and right to follow the norm of social responsibility. These people help more people in a wider variety of areas, including providing help to coworkers, donating organs, and volunteering, and also have been found to help more quickly than do people who score lower on these measures (Borman, Penner, Allen, & Motowidlo, 2001; Penner, 2002). A longitudinal study conducted by Nancy Eisenberg and her colleagues (Eisenberg et al., 1999) found that children who were the most helpful when they were measured in their preschool classes also were the most helpful later in childhood and in early adulthood, suggesting that they really were helpful people.
People with altruistic personalities seem to be people who have a strong other-concern—they like to be with, to relate to, and to help others. The altruistic personality is in part heritable. Research has found that identical twins are more similar to each other in both their helping-related emotions (such as empathy) and their actual helping than are fraternal twins, who share only a portion of their genetic makeup (Davis, Luce, & Kraus, 1994).
Gender Differences in Helping You may have already asked yourself an important question about helping: do men or women help more? And perhaps you have answered this question. For instance, you might have decided that women would be more helpful because they are by and large more attuned to the needs of others.
Or perhaps you decided that men would be more helpful because helping involves demonstrating bravery and men are more likely to desire to be heroes, or at least to look heroic in the eyes of other people. In fact, on average there are no big differences between men and women in terms of their helping. For8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 471 instance, in both the Canadian and U.S.
surveys of altruism we discussed earlier in the chapter, the percentage of women volunteering (48% in Canada and 46% in the United States) was not significantly different from the percentage of men (46% in Canada and 42% in the United States). Rather, there appears to be a person-by-situation interaction, such that gender differences show up more strongly in some situations than in others. The differences depend not only on the opportunity to help but also on the type of helping that is required (Becker & Eagly, 2004).
In general, men are more likely to help in situations that involve physical strength. If you look at photos and videos taken immediately after the World Trade Center attack in New York City in 2001, you will see many images of firefighters and police officers, who were primarily men, engaged in heroic acts of helping. This does not mean that women are any less helpful—in fact thousands of women helped during and after the World Trade Center attack by tending to the wounded in hospitals, donating blood, raising money for the families of the victims, and helping with the cleanup of the disaster sites.
Because women are, on average, more focused on other-concern, they are more likely than men to help in situations that involve long-term nurturance and caring, particularly within close relationships. Women are also more likely than men to engage in community behaviors, such as volunteering in the community or helping families (Becker & Eagly, 2004; Eagly & Becker, 2005). Helping within the family is done in large part by mothers, sisters, wives, and female friends.
Although this type of helping might be less likely to be rewarded with newspaper stories and medals, providing social support and helping connect people serves to help us meet the important goal of relating to others and thus helps improve the quality of our lives. And women are not afraid to help in situations that are dangerous. In fact, women have been found to be as likely as men are to engage in behaviors such as donating a kidney to others (Becker & Eagly, 2004).
Social Psychology in the Public Interest Are the Religious More Altruistic? Do you think that religious people are more helpful than are people who are less religious? There are plenty of reasons to think that this might be so.
After all, every major religion preaches the importance of compassion and helpfulness, and many faith-based organizations help the poor and disadvantaged every year. Religious organizations help provide education, food, clothes, financial support, and other essentials to the needy across the globe. There is support, based on surveys and questionnaires, that religious people do indeed report being more helpful than the less religious (Penner, 2002).
For instance, Morgan (1983) found that people who reported that they prayed more often also said that they better, friendlier, and more cooperative toward others. Furrow, King, and White (2004) found a significant positive relationship between religiousness and prosocial concerns such as empathy, moral reasoning, and responsibility in urban high school students. And Benson, Donahue, and Erickson (1989) found that adolescents who said that they were more religious were also more likely to have been involved in a volunteer service project in the last year.
Batson and his colleagues (1989) wondered if religious people were actually more likely to help or if they simply indicated that they would be on questionnaires. To test this question, they recruited472 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism college students and first asked them to report on their religious beliefs.
On the basis of these responses, Batson categorized the students into one of four groups: • The nonreligious students were those who did not indicate much interest in religion. • The externally religious students were those who primarily indicated that they used religion for self-concern, such as for feeling more comfortable and being comforted by others, for gaining social status, and for finding support for one’s chosen way of life. The externally religious tended to agree with such statements as “The church is most important as a place to formulate good social relationships” and “What religion offers me most is comfort when sorrows and misfortune strike.” • The internally religious were those who indicated that they had accepted religion and that it was part of their inner experiences.
The internally religious agreed with statements such as “I try hard to carry my religion over into all my other dealings in life” and “Quite often I have been keenly aware of the presence of God or the Divine Being.” • Finally, people who agreed with such statements as “It might be said that I value my religious doubts and uncertainties” and “Questions are far more central to my religious experience than are answers” were considered to be quest-oriented. These students see religion as a lifelong commitment to getting answers to important moral and religious questions. Then Batson and his colleagues asked the participants whether or not they would be willing to volunteer their time by helping a woman in need or by walking in a walkathon for a charity.
However, in each case Batson also gave one-half of the participants a possible excuse for not helping by informing them that a number of other students had already volunteered to help the woman or that they would have to complete a difficult physical exam before they could be in the walkathon. The researchers found that the externally religious were not more likely to help overall and were actually less likely to help when there was an easy excuse not to. It seems that the externally religious were not really altruistic at all.
The internally religious participants seemed somewhat more altruistic—they helped more when the helping was easy, but they did not continue to help when the task got difficult. However, Batson and his team found that the quest-oriented students were the true altruists—they volunteered to help even when doing so required engaging in some difficult exercise and continued to help even when there was an easy excuse not to. Although most studies investigating the role of religion on altruism have been correlational, there is also some experimental research showing that that activating symbols relating to religion causes increased altruism.
Shariff and Norenzayan (2007) showed their research participants religious words such as divine, God, sacred, and prophet and then later asked them to contribute some money to a charity. The participants who had seen the religious words were more likely to donate money to an anonymous recipient than were a control group of people who had been exposed to nonreligious control words. However, religion was not the only concept that increased helping.
Similar increases in altruism were found when people were shown words related to civil duty, such as civic, jury, court, police, and contract. In summary, when surveyed, religious people say that they are more helpful than are the nonreligious, but whether they really help when helping conflicts with self-interest seems to depend on what type of religious person they are. People who are religious for personal reasons related to self- concern generally are not more helpful.
On the other hand, those who are more quest-oriented—those who8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 473 really believe that helping is an important part of religious experience—are likely to help even when doing so requires effort. Furthermore, religion is not the only thing that makes us helpful. Being reminded of other social norms, such as our civil responsibility to others, also makes us more helpful.
Who Do We Help? Attributions and Helping We do not help everyone equally—some people just seem to be more worthy of help than others. Our cognitions about people in need matter as do our emotions toward them.
For one, our perception of the amount of the need is important. Bickman and Kamzan (1973) found that people were considerably more reluctant to help someone requesting money in a grocery store to buy some cookie dough (a relative luxury item) than they were to help someone requesting money to buy milk (which seems more necessary). In addition to attempting to determine whether the help is really needed, we also tend to judge whether people are deserving of the help.
We tend to provide less help to people who seem to have brought on their problems themselves or who don’t seem to be working very hard to solve them on their own than we do to people who need help as a result of events that seem to be out of their control. Imagine, for instance, that a student in your class asks to borrow your class notes to prepare for an exam. And then imagine if the student said, “I just can’t take good notes—I attend every class, and I really try, but I just can’t do it.” I’m guessing that you might be willing to help this student.
On the other hand, imagine that the student said, “Well, I miss class a lot because I don’t feel like coming, and even when I’m here I don’t bother to take notes every day.” I bet you’d be less likely to help this person, who doesn’t seem to be trying very hard. Supporting this idea, Dooley (1995) had students read scenarios about a person who had been diagnosed with AIDS. Participants who learned that the person had contracted the disease through a blood transfusion felt more empathy and pity for the person, and also expressed a greater desire to help the person, than did participants who believed that the disease was caused by unprotected sex or by illicit drug use.
One reason we may be particularly likely to help victims of hurricanes and other natural disasters, then, is that we see that these people did not cause their own problems. Those who do argue against helping these victims may well take the opposite position because they believe that the individuals deserved what they got (“they should have known better than to live there.”) It has been argued that a fundamental difference between individuals who hold politically conservative views and those who hold politically liberal views is how they perceive the necessity or moral responsibility of helping others, and that this relates to how they perceive the causes of people’s outcomes. Consider people who appear to need help because they have inadequate food, shelter, or health care, for example.
Liberals tend to attribute these outcomes more externally, blaming them on unjust social practices and societal structures that create inequalities. Because they are likely to believe that the people do not deserve their unfortunate situation, they are likely to favor spending on social programs designed to help these people. Conservatives, on the other hand, are more likely to hold just world beliefs—beliefs that people get what they deserve in life (Lerner, 1980).
Conservatives make more internal attributions for negative outcomes, believing that the needs are caused by the lack of474 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism effort or ability on the part of the individual. They are therefore less likely than liberals to favor government spending on welfare and other social programs designed to help people (Kluegel & Smith, 1986; Skitka, 1999).
Reactions to Receiving Help To this point in the chapter, we have proceeded as if helping is always a good thing—that people need to receive help and that they are appreciative of and thankful to the people who help them. But perhaps this is not always true. We haven’t yet considered the cognitive and affective reactions of the people who are receiving the help.
Can you remember a time when somebody tried to help you make a decision or perform a task, but you didn’t really want the help? How did that make you think and feel about yourself? Maybe there are costs involved in receiving help, just as there are in giving it.
Although people who receive help often really need the help and may indeed feel appreciative and grateful to those who help them, receiving help may also have some negative consequences. When we help another person, it indicates that we have enough resources that we can afford to give some of them to the recipient; it also indicates that the recipient is dependent on our goodwill. Thus helping can create a status disparity in the sense that the helper is seen as having higher status than the person being helped.
This inequality makes giving help an indication of high status and power, and receiving help a potentially self-threatening experience for the recipient (Nadler, 2002; Nadler & Halabi, 2006). There are a variety of emotions that help recipients might feel in these cases, including embarrassment and worry that they are, or are seen as, incompetent or dependent (DePaulo, Brown, Ishii, & Fisher, 1981; Nadler, Fisher, & Itzhak, 1983). Research has found that people frequently respond negatively when they receive help and may in some cases even prefer to endure hardships rather than to seek out help (Nadler, 1991).
Receiving help, then, can be a potential blow to our self-esteem. The negative feelings that we experience when receiving help are likely to be particularly strong when the recipient feels that the implication of the helping is that they are unable to care for themselves. In these cases the help is perceived as being dependency oriented (Nadler et al., 1983).
When the helper takes control of the situation and solves the problem facing the individual, leaving little left for the individual to accomplish on his or her own, the behavior may be seen as indicating that the individual cannot help herself. The potential recipients of help are likely to reject offers of dependency-oriented help, refrain from seeking it, and react negatively when it is offered. Another situation in which people may not appreciate the help they are receiving is when that help comes on the basis of one’s presumed need.
For instance Blaine, Crocker, and Major (1995) found that people who imagined that they had been hired for a job because they were disabled experienced lower self-esteem and felt that they were less likely to work hard on the job than those who imagined that they were hired on the basis of their job qualifications. You can see that government programs, such as those based on the notion of affirmative action, although likely to be helpful for the people who receive them, may also lead those people to feel dependent on others. In contrast to dependency-oriented help, autonomy-oriented help is partial and temporary and provides information to the other, for instance, by giving instructions or guidance or providing ideas about how to help oneself.
Autonomy-oriented help reflects the helper’s view that, given the appropriate tools, recipients can help themselves (Brickman, 1982). Autonomy-oriented help allows help recipients to8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 475 retain their independence despite their reliance on the more resourceful helper. This type of help is less likely to clash with the recipients’ view of themselves as capable people who can help themselves.
There are also observed gender differences in the willingness to seek help. Boys and men are less likely to ask for help overall, perhaps in part because they feel that asking for help indicates to others that they are less capable of handling their own affairs or that they have low status (Addis & Mahalik, 2003; Mansfield, Addis, & Mahalik, 2003). In short, when we help others we must be careful that we do it in a way that allows them to maintain their independence and that reminds them that they are still able to help themselves.
This type of help will be more easily accepted and more beneficial in the long run. Cultural Issues in Helping Although almost every culture has a social responsibility norm, the strength of those norms varies across cultures. And these differences relate well to what we know about individualism and collectivism.
In one study, Miller, Bersoff, and Harwood (1990) found that children and adults in the United States (a Western and therefore individualistic culture) were less likely than children and adults in India (an Eastern and therefore collectivistic culture) to believe that people have an obligation to provide assistance to others. The Indian respondents believed that there was an absolute requirement to help, whereas the Americans offered their helping more selectively, even to their friends. Similarly, Baron and Miller (2000) found that Indian students were more likely than U.S.
students to view donating bone marrow to save someone’s life as morally required, whereas U.S. students were more likely than Indian students to say that donating was a decision that the potential donor had to make himself or herself. Perlow and Weeks (2002) found that there were substantial cultural differences in the behavior of software engineers working at similar companies and doing the same type of work in the United States and in India.
Engineers at the American site were more focused on exchange and reciprocity—they tended to provide help to others only if they thought those people could be helpful to them in the future. The engineers at the Indian company, on the other hand, were more willing to help anyone who seemed to need help, regardless of the potential for a return. Perlow and Weeks interpreted these differences in terms of different ways of meeting the goal of self-interest.
Among the Americans, helping was seen as an unwanted interruption on the time of the individual, and thus helping was not personally beneficial. At the Indian company, however, helping was seen more as an opportunity for improving one’s skills. These results suggest that helping, at least in Western contexts such as the United States, can be increased if it is framed to be perceived as important toward achieving one’s goals.
One important difference between Eastern and Western cultures is that the importance of self-concern (versus other-concern) is higher in the latter. In fact, the strong individualistic norms in cultures such as the United States make it sometimes inappropriate to try to help in cases where we do not have a personal interest. Rebecca Ratner and Dale Miller (2001) had participants read a scenario in which a governmental funding agency was planning to reduce funding for research regarding a disease.
The disease was said to affect only women or only men. Then the participants were asked to indicate both whether they were opposed to the reduction in funding and how comfortable they would be in attending a meeting to protest the funding changes.476 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism In terms of their attitudes toward the reduction in funding, there were no significant gender differences.
Men thought that the funding should be maintained even when the disease only affected women, and vice versa. However, as you can see in Figure 8.11, “Effects of Standing on Feelings of Comfort in Taking Action,” when asked how comfortable they would feel attending a meeting protesting the funding decreases, significant differences occurred. The men predicted that they would feel less comfortable attending a meeting to protest the funding reductions when the disease only affected women, and the women predicted that they would feel less comfortable attending a meeting to protest the funding reductions when the disease only affected men.
Figure 8.11 Effects of Standing on Feelings of Comfort in Taking Action. This figure represents participants’ ratings of how comfortable they would be attending a meeting supporting the attempt to prevent funding reductions for a disease. Suggesting that a norm of self-interest is necessary to get involved, both men and women were less likely to feel comfortable arguing for a position that does not influence them personally.
Data from Ratner and Miller (2001, Experiment 3). Ratner and Miller argued that in Western cultures there is a norm of self-interest that influences whether or not we feel that we can be involved in actions designed to help others. In short, people are not expected to volunteer for, or to be involved in, causes that do not affect them personally.
It is simply inappropriate to lend help to others unless the person is personally involved in the issue and thus stands to benefit. Indeed, participants in another study by Ratner and Miller reacted more negatively to an individual’s altruistic behaviors when they did not appear consistent with his or her self-interest. There is still another example of the subtle role of self-interest in helping.
Did you ever notice that many people who are looking for contributions to a cause do not ask directly but rather ask that you purchase something from them, allowing them to keep the profit from the sale? Bake sales, car washes, and address sticker and magazine subscription charity campaigns are all examples of this. Of course, it would be more profitable for the charity if people simply gave the same amount of money rather than taking the gift—and perhaps the people who are making the purchases would prefer not to have to buy the product anyway.
Is it possible that people are simply more comfortable making donations in exchange for a product than they are simply giving money to a charity? Research by John Holmes and his colleagues (Holmes,8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 477 Miller, & Lerner, 2002) has supported this idea, finding that people are more likely to help when they can pretend that they are acting in their own self-interest. In one study, Holmes and his team found that students were more likely to donate money to a needy charity when they were offered a small candle in return for their donation than when they were not offered the candle.
However, and suggesting that they didn’t really care about the candle that much, when the request was to contribute to a charity that did not seem that needy, contributions were smaller overall but were not greater when the candle was offered than when it was not. Again, it seems that people feel more comfortable being altruistic when they can pretend that they are really helping themselves—not violating the norm of self-interest. Increasing Helping Now that we have a fundamental understanding of the variables that influence the likelihood that we will help others, let’s spend some time considering how we might use this information in our everyday life to try to become more helpful ourselves and to encourage those around us to do the same.
In doing so, we will make use of many of the principles of altruism that we have discussed in this chapter. First, we need to remember that not all helping is based on other-concern—self-concern is also important. People help in part because it makes them feel good, and therefore anything that we can do to increase the benefits of helping and to decrease the costs of helping would be useful.
Consider, for instance, the research of Mark Snyder, who has extensively studied the people who volunteer to help other people who are suffering from AIDS (Snyder & Omoto, 2004; Snyder, Omoto, & Lindsay, 2004). To help understand which volunteers were most likely to continue to volunteer over time, Snyder and his colleagues (Omoto & Snyder, 1995) asked the AIDS volunteers to indicate why they volunteered. As you can see in Figure 8.12, “Reasons for Volunteering to Help AIDS Victims,” the researchers found that the people indicated that they volunteered for many different reasons, and these reasons fit well with our assumptions about human nature—they involve both self-concern as well as other- concern.
Figure 8.12 Reasons for Volunteering to Help AIDS Victims. From Omoto and Snyder (1995). Values • Because of my humanitarian obligation to help others.
• Because I enjoy helping other people. • Because I consider myself to be a loving and caring person. • Because people should do something about issues that are important to them.
• Because of my personal values, convictions, and beliefs. Understanding • To learn more about how to prevent AIDS.478 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism • To learn how to help people with AIDS.
• To learn about how people cope with AIDS. • To understand AIDS and what it does with people. Personal development • To get to know people who are similar to myself.
• To meet new people and make new friends. • To gain experience dealing with emotionally difficult topics. • To challenge myself and test my skills.
• To learn about myself and my strengths and weaknesses. Community concern • Because of my sense of obligation to the gay community. • Because I consider myself an advocate for gay-related issues.
• Because of my concern and worry about the gay community. • To get to know people in the gay community. • To help members of the gay community.
Esteem enhancement • To make my life more stable. • To scape other pressures and stress in my life (e.g., from work, from home). • To feel less lonely.
• To feel needed. Omoto and Snyder (1995) found that the volunteers were more likely to continue their volunteer work if their reasons for volunteering involved self-related activities, such as understanding, personal development, or esteem enhancement. The volunteers who felt that they were getting something back from their work were likely to stay involved.
In addition, Snyder and his colleagues found that that people were more likely to continue volunteering when their existing social support networks were weak. This result suggests that some volunteers were using the volunteer opportunity to help them create better social connections (Omoto & Snyder, 1995). On the other hand, the volunteers who reported experiencing negative reactions about their helping from their friends and family members, which made them feel embarrassed, uncomfortable, and stigmatized for helping, were also less likely to continue working as volunteers (Snyder, Omoto, & Crain, 1999).8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 479 These results again show that people will help more if they see it as rewarding.
So if you want to get people to help, try to increase the rewards of doing so, for instance, by enhancing their mood or by offering incentives. Simple things, such as noticing, praising, and even labeling helpful behavior can be enough. When children are told that they are “kind and helpful children,” they contribute more of their prizes to other children (Grusec, Kuczynski, Rushton, & Simutis, 1978).
Rewards work for adults too: people were more likely to donate to charity several weeks after they were described by another person as being “generous” and “charitable” people (Kraut, 1973). In short, once we start to think of ourselves as helpful people, self-perception takes over and we continue to help. The countries that have passed Good Samaritan laws realize the importance of self-interest: if people must pay fines or face jail sentences if they don’t help, then they are naturally more likely to help.
And the programs in many schools, businesses, and other institutions that encourage students and workers to volunteer by rewarding them for doing so are also effective in increasing volunteering (Clary et al., 1998; Clary, Snyder, & Stukas, 1998). Helping also occurs in part because of other-concern. We are more likely to help people we like and care about, we feel similar to, and with whom we experience positive emotions.
Therefore, anything that we can do to increase our connections with others will likely increase helping. We must work to encourage ourselves, our friends, and our children to interact with others—to help them meet and accept new people and to instill a sense of community and caring in them. These social connections will make us feel closer to others and increase the likelihood we will help them.
We must also work to install the appropriate norms in our children. Kids must be taught not to be selfish and to value the norms of sharing and altruism. One way to increase our connection with others is to make those people highly salient and personal.
The effectiveness of this strategy was vividly illustrated by a recent campaign by Sport Club Recife, a Brazilian football club, which promoted the idea of becoming an “immortal fan” of the club by registering as an organ donor (Carneiro, 2014). As a result of this campaign, in only the first year of the campaign, the waiting list for organ transplants in the city of Recife was reduced to zero. Similar campaigns are now being planned in France and Spain.
Another way to increase our connection with others is for charities to individualize the people they are asking us to help. When we see a single person suffering, we naturally feel strong emotional responses to that person. And, as we have seen, the emotions that we feel when others are in need are powerful determinants of helping.
In fact, Paul Slovic (2007) found that people are simply unable to identify with statistical and abstract descriptions of need because they do not feel emotions for these victims in the same way they do for individuals. They argued that when people seem completely oblivious or numb to the needs of millions of people who are victims of earthquakes, genocide, and other atrocities, it is because the victims are presented as statistics rather than as individual cases. As Joseph Stalin, the Russian dictator who executed millions of Russians, put it, “A single death is a tragedy; a million deaths is a statistic.” We can also use what we have learned about helping in emergency situations to increase the likelihood of responding.
Most importantly, we must remember how strongly pluralistic ignorance can influence the interpretation of events and how quickly responsibility can be diffused among the people present at an emergency. Therefore, in emergency situations we must attempt to counteract pluralistic ignorance and diffusion of responsibility by remembering that others do not necessarily know more than we do.480 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism Depend on your own interpretation—don’t simply rely on your assumptions about what others are thinking and don’t just assume that others will do the helping.
We must be sure to follow the steps in Latané and Darley’s model, attempting to increase helping at each stage. We must make the emergency noticeable and clearly an emergency, for instance, by yelling out: “This is an emergency! Please call the police!
I need help!” And we must attempt to avoid the diffusion of responsibility, for instance, by designating one individual to help: “You over there in the red shirt, please call 911 now!” Key Takeaways • Some people—for instance, those with altruistic personalities—are more helpful than others. • Gender differences in helping depend on the type of helping that is required. Men are more likely to help in situations that involve physical strength, whereas women are more likely to help in situations that involve long-term nurturance and caring, particularly within close relationships.
• Our perception of the amount of the need is important. We tend to provide less help to people who seem to have brought on their own problems or who don’t seem to be working very hard to solve them on their own. • In some cases, helping can create negative consequences.
Dependency-oriented help may make the helped feel negative emotions, such as embarrassment and worry that they are seen as incompetent or dependent. Autonomy-oriented help is more easily accepted and will be more beneficial in the long run. • Norms about helping vary across cultures, for instance, between Eastern and Western cultures.
• We can increase helping by using our theoretical knowledge about the factors that produce it. Our strategies can be based on using both self-concern and other-concern. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
complete the online “Morality Test.” Write a brief reflection on the results of the test. 2. Imagine that you knew someone who was ill and needed help.
How would you frame your help to make him or her willing to accept it? 3. Assume for a moment that you were in charge of creating an advertising campaign designed to increase people’s altruism.
On the basis of your reading, what approaches might you take?8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 481 References Addis, M. E., & Mahalik, J. R.
(2003). Men, masculinity, and the contexts of help seeking. American Psychologist, 58(1), 5–14.
Baron, J., & Miller, J. G. (2000).
Limiting the scope of moral obligations to help: A cross-cultural investigation. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31(6), 703–725. Batson, C.
D., Oleson, K. C., Weeks, J. L., Healy, S.
P., Reeves, P. J., Jennings, P., & Brown, T. (1989).
Religious prosocial motivation: Is it altruistic or egoistic? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(5), 873–884. Becker, S.
W., & Eagly, A. H. (2004).
The heroism of women and men. American Psychologist, 59(3), 163–178. Benson, P.
L., Donahue, M. J., & Erickson, J. A.
(Eds.). (1989). Adolescence and religion: A review of the literature from 1970 to 1986.
Research in the Social Scientific Study of Religion, 1, 153–181. Bickman, L., & Kamzan, M. (1973).
The effect of race and need on helping behavior. Journal of Social Psychology, 89(1), 73–77. Blaine, B., Crocker, J., & Major, B.
(1995). The unintended negative consequences of sympathy for the stigmatized. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 25(10), 889–905.
Borman, W. C., Penner, L. A., Allen, T.
D., & Motowidlo, S. J. (2001).
Personality predictors of citizenship performance. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 9(1–2), 52–69. Brickman, P.
(1982). Models of helping and coping. American Psychologist, 37(4), 368–384.
Carneiro, J. (2014). How thousands of football fans are helping to save lives.
Retrieved from http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-27632527 Clary, E. G., Snyder, M., & Stukas, A. (1998).
Service-learning and psychology: Lessons from the psychology of volunteers’ motivations. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Clary, E.
G., Snyder, M., Ridge, R. D., Copeland, J., Stukas, A. A., Haugen, J., & Miene, P.
(1998). Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers: A functional approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(6), 1516–1530.
Davis, M. H., Luce, C., & Kraus, S. J.
(1994). The heritability of characteristics associated with dispositional empathy. Journal of Personality, 62(3), 369–391.
DePaulo, B. M., Brown, P. L., Ishii, S., & Fisher, J.
D. (1981). Help that works: The effects of aid on subsequent task performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(3), 478–487. Dooley, P. A.
(1995). Perceptions of the onset controllability of AIDS and helping judgments: An attributional analysis. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 25(10), 858–869.
Eagly, A. H., & Becker, S. W.
(2005). Comparing the heroism of women and men. American Psychologist, 60(4), 343–344.
Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Murphy, B. C., Shepard, S.
A., Cumberland, A., & Carlo, G. (1999). Consistency and development of prosocial dispositions: A longitudinal study.
Child Development, 70(6), 1360–1372.482 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism Furrow, J. L., King, P.
E., & White, K. (2004). Religion and positive youth development: Identity, meaning, and prosocial concerns.
Applied Developmental Science, 8(1), 17–26. Grusec, J. E., Kuczynski, L., Rushton, J.
P., & Simutis, Z. M. (1978).
Modeling, direct instruction, and attributions: Effects on altruism. Developmental Psychology, 14(1), 51–57. Holmes, J.
G., Miller, D. T., & Lerner, M. J.
(2002). Committing altruism under the cloak of self- interest: The exchange fiction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38(2), 144–151.
Kluegel, J. R., & Smith, E. R.
(1986). Beliefs about inequality: Americans’ views of what is and what ought to be. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Kraut, R. E. (1973).
Effects of social labeling on giving to charity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 9(6), 551–562. Lerner, M.
(1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York, NY: Plenum.
Mansfield, A. K., Addis, M. E., & Mahalik, J.
R. (2003). “Why won’t he go to the doctor?”: The psychology of men’s help seeking.
International Journal of Men’s Health, 2(2), 93–109. Miller, J. G., Bersoff, D.
M., & Harwood, R. L. (1990).
Perceptions of social responsibilities in India and in the United States: Moral imperatives or personal decisions? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(1), 33–47. Morgan, S.
P. (1983). A research note on religion and morality: Are religious people nice people?
Social Forces, 61(3), 683–692. Nadler, A. (2002).
Inter-group helping relations as power relations: Maintaining or challenging social dominance between groups through helping. Journal of Social Issues, 58(3), 487–502. Nadler, A.
(Ed.). (1991). Help-seeking behavior: Psychological costs and instrumental benefits.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Nadler, A., & Halabi, S. (2006).
Intergroup helping as status relations: Effects of status stability, identification, and type of help on receptivity to high-status group’s help. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(1), 97–110. Nadler, A., Fisher, J.
D., & Itzhak, S. B. (1983).
With a little help from my friend: Effect of single or multiple act aid as a function of donor and task characteristics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(2), 310–321. Omoto, A.
M., & Snyder, M. (1995). Sustained helping without obligation: Motivation, longevity of service, and perceived attitude change among AIDS volunteers.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(4), 671–686. Penner, L. A.
(2002). Dispositional and organizational influences on sustained volunteerism: An interactionist perspective. Journal of Social Issues, 58(3), 447–467.
Penner, L. A., Fritzsche, B. A., Craiger, J.
P., & Freifeld, T. S. (1995).
Measuring the prosocial personality. In J. Butcher & C.
Speigelberger (Eds.), Advances in personality assessment (Vol. 10, pp. 147–163).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Perlow, L., & Weeks, J. (2002).
Who’s helping whom? Layers of culture and workplace behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23(Spec.
Issue), 345–361. Ratner, R. K., & Miller, D.
T. (2001). The norm of self-interest and its effects on social action.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(1), 5–16.8.4 Other Determinants of Helping 483 Shariff, A. F., & Norenzayan, A. (2007).
God is watching you: Priming God concepts increases prosocial behavior in an anonymous economic game. Psychological Science, 18(9), 803–809. Skitka, L.
J. (1999). Ideological and attributional boundaries on public compassion: Reactions to individuals and communities affected by a natural disaster.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25(7), 793–808. Slovic, P. (2007).
“If I look at the mass I will never act”: Psychic numbing and genocide. Judgment and Decision Making, 2(2), 79–95. Snyder, M., & Omoto, A.
M. (Eds.). (2004).
Volunteers and volunteer organizations: Theoretical perspectives and practical concerns. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Snyder, M., Omoto, A.
M., & Crain, A. L. (1999).
Punished for their good deeds: Stigmatization of AIDS volunteers. American Behavioral Scientist, 42(7), 1175–1192. Snyder, M., Omoto, A.
M., & Lindsay, J. J. (Eds.).
(2004). Sacrificing time and effort for the good of others: The benefits and costs of volunteerism. New York, NY: Guilford Press.8.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Altruism This chapter has been concerned with the many varieties of helping.
We have seen that helping and altruism may occur in a variety of ways and toward a variety of people. Were you surprised to learn how important helping is in our social lives, and in how many different ways it occurs? Can you now see—perhaps in a way that you did not before—that helping allows us to lead more effective lives?
Because you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will realize that we help partly as a result of other-concern. We help because we care about others, we feel bad when they feel bad, and we really want to help. We help more when we see those others as similar to us and when we feel empathy for them.
But we also help out of self-concern, to relieve our personal distress, to escape public shame for not helping, and to feel good about our helpful actions. Helping others is beneficial to others but also to us—we often enjoy being helpful, and helping can make us feel good and be healthy. Perhaps your new knowledge about the causes of helping may lead you to be less surprised about the extent to which people are willing, in many cases at substantial cost to themselves, to help others.
Or perhaps you are now thinking more fully about whether altruism truly exists. Do people ever help only out of other-concern, or is all helping at least partly the result of self-concern? Does your knowledge about altruism lead you to think differently about donating your blood or organs?
Perhaps you will be able to use your new understanding of the situational factors involved in helping to make sure that you and others are not led to ignore the needs of others as a result of pluralistic ignorance or diffusion of responsibility. If you find yourself in an emergency situation, you may now have a better idea of how to make sure someone helps. Remember to use this information if the need arises.
And perhaps your new understanding about helping has given you new insights into your own behavior. Are you now more willing to help others? Do you think it is important to help?
Can you see how you might feel better about yourself if you do? Will you try to increase your own altruistic behavior? We hope that this chapter has encouraged you to do so.
4858.6 Chapter Summary Altruism refers to any behavior that is designed to increase another person’s welfare, and particularly those actions that do not seem to provide a direct reward to the person who performs them. Every day numerous acts of altruism occur all around us. People give up substantial time and energy to help others.
The tendency to help others is at least in part a basic feature of human nature, designed to help us help ourselves. Altruism enhances our reproductive success by helping the species as a whole survive and prosper. We are particularly helpful to our kin and to people we perceive as being similar to us.
We also help people who are not related or similar as the result of reciprocal altruism. By cooperating with others, we increase our and others’ chances of survival and reproductive success. We are more likely to help when we are rewarded and less likely when the perceived costs of helping are high.
When we act altruistically, we may gain a reputation as a person with high status who is able and willing to help others. Some countries have enacted Good Samaritan laws that require people to provide or call for aid in an emergency if they can do so. We also learn to help by modeling the helpful behavior of others.
Social norms for helping include the reciprocity norm, which reminds us that we should follow the principles of reciprocal altruism, and the social responsibility norm, which tells us that we should try to help others who need assistance, even without any expectation of future payback. We react to people in large part on the basis of how they make us feel and how we think we will feel if we help them. Positive mood states increase helping, and negative affective states, particularly guilt, do also.
Personal distress refers to the negative feelings and emotions that we may experience when we view another person’s distress. Empathy refers to an affective response in which a person understands, and even feels, another person’s emotional distress and when he or she experiences events the way the other person does. Latané and Darley’s decision model of bystander intervention has represented an important theoretical framework for helping us understand the role of situational variables on helping.
According to the model, whether or not we help depends on the outcomes of a series of decisions that involve noticing the event, interpreting the situation as one requiring assistance, deciding to take personal responsibility, and implementing action. Some people—for instance, those with altruistic personalities—are more helpful than others. And we help some people more than we help others; our perception of the amount of the need is important.
We tend to provide less help to people who seem to have brought on their own problems or who don’t seem to be working very hard to solve them on their own. Gender differences in helping depend on the type of helping that is required. Men are more likely to help in situations that involve physical strength, whereas women are more likely than men to help in situations that involve long-term nurturance and caring, particularly within close relationships.
487488 Chapter 8. Helping and Altruism In some cases, helping can create negative consequences. Dependency-oriented help may make the helped feel negative emotions, such as embarrassment and worry that they are seen as incompetent or dependent.
Autonomy-oriented help is more easily accepted and will be more beneficial in the long run. Norms about helping vary across cultures, for instance, between Eastern and Western cultures. The strong individualistic norms in cultures such as the United States make it seem inappropriate to help in cases where we do not have a personal interest.
People may feel more comfortable helping when they feel that they are acting, at least in part, in their own self-interest. We can increase helping by using our theoretical knowledge about the factors that produce it. Our strategies can be based on using both self- concern and other-concern.
In terms of self-concern, if helping is seen as something positive for the self, people will help more. In terms of other-concern, we may try to increase our social connections with others, thereby increasing the likelihood we will help them. We must work to instill the appropriate norms about helping in our children.
In emergency situations, we must be must be sure to disambiguate the emergency to others rather than assuming that those others will notice and interpret the event as one requiring help, and to help individuals experience that they have a personal responsibility to intervene. In sum, altruism is an important and frequent part of human lives. We couldn’t live without the help we receive from others, and we are generally willing in many cases to return that help.
Helping others is beneficial to them, but helping is also beneficial to us—we often enjoy being helpful, and helping can make us feel good and be healthy.Chapter 9. Aggression Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Defining Aggression • Define aggression and violence as social psychologists do.
• Differentiate emotional from instrumental aggression. 2. The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression • Explain how aggression might be evolutionarily adaptive.
• Describe how different parts of the brain influence aggression. • Summarize the effects of testosterone and serotonin on aggression. 3.
The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression • Review the situational variables that increase and decrease aggression. • Explain the different effects of reward, punishment, and modeling on aggression. • Review the influences of viewing violent behavior on aggression and explain why these effects might occur.
4. Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression • Summarize the individual difference variables related to aggression. • Explain how men and women differ, on average, in terms of aggression.
• Give examples of some cultural differences in aggression. 489490 Dr. Hammond Tarry Star Striker Banned for Biting (Again) Figure 9.1 Luis Suarez.
On June 24, 2014, Luis Suarez, Uruguay’s star football player, was representing his country in a group-stage match against Italy at the FIFA World Cup. The match was still tied at 0-0 when, in the 79th minute, Suarez appeared to intentionally bite the shoulder of Giorgio Chiellini, the Italian defender. Chiellini immediately alerted the officials to the act while Suarez, who fell to the ground, appeared to indicate an injury to his teeth.
At the time, the attention of the match officials was focused on other players closer to the soccer ball, and so they did not notice the bite and play continued. Two minutes later, Uruguay scored the only goal of the match, which took them through to the knockout stage of the World Cup while sending Italy, the 2006 champions, crashing out. Suarez and the Uruguayan management initially denied the bite only for the striker to later apologize on Twitter, admitting that “the truth is that my colleague Giorgio Chiellini suffered the physical result of a bite in the collision he suffered with me.” FIFA’s disciplinary committee found Suarez guilty and banned him from playing soccer for four months and nine competitive internationals—the longest- ever ban imposed on a player at the World Cup.
Although some fans were tempted to explain Suarez’s actions in terms of his passion and the pressure of a World Cup match, interestingly, Suarez had twice before been banned for biting players on the pitch, when playing for Dutch club Ajax and English Premier club Liverpool. As a result, FIFA was determined to impose a relatively harsh punishment. The ban meant that Suarez would miss Uruguay’s round of 16 match against Colombia in the World Cup, a match that Uruguay lost 0-2.Principles of Social Psychology 491 Despite all this, Suarez received a hero’s welcome when he returned to Uruguay, where the country’s president and the national media considered that he had been made a scapegoat.
Source: World Cup over for Suarez after record ban for biting If you go to the movies tonight, you may choose to see a violent film, in which you may view depictions of assaults, kidnappings, murders, rapes, wars, or executions. If you turn on the TV or surf the Internet, you’ll likely see news reports of the real thing—more assaults, kidnappings, murders, rapes, wars, and executions. We also suffer more directly from aggression in our everyday life.
When we get in our cars we may become the victim of aggressive driving by other drivers, or we may play violent video games that involve—well, more murder and killing. Even relaxing by watching sports on TV will lead us to see violence, as football players purposely kick and trip one another and hockey players start violent fistfights. Although there is evidence to suggest that human violence has steadily declined over the centuries (adjusting for population growth; Pinker, 2011), we certainly live in a world in which violence—be it terrorism, war, rape, child abuse, or even bullying—occurs with uncomfortable frequency (Dutton, Boyanowsky, & Bond, 2005).
Although we have argued that people are generally caring toward others—that they have a basic desire to accept, care for, and help them—the violent events that surround us present a problem for this assumption. If people are generally good and care about others so much, then how could anyone possibly kill another human being, let alone participate in a suicide bombing or even genocide? Do aggressive events mean that people are naturally aggressive, violent, and hostile—or are they unusual events, shaped more by particularly extreme social situations that do not reflect the normal character of human beings?
We will answer these questions by considering the underlying principles of aggression—in terms of affect, cognition, and behavior, and in terms of the general goals of protecting the self and reaching out to others. (In this case, however, it is the former goal that prevails.) Aggression is wired into the deepest and oldest parts of our brain and yet is stimulated and controlled by social, situational, and cultural variables. In this chapter, we will study the causes of aggression and make some suggestions for how we might be able to reduce it.
Most importantly, we will see that—consistent with our analysis of human behavior more generally—aggression is not so much about the goal of harming others as it is about the goal of protecting the self.492 Dr. Hammond Tarry Figure 9.2. When they feel that their self-concept is threatened, humans may engage in aggressive behavior.
References Dutton, D. G., Boyanowsky, E. O., & Bond, M.
H. (2005). Extreme mass homicide: From military massacre to genocide.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 10 (4), 437 Pinker, S. (2011). The better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined.
New York: Viking. Media Attributions • “Luis Suarez celebrates his Gol to put Uruguay 1 – Netherlands 0 – Take 2 | 110608-6714-jikatu” by Jimmy Baikovicius is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “Mahmoud Ahmadinejad at Columbia 4 by David Shankbone” by David Shankbone is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence.
• “Jeff Isom arguing with an umpire” by Wisconsin Timber Rattlers Team Photographer is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “ArmyMilCombativesChokehold” by US Army serviceman is licensed under a Public domain licence.9.1 Defining Aggression Learning Objectives 1. Define aggression and violence as social psychologists do.
2. Differentiate emotional from instrumental aggression. Aggression is a word that we use every day to characterize the behavior of others and perhaps even of ourselves.
We say that people are aggressive if they yell at or hit each other, if they cut off other cars in traffic, or even when they smash their fists on the table in frustration. But other harmful acts, such as the injuries that sports players receive during a rough game or the killing of enemy soldiers in a war might not be viewed by everyone as aggression. Because aggression is so difficult to define, social psychologists, judges, and politicians (as well as many other people, including lawyers), have spent a great deal of time trying to determine what should and should not be considered aggression.
Doing so forces us to make use of the processes of causal attribution to help us determine the reasons for the behavior of others. Social psychologists define aggression as behavior that is intended to harm another individual who does not wish to be harmed (Baron & Richardson, 1994). Because it involves the perception of intent, what looks like aggression from one point of view may not look that way from another, and the same harmful behavior may or may not be considered aggressive depending on its intent.
Intentional harm is, however, perceived as worse than unintentional harm, even when the harms are identical (Ames & Fiske, 2013). You can see that this definition rules out some behaviors that we might normally think are aggressive. For instance, a rugby player who accidentally breaks the arm of another player or a driver who accidentally hits a pedestrian would not by our definition be displaying aggression because although harm was done, there was no intent to harm.
A salesperson who attempts to make a sale through repeated phone calls is not aggressive because he is not intending any harm (we might say this behavior is “assertive” rather than aggressive). And not all intentional behaviors that hurt others are aggressive behaviors. A dentist might intentionally give a patient a painful injection of a painkiller, but the goal is to prevent further pain during the procedure.
Because our definition requires us to determine the intent of the perpetrator, there is going to be some interpretation of these intents and there may well be disagreement among the parties involved. The U.S. government perceives the development of a nuclear weapon by Iran as aggressive because the government believes that the weapon is intended to harm others, but Iranians may see the program as a matter of national pride.
Although the player whose arm is broken in a rugby match may attribute 493494 Chapter 9. Aggression hostile intent, the other player may claim that the injury was not intended. Within the legal system, juries and judges are frequently asked to determine whether harm was done intentionally.
Social psychologists use the term violence to refer to aggression that has extreme physical harm, such as injury or death, as its goal. Thus violence is a subset of aggression. All violent acts are aggressive, but only acts that are intended to cause extreme physical damage, such as murder, assault, rape, and robbery, are violent.
Slapping someone really hard across the face might be violent, but calling people names would only be aggressive. The type or level of intent that underlies an aggressive behavior creates the distinction between two fundamental types of aggression, which are caused by very different psychological processes. Emotional or impulsive aggression refers to aggression that occurs with only a small amount of forethought or intent and that is determined primarily by impulsive emotions.
Emotional aggression is the result of the extreme negative emotions we’re experiencing at the time that we aggress and is not really intended to create any positive outcomes. When Nazim yells at his boyfriend, this is probably emotional aggression—it is impulsive and carried out in the heat of the moment. Other examples are the jealous lover who strikes out in rage or the sports fans who vandalize stores and destroy cars around the stadium after their team loses an important game.
Instrumental or cognitive aggression, on other hand, is aggression that is intentional and planned. Instrumental aggression is more cognitive than affective and may be completely cold and calculating. Instrumental aggression is aimed at hurting someone to gain something—attention, monetary reward, or political power, for instance.
If the aggressor believes that there is an easier way to obtain the goal, the aggression would probably not occur. A bully who hits a child and steals her toys, a terrorist who kills civilians to gain political exposure, and a hired assassin are all good examples of instrumental aggression. Sometimes it is hard to distinguish between instrumental and emotional aggression, and yet it is important to try to do so.
Emotional aggression is usually treated differently in the legal system (with less severe consequences) from cognitive, instrumental aggression. However, it may well be the case that all aggression is at least in part instrumental because it serves some need for the perpetrator. Therefore, it is probably best to consider emotional and instrumental aggression not as distinct categories but rather as endpoints on a continuum (Bushman & Anderson, 2001).
Social psychologists agree that aggression can be verbal as well as physical. Therefore, slinging insults at a friend is definitely aggressive, according to our definition, just as hitting someone is. Physical aggression is aggression that involves harming others physically—for instance hitting, kicking, stabbing, or shooting them.
Nonphysical aggression is aggression that does not involve physical harm. Nonphysical aggression includes verbal aggression (yelling, screaming, swearing, and name calling) and relational or social aggression, which is defined as intentionally harming another person’s social relationships, for instance, by gossiping about another person, excluding others from our friendship, or giving others the “silent treatment” (Crick & Grotpeter, 1995). Nonverbal aggression also occurs in the form of sexual, racial, and homophobic jokes and epithets, which are designed to cause harm to individuals.
The following list (adapted from Archer & Coyne, 2005) presents some examples of the types of nonphysical aggression that have been observed in children and adults. One reason that people may use nonphysical rather than physical aggression is that it is more subtle. When we use these techniques, we9.1 Defining Aggression 495 may be able to better get away with it—we can be aggressive without appearing to others to be aggressing.
• Gossiping • Spreading rumors • Criticizing other people behind their backs • Bullying • Leaving others out of a group or otherwise ostracizing them • Turning people against each other • Dismissing the opinions of others • “Stealing” a boyfriend or girlfriend • Threatening to break up with partner if the partner does not comply • Flirting with another person to make a partner jealous Although the negative outcomes of physical aggression are perhaps more obvious, nonphysical aggression also has costs to the victim. Craig (1998) found that children who were victims of bullying showed more depression, loneliness, peer rejection, and anxiety in comparison to other children. In Great Britain, 20% of adolescents report being bullied by someone spreading hurtful rumors about them (Sharp, 1995).
Girls who are victims of nonphysical aggression have been found to be more likely to engage in harmful behaviors such as smoking or considering suicide (Olafsen & Viemero, 2000). And Paquette and Underwood (1999) found that both boys and girls rated social aggression as making them feel more “sad” and “bad” than did physical aggression. Recently, there has been an increase in school bullying through cyberbullying—aggression inflicted through the use of computers, cell phones, and other electronic devices (Hinduja & Patchin, 2009).
One notable recent example was the suicide of 18-year-old Rutgers University student Tyler Clementi on September 22, 2010. Tyler’s last words before he died were shared through an update to his Facebook status: “jumping off the gw bridge sorry” Clementi’s suicide occurred after his roommate, Dharun Ravi, and Ravi’s friend Molly Wei secretly enabled a remote webcam in a room where Tyler and a male friend were sharing a sexual encounter and then broadcasted the streaming video footage across the Internet. Cyberbullying can be directed at anyone, but lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT) students are most likely to be the targets (Potok, 2010).
Blumenfeld and Cooper (2010) found that 54% of LGBT youth reported being cyberbullied within the past three months. Hinduja and Patchin (2009) found that youth who report being victims of cyberbullying experience a variety of stresses from it, including psychological disorders, alcohol use, and in extreme cases, suicide. In addition to its emotional toll, cyberbullying also negatively affects students’ participation in, and success at, school.496 Chapter 9.
Aggression H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 9 DRAG THE WORDS – WHICH TYPE OF AGGRESSION? Use the definitions of the different types of aggression provided to decide which two types are being shown in each of the following scenarios. Types of aggression: Social/relational and cyberbullying, Instrumental/cognitive and physical, Verbal and emotional/ impulsive, Instrumental/cognitive and social/relational.
Scenarios: 1. After weeks of planning, an angry ex-husband sends an anonymous letter to his ex-wife’s workplace disclosing information designed to cause her embarrassment with her employers. 2.
A teenager spreads a malicious rumour on Facebook about her ex-boyfriend. 3. A soccer player plans how to injure an opponent during a game, and when the opportunity arises, makes a knee-high tackle that leaves the opponent in need of medical attention.
4. A woman loses her temper in the moment and shouts at her partner, using very offensive language Social Psychology in the Public Interest Terrorism as Instrumental Aggression There is perhaps no clearer example of the prevalence of violence in our everyday lives than the increase in terrorism that has been observed in the past decade (National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, 2011). These terrorist attacks have occurred in many countries across the world, in both Eastern as well as Western cultures.
Even affluent Western democracies such as Denmark, Italy, Spain, France, Canada, and the United States have experienced terrorism, which has killed thousands of people, primarily innocent civilians. Terrorists use tactics such as killing civilians to create publicity for their causes and to lead the governments of the countries that are attacked to overrespond to the threats (McCauley, 2004). How can we understand the motives and goals of terrorists?
Are they naturally evil people whose primary desire is to hurt others? Or are they more motivated to gain something for themselves, their families, or their countries? What are the thoughts and feelings that terrorists experience that drive them to their extreme behaviors?
And what person and situational variables cause terrorism? Prior research has attempted to determine if there are particular personality characteristics that describe terrorists (Horgan, 2005). Perhaps terrorists are individuals with some kind of deep psychological disturbance.
However, the research conducted on various terrorist organizations does not reveal anything distinctive about the psychological makeup of individual terrorists.9.1 Defining Aggression 497 Empirical data have also found little evidence for some of the situational variables that might have been expected to be important. There is little evidence for a relation between poverty or lack of education and terrorism. Furthermore, terrorist groups seem to be quite different from each other in terms of their size, organizational structure, and sources of support.
Arie Kruglanski and Shira Fishman (2006) have argued that it is best to understand terrorism not from the point of view of either particular personality traits or particular situational causes but rather as a type of instrumental aggression—a means to an end. In their view, terrorism is simply a “tool,” a tactic of warfare that anyone from any nation, military group, or even a lone perpetrator could use. Figure 9.3 Anders Behring Breivik killed over 90 people in a misguided effort to promote his conservative beliefs about immigration.
Kruglanski and his colleagues argue that terrorists believe that they can gain something through their terrorist acts that they could not gain through other methods. The terrorist makes a cognitive, deliberate, and instrumental decision that his or her action will gain particular objectives. Furthermore,498 Chapter 9.
Aggression the goal of the terrorist is not to harm others but rather to gain something personally or for one’s religion, beliefs, or country. Even suicide terrorists believe that they are dying for personal gain—for instance, the promise of heavenly paradise, the opportunity to meet Allah and the prophet Muhammad, and rewards for members of one’s family (Berko & Erez, 2007). Thus, for the terrorist, willingness to die in an act of suicidal terrorism may be motivated not so much by the desire to harm others but rather by self-concern—the desire to live forever.
One recent example of the use of terrorism to promote one’s beliefs can be seen in the actions of Anders Behring Breivik, 32 (Figure 9.3), who killed over 90 people in July 2011 through a bomb attack in downtown Olso, Norway, and a shooting spree at a children’s campground. Breivik planned his attacks for years, believing that his actions would help spread his conservative beliefs about immigration and alert the Norwegian government to the threats posed by multiculturalism (and particularly the inclusion of Muslims in Norwegian society). This violent act of instrumental aggression is typical of terrorists.
Key Takeaways • Aggression refers to behavior that is intended to harm another individual. • Violence is aggression that creates extreme physical harm. • Emotional or impulsive aggression refers to aggression that occurs with only a small amount of forethought or intent.
• Instrumental or cognitive aggression is intentional and planned. • Aggression may be physical or nonphysical. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Consider how social psychologists would analyze each of the following behaviors. What type of aggression is being exhibited (if any)? Consider your answer in terms of the two underlying motivations of enhancing the self and connecting with others.
• A wrestler tackles an opponent and breaks his arm. • A salesperson repeatedly calls a customer to try to convince her to buy a product, even though the customer would rather he did not. • Malik loses all the changes he made on his term paper and slams his laptop computer on the floor.
• Marty finds her boyfriend kissing another girl and beats him with her purse. • Sally spreads false rumors about Michele. • Jamie knows that Bill is going to hit Frank when he next sees him, but she doesn’t warn him9.1 Defining Aggression 499 about it.
• The Israeli Army attacks terrorists in Gaza but kills Palestinian civilians, including children, as well. • A suicide bomber kills himself and 30 other people in a crowded bus in Jerusalem. • North Korea develops a nuclear weapon that it claims it will use to defend itself from potential attack by other countries but that the United States sees as a threat to world peace.
References Ames, D. L., & Fiske, S. T.
(2013). Intentional harms are worse, even when they’re not. Psychological Science, 24(9), 1755-1762.
Archer, J., & Coyne, S. M. (2005).
An integrated review of indirect, relational, and social aggression. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9(3), 212–230. Berko, A., & Erez, E.
(2007). Gender, Palestinian women, and terrorism: Women’s liberation or oppression? Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 30(6), 493–519.
Blumenfeld, W. J., & Cooper, R. M.
(2010). LGBT and allied youth responses to cyberbullying: Policy implications. International Journal of Critical Pedagogy, 3(1), 114–133.
Bushman, B. J., & Anderson, C. A.
(2001). Is it time to pull the plug on hostile versus instrumental aggression dichotomy? Psychological Review, 108(1), 273–279.
Craig, W. M. (1998).
The relationship among bullying, victimization, depression, anxiety, and aggression in elementary school children. Personality and Individual Differences, 24(1), 123–130. Crick, N.
R., & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995).
Relational aggression, gender, and social-psychological adjustment. Child Development, 66(3), 710–722. Hinduja S., & Patchin, J.
W. (2009). Bullying beyond the schoolyard: Preventing and responding to cyberbullying.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Horgan, J. (2005).
The psychology of terrorism. New York, NY: Routledge Kruglanski, A. W., & Fishman, S.
(2006). Terrorism between “syndrome” and “tool.” Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(1), 45–48. McCauley, C.
(Ed.). (2004). Psychological issues in understanding terrorism and the response to terrorism.
Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers/Greenwood Publishing Group. National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism. (2011).
Background report: 9/11, ten years later. Retrieved from http://www.start.umd.edu/sites/default/files/files/ announcements/BackgroundReport_10YearsSince9_11.pdf Olafsen, R. N., & Viemero, V.
(2000). Bully/victim problems and coping with stress in school among 10- to 12-year-old pupils in Aland, Finland. Aggressive Behavior, 26(1), 57–65.500 Chapter 9.
Aggression Paquette, J. A., & Underwood, M. K.
(1999). Gender differences in young adolescents’ experiences of peer victimization: Social and physical aggression. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45(2), 242–266.
Potok M. (2010). Gays remain minority most targeted by hate crimes.
Intelligence Report, 140. Retrieved from http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-report/browse-all-issues/2010/ winter/under-attack-gays-remain-minority-mos Sharp, S. (1995).
How much does bullying hurt? The effects of bullying on the personal well-being and educational progress of secondary aged students. Educational and Child Psychology, 12(2), 81–88.
Media Attributions • “Anders Behring Breivik, painted portrait” by thierry ehrmann is licensed under CC BY 2.0 licence.9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression Learning Objectives 1. Explain how aggression might be evolutionarily adaptive. 2.
Describe how different parts of the brain influence aggression. 3. Summarize the effects of testosterone and serotonin on aggression.
When we see so much violence around us every day, we might conclude that people have an innate tendency, or even an instinct, to be aggressive. Some well-known philosophers and psychologists have argued that this is the case. For instance, the philosopher Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) took this view, arguing that humans are naturally evil and that only society could constrain their aggressive tendencies.
On the other hand, the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) was more positive. He believed that humans are naturally gentle creatures who are aggressive only because we are taught to be so by our society. The influential psychologist Sigmund Freud, who lived through the disaster of World War I in which millions of his fellow human beings were massacred, argued that although people do have a “life instinct,” they also have a “death instinct”—an impulse toward destruction of themselves and others.
Is Aggression Evolutionarily Adaptive? A belief in the innate aggressive tendencies of human beings—that the ability to be aggressive toward others, at least under some circumstances, is part of our fundamental human makeup—is consistent with the principles of evolutionary psychology. After all, the goal of maintaining and enhancing the self will in some cases require that we prevent others from harming us and those we care about.
We may aggress against others because it allows us to gain access to valuable resources such as food and desirable mates or to protect ourselves from direct attack by others. And we may aggress when we feel that our social status is threatened. Therefore, if aggression helps with either our individual survival or in the survival of our genes, then the process of natural selection may well cause humans, as it would any other animal, to be aggressive.
Human beings need to be able to aggress in certain situations, and nature has provided us with these skills (Buss & Duntley, 2006). Under the right situation, almost all of us will aggress. However, just because we can aggress does not mean that we will.
It is not necessarily evolutionarily adaptive to aggress in all situations. For one, aggressing can be costly if the other person aggresses back. Therefore, neither people nor animals are always aggressive.
Rather, they use aggression only when they feel that they absolutely need to (Berkowitz, 1993a). In animals, the fight-or-flight response 501502 Chapter 9. Aggression to threat leads them sometimes to attack and sometimes to flee the situation.
Human beings have an even wider variety of potential responses to threat, only one of which is aggression. Again, the social situation is critical. We may react violently in situations in which we are uncomfortable or fearful or when another person has provoked us, but we may react more calmly in other settings.
And there are cultural differences, such that violence is more common in some cultures than in others. There is no doubt that aggression is in part genetically determined. Animals can be bred to be aggressive by breeding the most aggressive offspring with each other (Lagerspetz & Lagerspetz, 1971).
Children who are aggressive as infants also are aggressive when they are adults (Coie & Dodge, 1998; Dubow, Huesmann, & Boxer, 2003; Raine, 1993) and identical twins are more similar than fraternal twins in their aggressive tendencies and criminal records. Behavioral genetics studies have found that criminal and aggressive behavior is correlated at about .70 for identical twins but only at about .40 for fraternal twins (Tellegen et al., 1988). Avsalom Caspi and his colleagues (2002) found evidence for the person-by-situation interaction in determining aggression.
They focused on the the influence of a particular genetic factor, the monoamine oxidase (MAOA) gene, located on the X chromosome, that produces an enzyme that influences the production of serotonin, a neurotransmitter that influences mood, appetite, and sleep and that inhibits aggression. Supporting the role of genetics in aggression, they found that individuals who had lower levels of activity of this gene were more at risk to show a variety of aggressive behaviors as adults. However, they also found that the genetic factor was only important for children who had also been severely mistreated.
This person-by-situation interaction effect is shown in Figure 9.4. Although much more research is needed, it appears that aggressive behavior, like most other behaviors, is affected by an interaction between genetic and environmental variations. Figure 9.4 Person-by-situation interaction effect [Image description] Caspi and his colleagues (2002) found evidence for a person-by-situation interaction regarding the role of genetics and parental treatment in aggression.
Antisocial behavior and aggression were greater for children who had been severely maltreated, but this effect was even stronger for children with a gene variation that reduced the production of serotonin. Evolutionary principles suggest that we should be less likely to harm those who are genetically related to us than we are to harm others who are different. And research has supported this finding—for9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 503 instance, biological parents are much less likely to abuse or murder their own children than stepparents are to harm their stepchildren (Daly & Wilson, 1998, 1999).
In fact, these researchers found that preschool children living with a stepparent or foster parent were many times more likely to be murdered by their parent than were children who lived with both biological parents. The Role of Biology in Aggression Aggression is controlled in large part by the area in the older part of the brain known as the amygdala (Figure 9.5, “Key Brain Structures Involved in Regulating and Inhibiting Aggression”). The amygdala is a brain region responsible for regulating our perceptions of, and reactions to, aggression and fear.
The amygdala has connections with other body systems related to fear, including the sympathetic nervous system, facial responses, the processing of smells, and the release of neurotransmitters related to stress and aggression. In addition to helping us experience fear, the amygdala also helps us learn from situations that create fear. The amygdala is activated in response to positive outcomes but also to negative ones, and particularly to stimuli that we see as threatening and fear arousing.
When we experience events that are dangerous, the amygdala stimulates the brain to remember the details of the situation so that we learn to avoid it in the future. The amygdala is activated when we look at facial expressions of other people experiencing fear or when we are exposed to members of racial outgroups (Morris, Frith, Perrett, & Rowland, 1996; Phelps et al., 2000). Although the amygdala helps us perceive and respond to danger, and this may lead us to aggress, other parts of the brain serve to control and inhibit our aggressive tendencies.
One mechanism that helps us control our negative emotions and aggression is a neural connection between the amygdala and regions of the prefrontal cortex (Gibson, 2002). The prefrontal cortex is in effect a control center for aggression: when it is more highly activated, we are more able to control our aggressive impulses. Research has found that the cerebral cortex is less active in murderers and death row inmates, suggesting that violent crime may be caused at least in part by a failure or reduced ability to regulate emotions (Davidson, Jackson, & Kalin, 2000; Davidson, Putnam, & Larson, 2000).504 Chapter 9.
Aggression Figure 9.5 Key Brain Structures Involved in Regulating and Inhibiting Aggression. Brain regions that influence aggression include the amygdala (area 1) and the prefrontal cortex (area 2). Individual differences in one or more of these regions or in the interconnections among them can increase the propensity for impulsive aggression.
Hormones Influence Aggression: Testosterone and Serotonin Hormones are also important in creating aggression. Most important in this regard is the male sex hormone testosterone, which is associated with increased aggression in both animals and in humans.9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 505 Research conducted on a variety of animals has found a strong correlation between levels of testosterone and aggression. This relationship seems to be weaker among humans than among animals, yet it is still significant (Dabbs, Hargrove, & Heusel, 1996).
In one study showing the relationship between testosterone and behavior, James Dabbs and his colleagues (Dabbs, Hargrove, & Heusel, 1996) measured the testosterone levels of 240 men who were members of 12 fraternities at two universities. They also obtained descriptions of the fraternities from university officials, fraternity officers, yearbook and chapter house photographs, and researcher field notes. The researchers correlated the testosterone levels and the descriptions of each of the fraternities.
They found that the fraternities that had the highest average testosterone levels were also more wild and unruly, and in one case were known across campus for the crudeness of their behavior. The fraternities with the lowest average testosterone levels, on the other hand, were more well-behaved, friendly, academically successful, and socially responsible. Another study found that juvenile delinquents and prisoners who have high levels of testosterone also acted more violently (Banks & Dabbs, 1996).
Testosterone affects aggression by influencing the development of various areas of the brain that control aggressive behaviors. The hormone also affects physical development such as muscle strength, body mass, and height that influence our ability to successfully aggress. Although testosterone levels are much higher in men than in women, the relationship between testosterone and aggression is not limited to males.
Studies have also shown a positive relationship between testosterone and aggression and related behaviors (such as competitiveness) in women (Cashdan, 2003). Although women have lower levels of testosterone overall, they are more influenced by smaller changes in these levels than are men. It must be kept in mind that the observed relationships between testosterone levels and aggressive behavior that have been found in these studies cannot prove that testosterone causes aggression—the relationships are only correlational.
In fact, the effect of aggression on testosterone is probably stronger than the effect of testosterone on aggression. Engaging in aggression causes temporary increases in testosterone. People who feel that they have been insulted show both more aggression as well as more testosterone (Cohen, Nisbett, Bosdle, & Schwarz, 1996), and the experience of stress is also associated with higher levels of testosterone and also with aggression.
Even playing an aggressive game, such as tennis or chess, increases the testosterone levels of the winners and decreases the testosterone levels of the losers (Gladue, Boechler, & McCaul, 1989; Mazur, Booth, & Dabbs, 1992). Perhaps this is why the fans of the Montreal Canadiens, a professional ice hockey team, rioted after their team won an important game against the Pittsburgh Penguins in 2010. Testosterone is not the only biological factor linked to human aggression.
Recent research has found that serotonin is also important, as serotonin tends to inhibit aggression. Low levels of serotonin have been found to predict future aggression (Kruesi, Hibbs, Zahn, & Keysor, 1992; Virkkunen, de Jong, Bartko, & Linnoila, 1989). Violent criminals have lower levels of serotonin than do nonviolent criminals, and criminals convicted of impulsive violent crimes have lower serotonin levels than criminals convicted of premeditated crimes (Virkkunen, Nuutila, Goodwin, & Linnoila, 1987).
In one experiment assessing the influence of serotonin on aggression, Berman, McCloskey, Fanning, Schumacher, and Coccaro (2009) first chose two groups of participants, one of which indicated that they had frequently engaged in aggression (temper outbursts, physical fighting, verbal aggression,506 Chapter 9. Aggression assaults, and aggression toward objects) in the past, and a second group that reported that they had not engaged in aggressive behaviors. In a laboratory setting, participants from both groups were then randomly assigned to receive either a drug that raises serotonin levels or a placebo.
Then the participants completed a competitive task with what they thought was another person in another room. (The opponent’s responses were actually controlled by computer.) During the task, the person who won each trial could punish the loser of the trial by administering electric shocks to the finger. Over the course of the game, the “opponent” kept administering more intense shocks to the participants.
As you can see in Figure 9.6, the participants who had a history of aggression were significantly more likely to retaliate by administering severe shocks to their opponent than were the less aggressive participants. The aggressive participants who had been given serotonin, however, showed significantly reduced aggression levels during the game. Increased levels of serotonin appear to help people and animals inhibit impulsive responses to unpleasant events (Soubrié, 1986).
Figure 9.6 Self reported aggression: serotonin vs. Placebo. Participants who reported having engaged in a lot of aggressive behaviors (right panel) showed more aggressive responses in a competitive game than did those who reported being less aggressive (left panel).
The aggression levels for the more aggressive participants increased over the course of the experiment for those who did not take a dosage of serotonin but aggression did not significantly increase for those who had taken serotonin. Data are from Berman et al. (2009).
Drinking Alcohol Increases Aggression Perhaps unsurprisingly, research has found that the consumption of alcohol increases aggression. In fact, excessive alcohol consumption is involved in a majority of violent crimes, including rape and murder (Abbey, Ross, McDuffie, & McAuslan, 1996). The evidence is very clear, both from correlational research designs and from experiments in which participants are randomly assigned either to ingest or not ingest alcohol, that alcohol increases the likelihood that people will respond aggressively to provocations (Bushman, 1997; Graham, Osgood, Wells, & Stockwell, 2006; Ito, Miller, & Pollock, 1996).
Even people who are not normally aggressive may react with aggression when they are intoxicated (Bushman & Cooper, 1990).9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 507 Alcohol increases aggression for a couple of reasons. First, alcohol disrupts executive functions, which are the cognitive abilities that help us plan, organize, reason, achieve goals, control emotions, and inhibit behavioral tendencies (Séguin & Zelazo, 2005). Executive functioning occurs in the prefrontal cortex, which is the area that allows us to control aggression.
Alcohol therefore reduces the ability of the person who has consumed it to inhibit his or her aggression (Steele & Southwick, 1985). Acute alcohol consumption is more likely to facilitate aggression in people with low, rather than high, executive functioning abilities. Second, when people are intoxicated, they become more self-focused and less aware of the social situation, a state that is known as alcohol myopia.
As a result, they are less likely to notice the social constraints that normally prevent them from engaging aggressively and are less likely to use those social constraints to guide them. We might normally notice the presence of a police officer or other people around us, which would remind us that being aggressive is not appropriate, but when we are drunk we are less likely to be so aware. The narrowing of attention that occurs when we are intoxicated also prevents us from being aware of the negative outcomes of our aggression.
When we are sober, we realize that being aggressive may produce retaliation as well as cause a host of other problems, but we are less likely to be aware of these potential consequences when we have been drinking (Bushman & Cooper, 1990). Alcohol also influences aggression through expectations. If we expect that alcohol will make us more aggressive, then we tend to become more aggressive when we drink.
The sight of a bottle of alcohol or an alcohol advertisement increases aggressive thoughts and hostile attributions about others (Bartholow & Heinz, 2006), and the belief that we have consumed alcohol increases aggression (Bègue et al., 2009). Negative Emotions Cause Aggression If you were to try to recall the times that you have been aggressive, you would probably report that many of them occurred when you were angry, in a bad mood, tired, in pain, sick, or frustrated. And you would be right—we are much more likely to aggress when we are experiencing negative emotions.
When we are feeling ill, when we get a poor grade on an exam, or when our car doesn’t start—in short, when we are angry and frustrated in general—we are likely to have many unpleasant thoughts and feelings, and these are likely to lead to violent behavior. Aggression is caused in large part by the negative emotions that we experience as a result of the aversive events that occur to us and by our negative thoughts that accompany them (Berkowitz & Heimer, 1989). One kind of negative affect that increases arousal when we are experiencing it is frustration (Berkowitz, 1989; Dollard, Doob, Miller, Mowrer, & Sears, 1939).
Frustration occurs when we feel that we are not obtaining the important goals that we have set for ourselves. We get frustrated when our computer crashes while we are writing an important paper, when we feel that our social relationships are not going well, or when our schoolwork is going poorly. How frustrated we feel is also determined in large part through social comparison.
If we can make downward comparisons with important others, in which we see ourselves as doing as well or better than they are, then we are less likely to feel frustrated. But when we are forced to make upward comparisons with others, we may feel frustration. When we receive a poorer grade than our classmates received or when we are paid less than our coworkers, this can be frustrating to us.508 Chapter 9.
Aggression Although frustration is an important cause of the negative affect that can lead to aggression, there are other sources as well. In fact, anything that leads to discomfort or negative emotions can increase aggression. Consider pain, for instance.
Berkowitz (1993b) reported a study in which participants were made to feel pain by placing their hands in a bucket of ice-cold water, and it was found that this source of pain also increased subsequent aggression. As another example, working in extremely high temperatures is also known to increase aggression—when we are hot, we are more aggressive. Griffit and Veitch (1971) had students complete questionnaires either in rooms in which the heat was at a normal temperature or in rooms in which the temperature was over 32 degrees Celsius (90 degrees Fahrenheit).
The students in the latter condition expressed significantly more hostility. Figure 9.7. Heat creates negative experiences that increase aggression.
It has been predicted that global warming will increase overall levels of human aggression. Hotter temperatures are associated with higher levels of aggression (Figure 9.7) and violence (Anderson, Anderson, Dorr, DeNeve, & Flanagan, 2000). Hotter regions generally have higher violent crime rates than cooler regions, and violent crime is greater on hot days than it is on cooler days, and during hotter years than during cooler years (Bushman, Wang, & Anderson, 2005).
Even the number of baseball batters hit by pitches is higher when the temperature at the game is higher (Reifman, Larrick, & Fein, 1991). Researchers who study the relationship between heat and aggression have proposed that global warming is likely to produce even more violence (Anderson & Delisi, 2011).9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 509 Research Focus The Effects of Provocation and Fear of Death on Aggression McGregor et al. (1998) demonstrated that people who have been provoked by others may be particularly aggressive if they are also experiencing negative emotions about the fear of their own death.
The participants in the study had been selected, on the basis of prior reporting, to have either politically liberal or politically conservative views. When they arrived at the lab they were asked to write a short paragraph describing their opinion of national politics. In addition, half of the participants (the mortality salience condition) were asked to “briefly describe the emotions that the thought of your own death arouses in you” and to “Jot down as specifically as you can, what you think will happen to you as you physically die, and once you are physically dead.” Participants in the exam control condition also thought about a negative event, but not one associated with a fear of death.
They were instructed to “Please briefly describe the emotions that the thought of your next important exam arouses in you’’ and to “Jot down as specifically as you can, what you think will happen to you as you physically take your next exam, and once you are physically taking your next exam.” Then the participants read an essay that had supposedly just been written by another person in the study. (The other person did not exist, but the participants didn’t know this until the end of the experiment.) The essay that the participants read had been prepared by the experimenters to condemn politically liberal views or to condemn politically conservative views. Thus one-half of the participants were provoked by the other person by reading a statement that strongly conflicted with their own political beliefs, whereas the other half read an essay that supported their beliefs (liberal or conservative).
At this point, the participants moved on to what they thought was a completely separate study in which they were to be tasting and giving their impression of some foods. Furthermore, they were told that it was necessary for the participants in the research study to administer the food samples to each other. The participants then found out that the food they were going to be sampling was spicy hot sauce and that they were going to be administering the sauce to the same person whose essay they had just read!
In addition, the participants read some information about the other person that indicated that the other person very much disliked eating spicy food. Participants were given a taste of the hot sauce (which was very hot) and then instructed to place a quantity of it into a cup for the other person to sample. Furthermore, they were told that the other person had to eat all the sauce.
As you can see in Figure 9.8, “Mortality Salience and Aggression,” this research provides another example of how negative feelings can lead us to be aggressive after we have been provoked. The threatening essay had little effect on the participants in the exam control condition. On the other hand, the participants who were both provoked by the other person and who had also been reminded of their own death administered significantly more aggression than did the participants in the other three conditions.510 Chapter 9.
Aggression Figure 9.8 Mortality Salience and Aggression A threat to one’s worldview increased aggression but only for participants who had been thinking about their own death. Data are from McGregor et al. (1998).
Just as negative feelings can increase aggression, positive affect can reduce it. In one study (Baron & Ball, 1974), participants were first provoked by an experimental confederate. Then the participants were, according to random assignment, shown either funny cartoons or neutral pictures.
When the participants were given an opportunity to retaliate by giving shocks as part of an experiment on learning, those who had seen the positive cartoons gave fewer shocks than those who had seen the neutral pictures. It seems that feeling good about ourselves, or feeling good about others, is incompatible with anger and aggression. You can see that this is in essence the flip side of the results we discussed in “Chapter 8.
Helping and Altruism” regarding altruism: just as feeling bad leads us to aggress, feeling good makes us more likely to help and less likely to hurt others. This makes perfect sense, of course, since emotions are signals regarding the threat level around us. When we feel good, we feel safe and do not think that we need to aggress.
Of course, negative emotions do not always lead to aggression toward the source of our frustration. If we receive a bad grade from our teacher or a ticket from a police officer, it is not likely that we will directly aggress against him or her. Rather, we may displace our aggression onto others, and particularly toward others who seem similar to the source of our frustration (Miller, Pedersen, Earleywine, & Pollock, 2003).
Displaced aggression occurs when negative emotions caused by one person trigger aggression toward a different person. A recent meta-analysis has found clear evidence that people who are provoked but are unable to retaliate against the person who provoked them are more aggressive toward an innocent other person, and particularly toward people who are similar in appearance to the true source of the provocation, in comparison to those who were not previously provoked (Marcus-Newhall, Pedersen, Carlson, & Miller, 2000). It is clear that negative affect increases aggression.
And you will recall that emotions that are accompanied by high arousal are more intense than those that have only low levels of arousal. Thus it would be expected that aggression is more likely to occur when we are more highly aroused, and9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 511 indeed this is the case. For instance, in his important research on arousal, Dolf Zillmann found that many types of stimuli that create arousal, including riding on a bicycle, listening to an erotic story, and experiencing loud noises, tend to increase both arousal as well as aggression (Zillman, Hoyt, & Day, 1974; Zillman, Katcher, & Milavsky, 1972).
Arousal probably has its effects on aggression in part through the misattribution of emotion. If we are experiencing arousal that was actually caused by a loud noise or by any other cause, we might misattribute that arousal as anger toward someone who has recently frustrated or provoked us. Can We Reduce Negative Emotions by Engaging in Aggressive Behavior?
We have seen that when we are experiencing strong negative emotions accompanied by arousal, such as when we are frustrated, angry, or uncomfortable, or anxious about our own death, we may be more likely to aggress. However, if we are aware that we are feeling these negative emotions, we might try to find a solution to prevent ourselves from lashing out at others. Perhaps, we might think, if we can release our negative emotions in a relatively harmless way, then the probability that we will aggress might decrease.
Maybe you have tried this method. Have you ever tried to yell really loud, hit a pillow, or kick something when you are angry, with the hopes that doing so will release your aggressive tendencies? The idea that engaging in less harmful aggressive actions will reduce the tendency to aggress later in a more harmful way, known as catharsis, is an old one.
It was mentioned as a way of decreasing violence by the Greek philosopher Aristotle and was an important part of the theories of Sigmund Freud. Many others believe in catharsis too. Russell, Arms, and Bibby (1995) reported that more than two-thirds of the people they surveyed believed in catharsis, agreeing with statements that suggested that participating in and observing aggressive sports and other aggressive activities is a good way to get rid of one’s aggressive urges.
People who believe in the value of catharsis use it because they think that doing so is going to make them feel better (Bushman, Baumeister, & Phillips, 2001). The belief in catharsis leads people to engage in popular techniques such as venting and cathartic therapies or even to play violent video games (Whitaker, Melzer, Steffgen, & Bushman, 2013), even though numerous studies have shown that these approaches are not effective. It is true that reducing negative affect and arousal can reduce the likelihood of aggression.
For instance, if we are able to distract ourselves from our negative emotions or our frustration by doing something else, rather than ruminating on it, we can feel better and will be less likely to aggress. However, as far as social psychologists have been able to determine, attempting to remove negative emotions by engaging in or observing aggressive behaviors (that is, the idea of catharsis) simply does not work. In one relevant study, Bushman, Baumeister, and Stack (1999) first had their participants write an article about their opinions about a social topic such as abortion.
Then they convinced them that another participant had read the article and provided very negative feedback about it. The other person said such things as, “This is one of the worst essays I have read!” Then the participants read a message suggesting that catharsis really did work. (It claimed that engaging in aggressive action is a good way to relax and reduce anger.) At this point, half of the participants were allowed to engage in a cathartic behavior—they were given boxing gloves, some instructions about boxing, and then got a chance to hit a punching bag for two minutes.
Then all the participants got a chance to engage in aggression with the same person who had angered512 Chapter 9. Aggression them earlier. The participant and the partner played a game in which the losing person on each trial received a blast of noise.
At the beginning of each trial, each participant was permitted to set the intensity of the noise that the other person would receive if he or she lost the trial, as well as the duration of the loser’s suffering, because the duration of the noise depended on how long the winner pressed the button. Contrary to the catharsis hypothesis, the students who punched the punching bag did not release and reduce their aggression as the message they had read suggested would happen. Rather, these students actually set a higher noise level and delivered longer bursts of noise than did the participants who did not get a chance to hit the punching bag.
It seems that if we hit a punching bag, punch a pillow, or scream as loud as we can, with the idea of releasing our frustration, the opposite occurs—rather than decreasing aggression, these behaviors in fact increase it (Bushman et al., 1999). Participating in aggression simply makes us more, not less, aggressive. One prediction that could be derived from the catharsis idea is that countries that are currently fighting wars would show less domestic aggression than those that are not.
After all, the citizens in these countries read about the war in the newspapers and see images of it on TV on a regular basis—wouldn’t that reduce their needs and desires to aggress in other ways? Again, the answer is no. Rather than decreasing, aggression increases when the country that one lives in is currently or recently fighting a war, perhaps in part because war hardens group alliances (Bauer, Cassar, Chytilová & Heinrich, 2014).
In an archival study, Archer and Gartner (1976) found that countries that were in wars experienced significant postwar increases in their rates of homicide. These increases were large in magnitude, occurred after both large wars and smaller wars, with several types of homicide rate indicators, in victorious as well as defeated nations, in nations with both improved and worsened postwar economies, among both men and women offenders, and among offenders of several age groups. Homicide rate increases occurred with particular consistency among nations with large numbers of combat deaths.
The increases in aggression that follow from engaging in aggressive behavior are not unexpected—and they occur for a variety of reasons. For one, engaging in a behavior that relates to violence, such as punching a pillow, increases our arousal. Furthermore, if we enjoy engaging in the aggressive behavior, we may be rewarded, making us more likely to engage in it again.
And aggression reminds us of the possibility of being aggressive in response to our frustrations. In sum, relying on catharsis by engaging in or viewing aggression is dangerous behavior—it is more likely to increase the flames of aggression than to put them out. It is better to simply let the frustration dissipate over time or perhaps to engage in other nonviolent but distracting activities.
Key Takeaways • The ability to aggress is part of the evolutionary adaptation of humans. But aggression is not the only, nor always the best, approach to dealing with conflict. • The amygdala plays an important role in monitoring fearful situations and creating aggressive responses to them.
The prefrontal cortex serves as a regulator to our aggressive impulses.9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 513 • The male sex hormone testosterone is closely associated with aggression in both men and women. The neurotransmitter serotonin helps us inhibit aggression. • Negative emotions, including fear, anger, pain, and frustration, particularly when accompanied by high arousal, may create aggression.
• Contrary to the idea of catharsis, social psychological research has found that engaging in aggression does not reduce further aggression. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Recall a time when you experienced frustration.
Did you react with aggression? If so, what type of aggression was it? 2.
Consider a time when you or someone you know engaged in an aggressive act with the goal of reducing further aggression (catharsis). Was the attempt successful? References Abbey, A., Ross, L.
T., McDuffie, D., & McAuslan, P. (1996). Alcohol and dating risk factors for sexual assault among college women.
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 20(1), 147–169. Anderson, C. A., & DeLisi, M.
(2011). Implications of global climate change for violence in developed and developing countries. In J.
Forgas, A. Kruglanski, & K. Williams (Eds.), Social conflict and aggression.
New York, NY: Psychology Press. Anderson, C. A., Anderson, K.
B., Dorr, N., DeNeve, K. M., & Flanagan, M. (2000).
Temperature and aggression. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 32, pp. 63–133).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Archer, D., & Gartner, R. (1976).
Violent acts and violent times: A comparative approach to postwar homicide rates. American Sociological Review, 41(6), 937–963. Banks, T., & Dabbs, J.
M., Jr. (1996). Salivary testosterone and cortisol in delinquent and violent urban subculture.
Journal of Social Psychology, 136(1), 49–56. Baron, R. A., & Ball, R.
L. (1974). The aggression-inhibiting influence of nonhostile humor.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10(1), 23–33. Bartholow, B. D., & Heinz, A.
(2006). Alcohol and aggression without consumption: Alcohol cues, aggressive thoughts, and hostile perception bias. Psychological Science, 17(1), 30–37.
Bauer, M., Cassar, A., Chytilová, J., & Henrich, J. (2014). War’s enduring effects on the development of egalitarian motivations and in-group biases.
Psychological Science, 25(1), 47-57.514 Chapter 9. Aggression Bègue, L., Subra, B., Arvers, P., Muller, D., Bricout, V., & Zorman, M. (2009).
A message in a bottle: Extrapharmacological effects of alcohol on aggression. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(1), 137–142. Berkowitz, L.
(1989). Frustration-aggression hypothesis: Examination and reformulation. Psychological Bulletin, 106(1), 59–73.
Berkowitz, L. (1993a). Aggression: Its causes, consequences and control.
New York, NY: McGraw- Hill. Berkowitz, L. (1993b).
Pain and aggression: Some findings and implications. Motivation and Emotion, 17(3), 277–293. Berkowitz, L., & Heimer, K.
(1989). On the construction of the anger experience: Aversive events and negative priming in the formation of feelings. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 22, pp. 1–37).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Berman, M. E., McCloskey, M.
S., Fanning, J. R., Schumacher, J. A., & Coccaro, E.
F. (2009). Serotonin augmentation reduces response to attack in aggressive individuals.
Psychological Science, 20(6), 714–720. Bushman, B. J.
(Ed.). (1997). Effects of alcohol on human aggression: Validity of proposed explanations.
New York, NY: Plenum Press. Bushman, B. J., & Cooper, H.
M. (1990). Effects of alcohol on human aggression: An integrative research review.
Psychological Bulletin, 107(3), 341–354. Bushman, B. J., Baumeister, R.
F., & Phillips, C. M. (2001).
Do people aggress to improve their mood? Catharsis beliefs, affect regulation opportunity, and aggressive responding. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(1), 17–32.
Bushman, B. J., Baumeister, R. F., & Stack, A.
D. (1999). Catharsis, aggression, and persuasive influence: Self-fulfilling or self-defeating prophecies?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(3), 367–376. Bushman, B. J., Wang, M.
C., & Anderson, C. A. (2005).
Is the curve relating temperature to aggression linear or curvilinear? Assaults and temperature in Minneapolis reexamined. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(1), 62–66.
Buss, D. M., & Duntley, J. D.
(Eds.). (2006). The evolution of aggression.
Madison, CT: Psychosocial Press. Cashdan, E. (2003).
Hormones and competitive aggression in women. Aggressive Behavior, 29(2), 107–115. Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I.
W.Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., et al.#8230;Poulton, R. (2002).
Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297(5582), 851–854. Cohen, D., Nisbett, R.
E., Bosdle, B., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Insult, aggression, and the southern culture of honor: An “experimental ethnography.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 945–960.
Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. A.
(1998). Aggression and antisocial behavior. In N.
Eisenberg & W. Damon (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology (5th ed., Vol. 3, pp.
779–862). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 515 Dabbs, J. M., Jr., Hargrove, M.
F., & Heusel, C. (1996). Testosterone differences among college fraternities: Well-behaved vs.
rambunctious. Personality and Individual Differences, 20(2), 157–161. Daly, M., & Wilson, M.
(Eds.). (1998). The evolutionary social psychology of family violence.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (Eds.). (1999).
An evolutionary psychological perspective on homicide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Davidson, R.
J., Jackson, D. C., & Kalin, N. H.
(2000). Emotion, plasticity, context, and regulation: Perspectives from affective neuroscience. Psychological Bulletin, 126(6), 890–909.
Davidson, R. J., Putnam, K. M., & Larson, C.
L. (2000). Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion regulation—A possible prelude to violence.
Science, 289(5479), 591–594. Dollard, J., Miller, N., & Doob, L. (1939).
Frustration and aggression. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Dubow, E.
F., Huesmann, L. R., & Boxer, P. (2003).
Theoretical and methodological considerations in cross-generational research on parenting and child aggressive behavior. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 31(2), 185–192. Gibson, K.
R. (2002). Evolution of human intelligence: The roles of brain size and mental construction.
Brain Behavior and Evolution, 59, 10–20. Gladue, B. A., Boechler, M., & McCaul, K.
D. (1989). Hormonal response to competition in human males.
Aggressive Behavior, 15(6), 409–422. Graham, K., Osgood, D. W., Wells, S., & Stockwell, T.
(2006). To what extent is intoxication associated with aggression in bars? A multilevel analysis.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 67(3), 382–390. Griffit, W., & Veitch, R. (1971).
Hot and crowded: Influence of population density and temperature on interpersonal affective behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 17(1), 92–98. Ito, T.
A., Miller, N., & Pollock, V. E. (1996).
Alcohol and aggression: A meta-analysis on the moderating effects of inhibitory cues, triggering events, and self-focused attention. Psychological Bulletin, 120(1), 60–82. Kruesi, M.
J., Hibbs, E. D., Zahn, T. P., & Keysor, C.
S. (1992). A 2-year prospective follow-up study of children and adolescents with disruptive behavior disorders: Prediction by cerebrospinal fluid 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, homovanillic acid, and autonomic measures?
Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(6), 429–435. Lagerspetz, K. M., & Lagerspetz, K.
Y. (1971). Changes in the aggressiveness of mice resulting from selective breeding, learning and social isolation.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 12(4), 241–248. Marcus-Newhall, A., Pedersen, W. C., Carlson, M., & Miller, N.
(2000). Displaced aggression is alive and well: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(4), 670–689.
Mazur, A., Booth, A., & Dabbs, J. M. (1992).
Testosterone and chess competition. Social Psychology Quarterly, 55(1), 70–77. McGregor, H.
A., Lieberman, J. D., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Arndt, J., Simon, L., & Pyszczynski, T. (1998).
Terror management and aggression: Evidence that mortality salience motivates516 Chapter 9. Aggression aggression against worldview-threatening others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(3), 590–605.
Miller, N., Pedersen, W. C., Earleywine, M., & Pollock, V. E.
(2003). A theoretical model of triggered displaced aggression. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7(1), 75–97.
Morris, J. S., Frith, C. D., Perrett, D.
I., & Rowland, D. (1996). A differential neural response in the human amygdala to fearful and happy facial expressions.
Nature, 383(6603), 812–815. Phelps, E. A., O’Connor, K.
J., Cunningham, W. A., Funayama, E. S., Gatenby, J.
C., Gore, J. C., & Banaji, M. R.
(2000). Performance on indirect measures of race evaluation predicts amygdala activation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(5), 729–738.
Raine, A. (1993). The psychopathology of crime: Criminal behavior as a clinical disorder.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Reifman, A. S., Larrick, R.
P., & Fein, S. (1991). Temper and temperature on the diamond: The heat- aggression relationship in major league baseball.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17(5), 580–585. Russell, G. W., Arms, R.
L., & Bibby, R. W. (1995).
Canadians’ beliefs in catharsis. Social Behavior and Personality, 23(3), 223–228. Séguin, J.
R., & Zelazo, P. D. (2005).
Executive function in early physical aggression. In R. E.
Tremblay, W. W. Hartup, & J.
Archer (Eds.), Developmental origins of aggression (pp. 307–329). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Soubrié, P. (1986). Reconciling the role of central serotonin neurons in human and animal behavior.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 9(2), 319–335. Steele, C. M., & Southwick, L.
(1985). Alcohol and social behavior: I. The psychology of drunken excess.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(1), 18–34. Tellegen, A., Lykken, D. T., Bouchard, T.
J., Wilcox, K. J., Segal, N. L., & Rich, S.
(1988). Personality similarity in twins reared apart and together. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1031–1039.
Virkkunen, M., de Jong, J., Bartko, J. J., & Linnoila, M. (1989).
Psychobiological concomitants of history of suicide attempts among violent offenders and impulsive fire setters. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46(7), 604–606. Virkkunen, M., Nuutila, A., Goodwin, F.
K., & Linnoila, M. (1987). Cerebrospinal fluid monoamine metabolite levels in male arsonists.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 44(3), 241–247. Whitaker, J. L., Melzer, A., Steffgen, G.
& Bushman, B. J. (2013).
The allure of the forbidden: Breaking taboos, frustration, and attraction to violent video games. Psychological Science, 24(4), 507.513. Zillman, D., Hoyt, J.
L., & Day, K. D. (1974).
Strength and duration of the effect of aggressive, violent, and erotic communications on subsequent aggressive behavior. Communication Research, 1(3), 286–306. Zillman, D., Katcher, A.
H., & Milavsky, B. (1972). Excitation transfer from physical exercise to subsequent aggressive behavior.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 8(3), 247–259.9.2 The Biological and Emotional Causes of Aggression 517 Image Descriptions Figure 9.4 Person-by-situation interaction effect A line graph with extent of childhood maltreatment on the x-axis and composite index of antisocial behaviour (z scores) on the y-axis. The data is summarized in the following table. Composite index of antisocial behaviour (z scores) Childhood maltreatment Low MAOA activity High MAOA activity None − 0.25 between 0 and − 0.25 Probable 0.25 0 Severe 1 between 0.25 and 0.5 [Return to Figure 9.4] Figure 9.8 Mortality Salience and Aggression A bar graph compares the the aggression of participants in worldview threatening essay condition and the worldview consistent essay condition.
The aggression is measured by the grams of hot sauce allocated. The x-axis shows 2 different priming condition: exam control and mortality salience. The y- axis shows the grams of hot sauce allocated.
The data is summarized in the following table. Grams of hot sauce allocated Priming condition Worldview threatening Worldview consistent Exam control 15 between 25 and 30 Mortality salience between 15 and 20 between 10 and 15 Media Attributions • “Heat wave refresh it with water” by Instant Vantage is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence.9.3 The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression Learning Objectives 1. Review the situational variables that increase and decrease aggression.
2. Explain the different effects of reward, punishment, and modeling on aggression. 3.
Review the influences of viewing violent behavior on aggression and explain why these effects might occur. Although emotions and biology are critical, they are not the only determinants of our aggression. Of particular importance to social psychologists is the role of the social situation.
Social Learning and Modeling: Is Aggression Learned? As would be predicted by principles of social reinforcement, if we are rewarded for being aggressive, we’ll likely aggress again, but if we are punished for our violence, we may subsequently curb our aggression. The child who gets a toy by hitting another child and taking it is likely to continue being aggressive in the future, particularly if he or she is not punished for the action.
Children who are more aggressive are also often seen as more competent, in part because they can use their aggression to get their way (Hawley, 2007). Björkqvist et al. (2001) found that girls who use nonphysical aggression reported being less lonely and were more likely to have higher status than did nonaggressive girls.
In another study, aggressive boys were more likely to be accepted by their peers than were nonaggressive boys (Salmivalli, Kaukiainen, & Lagerspetz, 2000). Aggression seems to be paying off for these students. Some aggression is learned through modeling the violence that we see all around us every day (Bandura & Walters, 1959).
In his important research on aggression, Albert Bandura demonstrated that children learned new aggressive behaviors by observing aggressive models (Bandura, 1973). Bandura argued that we don’t just imitate the specific behaviors that we see, but that viewing aggression changes our schemas and our attitudes about aggression. Watching a parent hitting another person may not only increase a child’s likelihood of hitting but may also increase his or her beliefs that “hitting is OK” and that “one way to solve problems is by hitting.” Modeling teaches new ideas about aggression and can help explain why exposure to violence increases aggressive behavior in the long run (Huesmann & Kirwil, 2007).
Modeling is particularly problematic for children who grow up in violent families. These children are 519520 Chapter 9. Aggression not only the victims of aggression, but they also see violence being inflicted on their parents and siblings.
Because children learn how to be parents in large part by modeling the actions of their parents, it is no surprise that there is a strong correlation between family violence in childhood and violence as an adult. Children who witness their parents being violent or who are themselves abused are more likely as adults to inflict abuse on their partners and children (Heyman & Slep, 2002). In turn, their own children are also more likely to interact violently with each other and to aggress against their parents (Patterson, Dishion, & Bank, 1984).
Although rewards clearly increase aggression, perhaps punishment decreases it? Judicial systems are based in large part on punishing people for being aggressive, with fines, jail terms, and even the death penalty being used as punishments. There is, however, a problem with using punishment to reduce aggression, particularly when the punishment is itself aggressive.
The problem is that the punishment may be modeled, which can increase the aggressive behaviors that we are trying to stop. In a meta- analysis, Gershoff (2002) found that although children who were spanked by their parents were more likely to immediately comply with the parents’ demands, they were also more aggressive, showed less ability to control aggression, and had poorer mental health in the long term. The problem seems to be that children who are punished for bad behavior may be more likely to change their behavior only for external reasons, rather than internalizing the norms of being good for its own sake.
Punishment is most effective when it is intense, prompt (before the person can derive much pleasure from the aggression), applied consistently and with certainty, perceived as justified, and replaced by a more desirable alternative behavior (Berkowitz, 1993). But even if punishment occurs under these ideal conditions, it may only suppress aggressive behavior temporarily (Baron & Richardson, 1994; Berkowitz, 1993). One example of the use of violence to attempt to stop violence is capital punishment—the use of the death penalty.
Although banned in many countries, capital punishment is used in countries such as the United States, Egypt, India, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, and Vietnam. Although many people believe that capital punishment deters crime, there is little evidence that it actually does (Archer, Gartner, & Beittel, 1983). For one, the time period between the crime and the punishment is typically many years long, which makes it less effective as a deterrent.
Second, many of the crimes that are punished by the death penalty involve emotional aggression and are not premeditated. They occur during arguments or while the perpetrator is under the influence of alcohol or recreational drugs. In these cases, even if the perpetrator has knowledge of the death penalty, this knowledge is not likely to have much effect on reducing crime.
And capital punishment also means that many innocent people are wrongly executed for crimes they did not commit. Violence Creates More Violence: Television, Video Games, and Handguns Worldwide, the average child watches over three hours of television every day, and these programs contain both physical and nonphysical aggression at the rate of about three violent acts per minute (Archer & Coyne, 2005; Groebel, 1999; Shanahan, Hermans, & Hyman, 2003). Furthermore, the amount, intensity, and graphic nature of the violence that children view continues to escalate every year.
According to a study of programming from 1993 to 2001 on six major Canadian television networks, depictions of physical violence increased by 378% over this period, to the tune of about 40 acts of violence per hour (Paquette, Gosselin, & DeGuise, 1997). These programs are punctuated with television advertisements, approximately 13% of which also contain violent content (Jones &9.3 The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression 521 Cunningham, 2008). At the same time, children are also exposed to violence in movies and video games, as well as in popular music and music videos that include violent lyrics and imagery.
Given your knowledge about the importance of the social situation, it might not surprise you to hear that these situational exposures to violence have an effect on aggressive behavior, and in fact they do. The evidence is impressive and clear: the more media violence people, including children, view, the more aggressive they are likely to be (Anderson et al., 2003; Cantor et al., 2001). The relation between viewing TV violence and aggressive behavior is about as strong as the relation between smoking and cancer or between studying and academic grades (Bushman & Huesmann, 2010).
If you watch a lot of violence, you are likely to become aggressive! Figure 9.9 Participants who had recently played a violent video game expressed significantly more violent responses to a story than did those who had recently played a nonviolent video game. Data are from Bushman and Anderson (2002).
The evidence is so clear because it has come through the accumulation of many studies conducted over many years, using a variety of research designs. These studies have included laboratory and field experiments, as well as both cross-sectional and longitudinal correlational studies, and have included people from many different cultures. In the correlational studies, many potential common- causing variables, such as intelligence, family background, socioeconomic status, and personality, have been controlled for.
The potential for reverse causation has been eliminated through studies that have shown that viewing violence at a young age tends to predict aggressive behavior when the child is older, more than the other way around. Furthermore, laboratory studies in which people have been randomly assigned to view either violent or nonviolent material have shown the same results (Paik & Comstock, 1994; Zillman & Weaver, 1999). In one recent study, Coyne, Archer, and Eslea (2004) found that adolescents who viewed either physical or nonphysical aggression were subsequently more likely to behave in an aggressive manner than those who viewed no aggression.522 Chapter 9.
Aggression Research Focus The Effects of Violent Video Games on Aggression It is clear that watching TV violence can increase aggression, but what about violent video games? These games are more popular than ever and also more graphically violent. Children spend countless hours playing video games, many of which involve engaging in extremely violent behaviors.
The games often require the player to take the role of a violent person, to identify with the character, to select victims, and, of course, to kill people. These behaviors are rewarded by winning points and moving on to higher levels and are repeated over and over. Again, the answer is clear—playing violent video games leads to aggression.
A meta-analysis (Anderson & Bushman, 2001) that reviewed 35 research studies that had tested the effects of playing violent video games on aggression. The studies included both experimental and correlational studies, with both male and female participants in both laboratory and field settings. They found that exposure to violent video games is significantly linked to increases in aggressive thoughts, aggressive feelings, psychological arousal (including blood pressure and heart rate), as well as aggressive behavior.
Furthermore, playing more video games was found to relate to less altruistic behavior. Bushman and Anderson (2002) directly assessed the effects of viewing violent video games on aggressive thoughts and behavior. In one of their studies, participants were randomly assigned to play either a violent or a nonviolent video game for 20 minutes.
Each participant played one of four violent video games (Carmageddon, Duke Nukem, Mortal Kombat, or Future Cop) or one of four nonviolent video games (Glider Pro, 3D Pinball, Austin Powers, or Tetra Madness). Participants then read a story—for instance, this one about Todd—and were asked to list 20 thoughts, feelings, and actions about how they would respond if they were Todd: Todd was on his way home from work one evening when he had to brake quickly for a yellow light. The person in the car behind him must have thought Todd was going to run the light because he crashed into the back of Todd’s car, causing a lot of damage to both vehicles.
Fortunately, there were no injuries. Todd got out of his car and surveyed the damage. He then walked over to the other car.
As you can see in Figure 9.9, the students who had played one of the violent video games responded much more aggressively to the stories than did those who played the nonviolent games. In fact, their responses were often extremely aggressive. They said things like “Call the guy an idiot,” “Kick the other driver’s car,” “This guy’s dead meat!” and “What a dumbass!” Other studies have found similar results (Konijn, Nije Bijvank, & Bushman, 2007), and longitudinal studies in the United States and in Japan have shown that playing violent video games predicts aggressive behaviors and thoughts several months later, even after controlling for initial level of aggression (Anderson, Gentile, & Buckley, 2007; Anderson et al., 2008).
Why Does Viewing Violence Lead to Aggression? There is strong evidence that viewing aggression on TV, playing violent video games, and exposure to violence in general tends to increase the likelihood of aggression. But why might viewing violence increase aggression?9.3 The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression 523 Perhaps the strongest possibility is also the simplest—that viewing violence increases the cognitive accessibility of violence.
When we see violence, violence is then activated in memory and becomes ready to guide our subsequent thinking and behavior in more aggressive ways. One way of understanding this process is shown in Figure 9.10, “Priming Aggression.” According to this model, the activation from the viewed violence spreads automatically in memory from the perceived violent acts to other aggressive ideas and in the end increases the likelihood of engaging in violence (Anderson, Benjamin, & Bartholow, 1998). Figure 9.10 Priming Aggression.
Adapted from Anderson et al. (1998). Worldwide, about 1,000 people are killed every day as a result of gun violence.
Of these, about 560 are the result of criminal homicides, 250 are direct war deaths, 140 are suicides, and 50 are accidents (International Action Network on Small Arms, 2006). Although school and workplace shootings have been of particular concern in recent years, even people who keep guns in their home for protection are likely to be killed by that gun—particularly at the hands of a family member—and are also likely to kill themselves with it (Cummings, Koepsell, Grossman, Savarino, & Thompson, 1997; Wintemute, Parham, Beaumont, Wright, & Drake, 1999). Although it is true that it is people and not the guns themselves that do the killing, principles of social psychology make it clear why possessing guns is so dangerous.
Guns provide cues about violence, which makes it more likely that people will respond to provocation with aggression. In any particular situation of conflict or confrontation, we have several choices. We might try to escape the situation, we might confront the person in a nonviolent way, or we might choose to use violence.
The presence of guns reminds us that we may respond with violence. When guns are around, violence is highly cognitively accessible, and this accessibility increases the likelihood of responding to provocation with violence. Research has shown that the presence of guns provides a highly salient cue, which reminds us that aggression is a possible response to threat.
Anderson, Benjamin, and Bartholow (1998) found that just having participants think about guns primed thoughts about aggression. But the link does not end there.524 Chapter 9. Aggression In addition to priming aggressive thoughts and feelings, viewing handguns also increases violent behavior, particularly when we are provoked (Carlson, Marcus-Newhall, & Miller, 1990).
In one famous study (Berkowitz & Lepage, 1967), male university students were given either one or seven painful electrical shocks, supposedly from another student, and then were given an opportunity to shock this person in return. In some cases, a 12-gauge shotgun and a .38-caliber revolver were lying on the table near the shock key, whereas in other conditions, two badminton racquets were near the key. The researchers found, first, that the students who had been shocked more times returned significantly more shocks to the partner than did those who had been shocked only once.
But what about the presence of the guns? The researchers found that the guns did not significantly increase aggression for the participants who had received only one shock, but it did increase aggression for those who had received seven shocks. The presence of the guns seems to have elicited more aggressive responses from those who had been most provoked by the shocks.
Given what you know about the importance of situational effects on priming, these results may not surprise you. Another way that viewing violence increases aggression is through modeling. Children (and even adults) may simply imitate the violence they observe.
Indeed, there is substantial evidence that people do copy the aggression that they read about or see in the media. For instance, when Belgian teenager Alisson Cambier spurned the romantic advances of her 24-year-old neighbour Thierry Jaradin, he excused himself only to return to the room wearing a ghostface costume and carrying two knives, which he used to stab her 30 times. He later admitted that the murder was premeditated and inspired by the horror film Scream.
Research also has found strong evidence for copycat suicides. The rate of suicide in the general population increases significantly in the months after famous people, for instance Marilyn Monroe or Kurt Cobain, commit suicide (Phillips & Carstensen, 1986). In short, viewing violence teaches us how and when we should be aggressive.
Another outcome of viewing large amounts of violent material is desensitization, the tendency to become used to, and thus less influenced by, a stimulus. When we first see violence, we are likely to be shocked, aroused, and even repulsed by it. However, as we see more and more violence over time, we become habituated to it, such that subsequent exposures produce fewer and fewer negative emotional responses.
In the end, we may begin to see violence as a normal part of everyday life and become accepting of it. In sum, continually viewing violence substantially changes how we think about and how our brains respond to the events that occur to us (Bartholow, Bushman, & Sestir, 2006). Frequent exposure to violence primes aggression and makes aggressive behavior more likely (Molitor & Hirsch, 1994).
And viewing aggression frequently makes that aggression seem more normal and less negative. If we create for ourselves a world that contains a lot of violence, we become more distrustful and more likely to behave aggressively in response to conflict (Nabi & Sullivan, 2001). H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 9 DRAG THE WORDS – VIDEO GAMES AND AGGRESSION9.3 The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression 525 Read through each of the brief statements below about the potential relationship between exposure to violent video games and aggressive behavior.
Match the key term that best fits each statement. Key terms: desensitization, modeling, priming, catharsis, displaced aggression Statements: 1. After a particularly frustrating session playing a battle royale game on his console, 15-year-old Marcus shouts at his Mom when she asks him to do his homework.
2. Kevin comes home from a tough day at work where he was verbally abused by his boss. He decides to play a video game involving street violence to try to channel the frustrations that he is feeling from the incident.
3. 10-year-old Brandon is playing a wrestling game on his tablet. Afterwards, during some rough and tumble play with his little brother Carter, he copies a clothesline move from the game.
He ends up hurting his brother, and is banned from playing games for a week. 4. 23-year-old Riya has played survival horror video games since her mid-teens.
She finds that the realism of the graphics in these games has made it harder to find a horror movie that actually scares her. 5. Boris, an 18-year-old university student, finds the chat function on his favorite video game can get quite toxic, with many aggressive comments sent back and forth.
He tries to stay out of it, but the angrier the texts get, the more aggressive the replies that he thinks of to send. Key Takeaways • Aggression can be explained in part by the general principles of learning, including reinforcement, punishment, and modeling. • Reinforcement is more effective than punishment in reducing aggression.
• Viewing violence in TV shows, movies, and video games tends to create aggression in the viewer. • Exposure to violence increases aggression through reinforcement, through modeling, by priming cognitions related to aggression, and through desensitization.526 Chapter 9. Aggression Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Describe a time when you were reinforced or punished for your aggressive behavior or when someone you knew was. Was the attempt to reduce aggression successful? 2.
Watch some children’s television programming for one hour and make a note of the number and types of incidences of aggression depicted. 3. Do you or people you know watch a lot of TV violence or play violent video games?
How do you think this exposure is influencing you or them? Do you think you are less susceptible to violent media than other people? References Anderson, C.
A., & Bushman, B. J. (2001).
Effects of violent video games on aggressive behavior, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and prosocial behavior: A meta- analytic review of the scientific literature. Psychological Science, 12(5), 353–359. Anderson, C.
A., Benjamin, A. J., Jr., & Bartholow, B. D.
(1998). Does the gun pull the trigger? Automatic priming effects of weapon pictures and weapon names.
Psychological Science, 9(4), 308–314. Anderson, C. A., Berkowitz, L., Donnerstein, E., Huesmann, L.
R., Johnson, J. D., Linz, D.,… Wartella, E. (2003).
The influence of media violence on youth. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(3), 81–110. Anderson, C.
A., Gentile, D. A., & Buckley, K. E.
(2007). Violent video game effects on children and adolescents: Theory, research, and public policy. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Anderson, C. A., Sakamoto, A., Gentile, D. A., Ihori, N., Shibuya, A., Naito, M.,…Kobayashi, K.
(2008). Longitudinal effects of violent video games on aggression in Japan and the United States. Pediatrics, 122(5), e1067–e1072.
Archer, D., Gartner, R., & Beittel, M. (1983). Homicide and the death penalty: A cross-national test of a deterrence hypothesis.
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 74(3), 991–1013. Archer, J., & Coyne, S. M.
(2005). An integrated review of indirect, relational, and social aggression. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9(3), 212–230.
Bandura, A. (1973). Aggression: A social learning analysis.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Bandura, A., & Walters, R. H.
(1959). Adolescent aggression. New York, NY: Ronald Press.
Baron, R. A., & Richardson, D. R.
(1994). Human aggression (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Plenum Press; Berkowitz, L.
(1993). Aggression: Its causes, consequences and control. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Bartholow, B. D., Bushman, B. J., & Sestir, M.
A. (2006). Chronic violent video game exposure and9.3 The Violence around Us: How the Social Situation Influences Aggression 527 desensitization to violence: Behavioral and event-related brain potential data.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42(4), 532–539. Berkowitz, L. (1993).
Aggression: Its causes, consequences and control. New York, NY: McGraw- Hill. Berkowitz, L., & Lepage, A.
(1967). Weapons as aggression-eliciting stimuli. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7(2, Pt.1), 202–207.
Björkqvist, K., Osterman, K., Lagerspetz, K. M. J., Landau, S.
F., Caprara, G. V., & Fraczek, A. (Eds.).
(2001). Aggression, victimization and sociometric status: Findings from Finland, Israel, Italy and Poland. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers.
Bushman, B. J., & Anderson, C. A.
(2002). Violent video games and hostile expectations: A test of the general aggression model. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(12), 1679–1686.
Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. R.
(2010). Aggression. In S.
T. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, 5th ed., pp.
833–863). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Cantor, J., Bushman, B.
J., Huesmann, L. R., Groebel, J., Malamuth, N. M., Impett, E.
A.,…Smith, S. (Eds.). (2001).
Some hazards of television viewing: Fears, aggression, and sexual attitudes. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Carlson, M., Marcus-Newhall, A., & Miller, N.
(1990). Effects of situational aggression cues: A quantitative review. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(4), 622–633.
Coyne, S. M., Archer, J., & Eslea, M. (2004).
Cruel intentions on television and in real life: Can viewing indirect aggression increase viewers’ subsequent indirect aggression? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 88(3), 234–253. Cummings, P., Koepsell, T.
D., Grossman, D. C., Savarino, J., & Thompson, R. S.
(1997). Association between the purchase of a handgun and homicide or suicide. American Journal of Public Health, 87(6), 974–978.
Gershoff, E. T. (2002).
Corporal punishment by parents and associated child behaviors and experiences: A meta-analytic and theoretical review. Psychological Bulletin, 128(4), 539–579. Groebel, J.
(1999). The UNESCO global study on media violence. Retrieved from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0011/001178/117881e.pdf Hawley, P.
H. (Ed.). (2007).
Social dominance in childhood and adolescence: Why social competence and aggression may go hand in hand. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Heyman, R.
E., & Slep, A. M. S.
(2002). Do child abuse and interparental violence lead to adulthood family violence? Journal of Marriage and Family, 64(4), 864–870.
Huesmann, L. R., & Kirwil, L. (2007).
Why observing violence increases the risk of violent behavior by the observer. In D. J.
Flannery, A. T. Vazsonyi, & I.
D. Waldman (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of violent behavior and aggression (pp. 545–570).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. International Action Network on Small Arms. (2006).
Gun violence: The global crisis. Retrieved from http://www.iansa.org/system/files/GlobalCrisis07.pdf Jones, T., & Cunningham, P. H.
(2008). Violent advertising on Canadian primetime television: A frequency analysis and potential impact. Canadian Journal of Media Studies, 4(1), 40-70.528 Chapter 9.
Aggression Konijn, E. A., Nije Bijvank, M., & Bushman, B. J.
(2007). I wish I were a warrior: The role of wishful identification in the effects of violent video games on aggression in adolescent boys. Developmental Psychology, 43(4), 1038–1044.
Molitor, F., & Hirsch, K. W. (1994).
Children’s toleration of real-life aggression after exposure to media violence: A replication of the Drabman and Thomas studies. Child Study Journal, 24(3), 191–207. Nabi, R.
L., & Sullivan, J. L. (2001).
Does television viewing relate to engagement in protective action against crime? A cultivation analysis from a theory of reasoned action perspective. Communication Research, 28(6), 802–825.
Paik, H., & Comstock, G. (1994). The effects of television violence on antisocial behavior: A meta- analysis.
Communication Research, 21(4), 516–546. Paquette, G., Gosselin, A., & DeGuise, J. (1997).
Violence on Canadian television: Some of its cognitive effects. Canadian Journal of Communication, 22(2), 143-160. Patterson, G.
R., Dishion, T. J., & Bank, L. (1984).
Family interaction: A process model of deviancy training. Aggressive Behavior, 10(3), 253–267. Phillips, D.
P., & Carstensen, L. L. (1986).
Clustering of teenage suicides after television news stories about suicide. New England Journal of Medicine, 315(11), 685–689. Salmivalli, C., Kaukiainen, A., & Lagerspetz, K.
(2000). Aggression and sociometric status among peers: Do gender and type of aggression matter? Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 41(1), 17–24.
Shanahan, K. J., Hermans, C. M., & Hyman, M.
R. (2003). Violent commercials in television programs for children.
Journal of Current Issues in Advertising, 25(1), 61-68. Wintemute, G. J., Parham, C.
A., Beaumont, J. J., Wright, M., & Drake, C. (1999).
Mortality among recent purchasers of handguns. New England Journal of Medicine, 341(21), 1583–1589. Zillman, D., & Weaver, J.
B., III. (1999). Effects of prolonged exposure to gratuitous media violence on provoked and unprovoked hostile behavior.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29(1), 145–165.9.4 Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression Learning Objectives 1. Summarize the individual difference variables related to aggression. 2.
Explain how men and women differ, on average, in terms of aggression. 3. Give examples of some cultural differences in aggression.
The occurrence of aggression is still another example of the interaction between person variables and situation variables. Although the social situation is extremely important, it does not influence everyone equally—not all people become aggressive when they view violence. You may be able to watch a lot of violent television and play a lot of violent video games without ever being aggressive yourself.
On the other hand, other people may not be so lucky—remember that, on average, watching violence does increase aggression. Just as we may know some people who smoked cigarettes all their lives but never got lung cancer, I would still not recommend that anyone start smoking. The problem is that we don’t know if we are going to be affected until it is too late.
Let’s consider in this section the personality variables that are known to relate to aggression and how these variables may interact with the influence of the social situation. Individual Differences in Aggression Aggression occurs when we feel that we are being threatened by others, and thus personality variables that relate to perceived threat also predict aggression. Aggression is particularly likely among people who feel that they are being rejected by others whom they care about (Downey, Irwin, Ramsay, & Ayduk, 2004).
In addition, people who experience a lot of negative affect, and particularly those who tend to perceive others as threatening, are likely to be aggressive (Crick & Dodge, 1994). When these people see behavior that may or may not be hostile in intent, they tend to perceive it as aggressive, and these perceptions can increase their aggression. People also differ in their general attitudes toward the appropriateness of using violence.
Some people are simply more likely to believe in the value of using aggression as a means of solving problems than are others. For many people, violence is a perfectly acceptable method of dealing with interpersonal conflict, and these people are more aggressive (Anderson, 1997; Dill, Anderson, & Deuser, 1997). The social situation that surrounds people also helps determine their beliefs about aggression.
Members of youth gangs find violence to be acceptable and normal (Baumeister, Smart, & Boden, 1996), and membership in the gang reinforces these beliefs. For these individuals, the important goals are to be 529530 Chapter 9. Aggression respected and feared, and engaging in violence is an accepted means to this end (Horowitz & Schwartz, 1974).
Perhaps you believe that people with low self-esteem would be more aggressive than those with high self-esteem. In fact, the opposite is true. Research has found that individuals with inflated or unstable self-esteem are more prone to anger and are highly aggressive when their high self-image is threatened (Kernis, Brockner, & Frankel, 1989; Baumeister et al., 1996).
For instance, classroom bullies are those who always want to be the center of attention, who think a lot of themselves, and who cannot take criticism (Salmivalli & Nieminen, 2002). It appears that these people are highly motivated to protect their inflated self-concepts and react with anger and aggression when it is threatened. Figure 9.11 Self-Perceptions, Aggression, and Altruism Children who saw themselves, and who were seen by peers, as having self-concerned motives were more aggressive and less altruistic than were children who were rated as more caring of others.
Data are from Salmivalli et al. (2005). Underlying these observed individual differences in aggression are the fundamental motives of self- concern and other-concern.
Salmivalli, Ojanen, Haanpaa, and Peets (2005) asked fifth- and sixth-grade children to complete a number of measures describing themselves and their preferred relationships with others. In addition, each of the children was given a roster of the other students in their class and was asked to check off the names of the children who were most aggressive and most helpful. As you can see in Figure 9.11, “Self-Perceptions, Aggression, and Altruism,” the underlying personality orientations of the children influenced how they were perceived by their classmates, and in a way that fits well with our knowledge about the role of self-concern and other-concern.
Children who rated goals of self-concern highly (agreeing that it was important, for instance, that “others respect and admire me”) were more likely to be rated as acting aggressively, whereas children for whom other- concern was seen as more important (agreeing with statements such as “I feel close to others”) were more likely to be seen as altruistic.9.4 Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression 531 Gender Differences in Aggression Given what we know about the tendency toward self-enhancement and a desire for status, you will not be surprised to learn that there is a universal tendency for men to be more violent than women (Archer & Coyne, 2005; Crick & Nelson, 2002). In comparison to women and girls, who use more nonphysical and relational aggression such as shouting, insulting, spreading rumors, and excluding others from activities, men and boys prefer more physical and violent aggression—behaviors such as hitting, pushing, tripping, and kicking (Österman et al., 1998). Strong gender differences in aggression have been found in virtually every culture that has been studied.
Worldwide, about 99% of rapes are committed by men, as are about 90% of robberies, assaults, and murders (Graham & Wells, 2001). Among children, boys show higher rates of physical aggression than girls do (Loeber & Hay, 1997), and even infants differ, such that infant boys tend to show more anger and poorer emotional regulation in comparison to infant girls. These findings will probably not surprise you because aggression, as we have seen, is due in large part to desires to gain status in the eyes of others, and (on average) men are more concerned about this than are women.
Although these gender differences exist, they do not mean that men and women are completely different, or that women are never aggressive. Both men and women respond to insults and provocation with aggression. In fact, the differences between men and women are smaller after they have been frustrated, insulted, or threatened (Bettencourt & Miller, 1996).
And men and women seem to use similar amounts of verbal aggression (Graham & Wells, 2001). Gender differences in violent aggression are likely caused in part by hormones. Testosterone, which exists at higher levels in boys and men, plays a significant role in aggression, and this is in part responsible for these differences.
And the observed gender differences in aggression are almost certainly due, in part, to evolutionary factors. During human evolution, women primarily stayed near the home, taking care of children and doing the cooking, whereas men engaged in more aggressive behaviors, such as defense, hunting, and fighting. Thus men probably learned to aggress, in part, because successfully fulfilling their duties required them to be aggressive.
In addition, there is an evolutionary tendency for males to be more competitive with each other in order to gain status. Men who have high social status are more attractive to women, and having status allows them to attract the most desirable, attractive, and healthy mates (Buss & Shackelford, 1997). But gender differences are not entirely determined by biology and evolution; many of these differences are the result of social learning.
Imagine for a moment that 10-year-old Jean comes home from school and tells her father that she got in a big fight at school. How do you think he would respond to her? Now, imagine that her twin brother, Jake, comes home and reports the same thing.
I think you can imagine that the father’s response would be different in this case. Boys are more likely to be reinforced for being aggressive than are girls. Aggressive boys are often the most popular children in elementary schools (Rodkin, Farmer, Pearl, & Van Acker, 2000) because they can use their aggressiveness to gain and maintain social status.
On the other hand, girls who successfully use nonphysical or relational aggression may also gain social benefits. Eagly and her colleagues have proposed that gender differences in aggression stem primarily from social norms and expectations about the appropriate roles of men and women (Eagly, 1987; Eagly & Wood, 1991). Eagly notes that in many nations, women are expected to have more highly developed532 Chapter 9.
Aggression other-oriented attributes, such as friendliness and emotional expressivity, and that when women do aggress, they use aggression as a means of expressing anger and reducing stress. Men, on the other hand, are socialized to value more self-oriented attributes, such as independence and assertiveness, and they are more likely to use aggression to attain social or material rewards (Campbell, Muncer, & Gorman, 1993). One meta-analysis found that participants were more likely to indicate that men, rather than women, would and should engage in the most aggressive behaviors (Eagly & Steffen, 1986).
Cultural and Societal Differences in Aggression The United States continues to be an extremely violent country, much more so than other countries that are similar to it in many ways, such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the Western European countries. On the other hand, other countries in Eastern Europe, Africa, Asia, and South America have more violence than does the United States. These differences show that cultures vary dramatically in how, and how much, their members aggress against each other.
When children enter a violent culture such as that of the United States, they may be socialized to be even more violent. In a study of students at a high school near Detroit, Michigan, Souweidane and Huesmann (1999) found that the children who had been born in the United States were more accepting of aggression than were children who had emigrated from the Middle East, especially if they did so after the age of 11. And in a sample of Hispanic schoolchildren in Chicago, children who had been in the United States longer showed greater approval of aggression (Guerra, Huesmann, & Zelli, 1993).
In addition to differences across cultures, there are also regional differences in the incidences of violence—for example, in different parts of the United States. The Research Focus below describes one of these differences—variations in a social norm that condones and even encourages responding to insults with aggression, known as the culture of honor. Research Focus The Culture of Honor In the United States, the homicide rate is significantly higher in the southern and western states but lower in the eastern and northern states.
One explanation for these differences is in terms of variation in cultural norms about the appropriate reactions to threats against one’s social status. These cultural differences apply primarily to men; some men react more violently than others when they believe that others are threatening them. The social norm that condones and even encourages responding to insults with aggression (the culture of honor) leads even relatively minor conflicts or disputes to be seen as challenges to one’s social status and reputation and can therefore trigger aggressive responses.
The culture of honor is more prevalent in areas that are closer to the equator, including the southern parts of the United States. In one series of experiments (Cohen, Nisbett, Bosdle, & Schwarz, 1996), researchers investigated how White male students who had grown up either in the northern or in the southern regions of the United States responded to insults (Figure 9.12). The experiments, which were conducted at the University of Michigan (located in the northern United States), involved an encounter in which the research9.4 Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression 533 participant was walking down a narrow hallway.
The experimenters enlisted the help of a confederate who did not give way to the participant but who rather bumped into the participant and insulted him. Compared with northerners, students from the south who had been bumped were more likely to think that their masculine reputations had been threatened, exhibited greater physiological signs of being upset, had higher testosterone levels, engaged in more aggressive and dominant behavior (gave firmer handshakes), and were less willing to yield to a subsequent confederate. Figure 9.12.
Students from southern states expressed more anger and had greater levels of testosterone after being insulted than did students from northern states (Cohen, Nisbett, Bosdle, & Schwarz, 1996). In another test of the impact of culture of honor, Cohen and Nisbett (1997) sent letters to employers all over the United States from a fictitious job applicant who admitted having been convicted of a felony. To half the employers, the applicant reported that he had impulsively killed a man who had been having an affair with his fiancée and then taunted him about it in a crowded bar.
To the other half, the applicant reported that he had stolen a car because he needed the money to pay off debts. Employers from the south and the west, places in which the culture of honor is strong, were more likely than employers in the north and east to respond in an understanding and cooperative way to the letter from the convicted killer, but there were no cultural differences for the letter from the auto thief. A culture of honor, in which defending the honor of one’s reputation, family, and property is emphasized, may be a risk factor for school violence.
More students from culture-of-honor states (i.e., southern and western states) reported having brought a weapon to school in the past month than did students from non-culture-of-honor states (i.e., northern and eastern states). Furthermore, over a 20-year period, culture-of-honor states had more than twice as many school shootings per capita as non-culture-of-honor states, suggesting that acts of school violence may be a response of defending one’s honor in the face of perceived social humiliation (Brown, Osterman, & Barnes, 2009). One possible explanation for regional differences in the culture of honor involves the kind of activities typically engaged in by men in the different regions (Nisbett & Cohen, 1996).
While people in the northern parts of the United States were usually farmers who grew crops, people from southern climates were more likely to raise livestock. Unlike the crops grown by the northerners, the herds were mobile and vulnerable to theft, and it was difficult for law enforcement officials to protect them. To be successful in an environment where theft was common, a man had to build a reputation for strength and toughness, and this was accomplished by a willingness to use swift, and sometimes violent, punishment against thieves.
Areas in which livestock raising is more common also tend to have higher status disparities between the wealthiest and the poorest inhabitants (Henry, 2009). People534 Chapter 9. Aggression with low social status are particularly likely to feel threatened when they are insulted and are particularly likely to retaliate with aggression.
In summary, as in virtually every case, a full understanding of the determinants of aggression requires taking a person-situation approach. Although biology, social learning, the social situation, and culture are all extremely important, we must keep in mind that none of these factors alone predicts aggression but that they work together to do so. For instance, we have seen that testosterone predicts aggressive behavior.
But this relationship is stronger for people with low socioeconomic status than for those with higher socioeconomic status (Dabbs & Morris, 1990). And children who have a genetic predisposition to aggression are more likely to become aggressive if they are abused as children (Caspi et al., 2002). It seems that biological factors may predispose us to aggression, but that social factors act as triggers—a classic example of interactionism at work.
Social Psychology in the Public Interest Preventing Violence The social psychological study of aggression represents a classic example of the conundrum faced by social psychologists: Although we have developed a good understanding of the causes of aggression—and that understanding gets clearer every day—what exactly to do about it is an even more difficult question. Human aggression has remained with us since the beginning of time, and it is difficult to imagine that it is going to disappear soon. Stopping the cycle of violence that characterizes so many families, neighborhoods, cities, and countries will not be easy.
On the other hand, if we are serious about it, then we have a good idea where to begin to try to make a difference, because the principles that we have discussed in this chapter form a foundation both for understanding the causes of violence and for potentially reducing it. One thing that is certain is that reducing the prevalence of violence must involve changes in cognitions and emotions, as well as behavior. Also, this work must begin with children of very young ages, before aggressive behaviors, thoughts, and feelings become so well developed that they are difficult to change (Zigler, Taussig, & Black, 1992).
With increasing life experiences, our schemas about the world become more well defined and stable, and these established knowledge structures become more difficult to change. Not surprisingly, attempts at treating or rehabilitating violent adults (including such things as “boot camps,” individual and group therapy, and “scared straight” programs) have not been that successful. One problem is that these approaches do not address the wide range of factors that contribute to the development and maintenance of violent behavior.
The most successful interventions appear to be those that address both person and situation factors, and which do so at a relatively young age. To prevent the cycle of violence from beginning, we must reduce exposure to violence, particularly among children. There is no question that viewing violence breeds more violence.
The more violence we see or participate in, and the more violence we experience, the more we commit. The relationship is9.4 Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression 535 not perfect, and it does not hold for everyone, but it is clear. Just as smoking cigarettes causes cancer, so viewing aggression causes violence.
And just as many countries have developed advertising campaigns, taxes, and laws to reduce the use of cigarettes, particularly among minors, so we must work to reduce the exposure, particularly of children, to violent material. Governments can and have been involved in this effort (Huesmann & Skoric, 2003), but the primary source will be parents, who must find out what their children are watching on TV, in movies, and on the Internet—as well as what video games they are playing—and monitor and restrict their use. People must work to dispel the popular notion that engaging in aggressive actions is cathartic.
When we attempt to reduce aggression by punching a pillow or pounding on our computer keyboard, we are bound to fail. The arousal and negative emotions that result from engaging in aggression do not reduce but rather increase the likelihood of engaging in more aggression. It is better to simply let the frustration dissipate over time, for instance, by distracting oneself with laughter or other activities than to attempt to fight aggression with more aggression.
We need to help people control their emotions. Most violence is emotional aggression—the result of negative affect and high arousal. We need to better teach children to think about how they are feeling, to consider the sources of their negative emotions, and to learn ways to respond to them that do not involve aggression.
When we think more carefully about our situation, rather than simply responding in an emotional way, we can more carefully choose the most effective responses when we are frustrated or angry (Berkowitz, 1993). We must also work at the societal and government level by creating and enforcing laws that punish those who are aggressive, by increasing controls on the presence and availability of handguns and violent material more generally, and by creating programs to help the many victims of sexual and physical violence. In schools, it is essential that administrators, teachers, and staff become aware of the potential for violence and make themselves available as resources for students.
School systems must have explicit policies that prohibit and specify sanctions for any student who teases, threatens, excludes, or otherwise mistreats another individual. A step forward in this regard is the legislation designed to stop cyberbullying that has recently been introduced in countries such as Canada, New Zealand, and the United States. Reducing the large income disparities between the poorest and the richest members of society will also be important.
As a result of upward comparison, poverty creates frustration that begets violence. Children (and adults) must be better educated about the causes of violence, because understanding the causes can help us learn to be less aggressive. Furthermore, because abuse of alcohol and other drugs so often leads to violence, better education about the effects of such substances, as well as support for individuals who need help dealing with them, is an important investment, not only for these individuals but also for the people around them.
We must also work to improve the situation in which children find themselves. Children who grow up in abusive homes learn that aggression is the norm; it is not surprising that they then often respond to social problems through aggression. We must help these families learn to use reward rather than punishment and particularly to avoid violent punishment, which leads children to model the violent behavior.
If we can reduce the extent of violence within families, then children who grow up in those families will likely be less violent themselves.536 Chapter 9. Aggression And we must help people find alternatives to violence by encouraging them to think about others more positively rather than as threats to their own status and self-worth. If we can increase other-concern, for instance, by helping children learn to better communicate with each other, and at the same time increase people’s positive feelings about themselves, we will create more positive social situations that reduce violence and aggression.
Key Takeaways • There are individual differences in aggression, for instance, in terms of how people respond to negative emotions. • Men are more physically aggressive, but there are few differences between men and women in nonphysical aggression. • Different cultures have different norms about aggression as well as different rates of aggressive behavior.
The culture of honor is an example. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Consider yourself and people you know in terms of individual differences related to aggression, as well as gender and cultural influences on aggression.
Do the variables we discussed in this section predict their likelihood of aggressing? 2. Consider a case in which you or someone you know is frustrated, angry, or experiencing other emotions that may lead to aggressive behavior.
What techniques might you use to prevent the aggression from occurring? 3. Create a print, web, or video advertisement that conveys information that would help students learn to be less aggressive.
References Anderson, C. A. (1997).
Effects of violent movies and trait hostility on hostile feelings and aggressive thoughts. Aggressive Behavior, 23(3), 161–178. Archer, J., & Coyne, S.
M. (2005). An integrated review of indirect, relational, and social aggression.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9(3), 212–230.9.4 Personal and Cultural Influences on Aggression 537 Baumeister, R. F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. M.
(1996). Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self-esteem. Psychological Review, 103(1), 5–33.
Berkowitz, L. (1993). Aggression: Its causes, consequences, and control.
New York, NY: McGraw- Hill. Bettencourt, B., & Miller, N. (1996).
Gender differences in aggression as a function of provocation: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 422–447. Brown, R.
P., Osterman, L. L., & Barnes, C. D.
(2009). School violence and the culture of honor. Psychological Science, 20(11), 1400–1405.
Buss, D. M., & Shackelford, T. K.
(1997). Human aggression in evolutionary psychological perspective. Clinical Psychology Review, 17(6), 605–619.
Campbell, A., Muncer, S., & Gorman, B. (1993). Sex and social representations of aggression: A communal-agentic analysis.
Aggressive Behavior, 19(2), 125–135. Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W.,…Poulton, R.
(2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297(5582), 851–854.
Cohen, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1997).
Field experiments examining the culture of honor: The role of institutions in perpetuating norms about violence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(11), 1188–1199. Cohen, D., Nisbett, R.
E., Bosdle, B., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Insult, aggression, and the southern culture of honor: An “experimental ethnography.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 945–960.
Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A.
(1994). A review and reformulation of social information-processing mechanisms in children’s social adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 115(1), 74–101.
Crick, N. R., & Nelson, D. A.
(2002). Relational and physical victimization within friendships: Nobody told me there’d be friends like these. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 30(6), 599–607.
Dabbs, J. M., & Morris, R. (1990).
Testosterone, social class, and antisocial behavior in a sample of 4,462 men. Psychological Science, 1(3), 209–211. Dill, K.
E., Anderson, C. A., & Deuser, W. E.
(1997). Effects of aggressive personality on social expectations and social perceptions. Journal of Research in Personality, 31(2), 272–292.
Downey, G., Irwin, L., Ramsay, M., & Ayduk, O. (Eds.). (2004).
Rejection sensitivity and girls’ aggression. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers. Eagly, A.
H. (1987). Sex differences in social behavior: A social-role interpretation.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Eagly, A. H., & Steffen, V.
J. (1986). Gender and aggressive behavior: A meta-analytic review of the social psychology literature.
Psychological Bulletin, 100, 309–330. Eagly, A. H., & Wood, W.
(1991). Explaining sex differences in social behavior: A meta-analytic perspective. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 306–315.
Graham, K., & Wells, S. (2001). The two worlds of aggression for men and women.
Sex Roles, 45(9–10), 595–622.538 Chapter 9. Aggression Guerra, N. G., Huesmann, L.
R., & Zelli, A. (1993). Attributions for social failure and adolescent aggression.
Aggressive Behavior, 19(6), 421–434. Henry, P. J.
(2009). Low-status compensation: A theory for understanding the role of status in cultures of honor. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(3), 451–466.
Horowitz, R., & Schwartz, G. (1974). Honor, normative ambiguity and gang violence.
American Sociological Review, 39(2), 238–251. Huesmann, L. R., & Skoric, M.
M. (Eds.). (2003).
Regulating media violence: Why, how and by whom? Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Kernis, M.
H., Brockner, J., & Frankel, B. S. (1989).
Self-esteem and reactions to failure: The mediating role of overgeneralization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(4), 707–714. Loeber, R., & Hay, D.
(1997). Key issues in the development of aggression and violence from childhood to early adulthood. Annual Review of Psychology, 371–410.
Nisbett, R. E., & Cohen, D. (1996).
Culture of honor: The psychology of violence in the South. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Österman, K., Björkqvist, K., Lagerspetz, K.
M. J., Kaukiainen, A., Landau, S. F., Fraczek, A., & Caprara, G.
V. (1998). Cross-cultural evidence of female indirect aggression.
Aggressive Behavior, 24(1), 1–8. Rodkin, P. C., Farmer, T.
W., Pearl, R., & Van Acker, R. (2000). Heterogeneity of popular boys: Antisocial and prosocial configurations.
Developmental Psychology, 36(1), 14–24. Salmivalli, C., & Nieminen, E. (2002).
Proactive and reactive aggression among school bullies, victims, and bully-victims. Aggressive Behavior, 28(1), 30–44. Salmivalli, C., Ojanen, T., Haanpaa, J., & Peets, K.
(2005). “I’m OK but you’re not” and other peer- relational schemas: Explaining individual differences in children’s social goals. Developmental Psychology, 41(2), 363–375.
Souweidane, V., & Huesmann, L. R. (1999).
The influence of American urban culture on the development of normative beliefs about aggression in Middle-Eastern immigrants. American Journal of Community Psychology, 27(2), 239–254. Zigler, E., Taussig, C., & Black, K.
(1992). Early childhood intervention: A promising preventative for juvenile delinquency. American Psychologist, 47(8), 997–1006.9.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Aggression This chapter has reviewed how social psychologists understand human aggression and violence.
These actions surround us every day and cause much pain for many people. We have seen how social psychologists study aggression, their understanding of why it occurs, and how we might attempt to reduce it. Did you learn something about human aggression that surprised you and that helps you better understand social tragedies, such as school shootings, violence in sports, and even terrorism?
Perhaps you were surprised that social psychologists consider aggression to be primarily about self- concern. Although violence is designed to harm others, this is not usually its underlying goal or its underlying cause. Violence is more about the self and threats to it.
We react violently when we feel bad about ourselves, for instance, when we feel that our status is threatened or when we are experiencing other negative emotions. But because you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will realize how important the self-concept is—so important, indeed, that threats against it can result in extremely violent acts. Think about the recent school shootings in the United States and in other countries.
And think of other events, such as wars, terrorism, and even genocides, that have occurred over the past century and even in your lifetime. Does your new understanding of aggression help you better understand that how unusual and unexpected events such as these—which go against our natural desires to trust, respect, and care for others—occur, and how they are understandable outcomes of the nature of human beings? Aggression is another example of the person-situation interaction.
Some people are naturally more aggressive than others, but the social situation may either increase or decrease the likelihood that aggression actually occurs. Think for a moment about your personality and about the situations that you spend time in. Are these likely to create aggression?
If so, how might you change your behavior to reduce the likelihood of being aggressive? Because you are now more aware of the variables that cause aggression, we hope that you will work harder to try to prevent it—both in yourself and others. Can you see how alcohol abuse can be harmful because it may lead to sexual and physical violence?
Can you see how even nonviolent aggression, such as gossiping, spreading rumors, and bullying, can be harmful to the self-concept of others and have unexpected negative outcomes? Do you see now the strong influence of viewing violence, for instance on TV and in video games, can increase aggression? Can you see why catharsis doesn’t work?
Perhaps now you can also understand how you and others can learn to react more calmly to the frustrations that provoke you. We hope you will apply this new knowledge in your everyday life. We must all work harder to reduce our own aggression and to help others reduce theirs.
539540 Chapter 9. Aggression H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 9 True or False Quiz Check your learning of some key concepts in this chapter by taking this quick true-false quiz. You can retry any question, or choose to see the correct answer as you go.
Good luck! 1. Playing violent video games can cause changes in affective and cognitive processes related to aggressive behavior.
2. Level of frustration alone accounts for most of the variation in human aggression across situations. 3.
Cultures of honor are ones where aggressive responses to insults to collective rather than individual honor are supported. 4. In general, the presence of cues for violence in a situation will increase the salience of a violent response.
5. In experimental studies, catharsis has been shown to be a reliable way of reducing aggressive behavior.9.6 Chapter Summary Aggression refers to behavior that is intended to harm another individual. To determine whether or not a behavior is aggressive, we must determine the intent of the perpetrator.
The level of intent that underlies an aggressive behavior creates the distinction between emotional or impulsive aggression (which refers to aggression that occurs with only a small amount of forethought or intent) and instrumental or cognitive aggression (which is intentional and planned). Aggression can be nonphysical as well as physical, and nonphysical aggression can be very damaging to its victims. The ability to be aggressive to others, at least under some circumstances, is part of our fundamental human makeup.
Because aggression helps in both our individual survival as well as in the survival of our genes, human beings need to be able to aggress. Under the right situation, if we feel that our self is threatened, almost all of us will aggress. Aggression is controlled in large part by the area in the core of the brain known as the amygdala.
Although the amygdala helps us perceive and respond to danger, and this may lead us to aggress, other parts of the brain—including the prefrontal cortex—help us control and inhibit our aggressive tendencies. Hormones and chemicals such as testosterone, serotonin, and alcohol also relate to our tendencies to aggress. We are more likely to aggress when we are experiencing negative emotions—a signal that the self is threatened.
Frustration occurs when we feel that we are not obtaining the important goals that we have set for ourselves, and frustration increases aggression. Other negative emotions, including pain and the fear of our own death, also increase aggression. These effects are heightened when we are also experiencing arousal.
On the other hand, feeling good about ourselves, or feeling good about others, appears to be incompatible with anger and aggression. Although catharsis, the idea that engaging in less harmful aggressive actions will reduce the tendency to aggress later in a more harmful way, is a theory that is endorsed by many people, there is no evidence that catharsis actually occurs. If we hit a punching bag, pound on a pillow, or scream as loud as we can with the idea of releasing our frustration, the opposite occurs—rather than decreasing aggression, these behaviors in fact increase it.
Participating in aggression simply makes us more, not less, aggressive. As would be expected by principles of social reinforcement, if we are rewarded by being aggressive, we’ll likely aggress again, but if we are punished for our violence, we may subsequently curb our aggression. And we learn aggression by modeling others, an outcome that is particularly problematic for children who grow up in violent families.
Although rewarding aggression can increase it, there is, however, a problem with using punishment to reduce aggression: the punishment can be modeled, which can increase the aggressive behaviors that we are trying to stop. The evidence is clear that the more media violence we view, the more aggressive we are likely to be. If you watch a lot of violence, you are likely to be aggressive.
Viewing violence increases the cognitive accessibility of violence, leads us to model that behavior, and desensitizes us to violence. In short, 541542 Chapter 9. Aggression continually viewing violence substantially changes how we think about and respond to the events that occur to us.
Aggression occurs when we feel that we are being threatened by others, and thus personality variables that relate to perceived threat also predict aggression. Gender differences in aggression have been found in virtually every culture that has been studied. These differences in violent aggression are caused by hormones, by evolutionary factors, and also by social learning.
There are cultural differences, both across and within societies, in the observed level of violence. The social norm that condones and even encourages responding to insults with aggression is known as the culture of honor. The culture of honor leads even relatively minor conflicts or disputes to be seen as challenges to one’s social status and reputation and can therefore trigger aggressive responses.
Although biology, social learning, the social situation, and culture are all extremely important, we must keep in mind that none of these factors alone predicts aggression, but that they work together to do so. Our knowledge about aggression forms a foundation for potentially reducing violence. To prevent the cycle of violence from beginning, we must reduce exposure to violence, help people control their emotions, and work at the societal and government level to create and enforce laws that punish those who are aggressive.
This chapter has reviewed how social psychologists understand aggression. Hopefully, you now have a better understanding of the causes of aggression and may also work harder to try to prevent it—both in yourself and others. H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 9 Multiple-Choice Quiz Check how well you remember some key concepts and findings from this chapter by taking the multiple-choice quiz.
Feedback is available after each question and at the end of the quiz. Good luck! 1.
Kyler wishes to harm Cristian, who does not wish to be harmed. What behavior does this describe? a.
Catharsis b. Instrumental cognition c. Type A d.
Aggression 2. After seeing a clip of the Ultimate Fighting Championship online, eight-year old Carter started wrestling with his six-year old brother, Jay. He grabs him in a headlock he saw in the clip, and his mother has to intervene.
Carter’s behavior here is best explained by ____. a. instrumental aggression b.
displacement theory9.6 Chapter Summary 543 c. the social learning perspective d. excitation transfer theory 3.
Vincent has a hostile intention bias. This means that when someone does something to him that appears neutral in intent, he will often ____. a.
have a neutral intention in his response b. often assume that the person has hostile intentions towards him c. will find it difficult to see the other person’s hostility d.
respond prosocially to diffuse the situation 4. Which of the following describes a culture of honor? a.
one where there is a strong military presence b. one where cultural norms support aggressive responses if one’s honor has been insulted c. one where wealth is distributed in honorable ways d.
one where there are cultural beliefs that prioritize collective over personal honor 5. Which statement best describes the relationship between testosterone levels and aggression? a.
testosterone and aggression levels influence each other. b. testosterone levels influence aggression, but not the other way around.
c. there is no relationship between testosterone levels and aggression. d.
aggression influences testosterone levels, but not the other way aroundChapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Understanding Social Groups • Define the factors that create social groups and perceptions of entitativity.
• Define the concept of social identity, and explain how it applies to social groups. • Review the stages of group development and dissolution. 2.
Group Performance • Describe the situations under which social facilitation and social inhibition might occur, and review the theories that have been used to explain these processes. • Outline the effects of member characteristics, process gains, and process losses on group performance. • Summarize how social psychologists classify the different types of tasks that groups are asked to perform.
• Explain the influence of social loafing on group performance. 3. Group Decision Making • Explain factors that can lead to process gain in group versus individual decision making.
• Explain how groupthink can harm effective group decision making. • Outline the ways that lack of information sharing can reduce decision-making quality in group contexts. • Explain why brainstorming can often be counterproductive to sound decision making in groups.
• Describe how group polarization can lead groups to make more extreme decisions than individuals. • Explore important factors that lead juries to make better or worse decisions. 4.
Improving Group Performance and Decision Making • Review the ways that people can work to make group performance and decision making more effective. • Explore the role of motivating people to perform better due to self-interest. • Outline ways to improve communication and information sharing in groups.
545546 Dr. Hammond Tarry • Review research on setting effective group goals. • Outline the benefits of challenges of diversity in regards to group performance and decision making.
Gender Diversity in the Workplace As we saw in our discussions of gender, conformity, and leadership in chapter 6, men, on average, still occupy more senior leadership positions in fields including politics and business. However, recent evidence from Thomson Reuters, from a sample of over 4,000 public companies across the globe, indicates that the proportion of female members on corporate boards has been steadily increasing in recent years. In 2012, 59 percent of the companies surveyed reported having at least one woman board member, compared to 56 percent in 2008.
Forty-five percent reported that 10 percent or more of their board membership were women, compared to 38 percent in 2008, and 17 percent reported more than 20 percent women members, up from 13 percent in 2008. From a regional perspective, Europe had the highest percentage of women on corporate boards, followed closely by the Americas, while companies in the Asia Pacific region reported having less gender-diverse boards. Figure 10.1 These findings are interesting to social psychologists for many reasons.
One is that they indicate that some progress is being made against sexual prejudice and discrimination in the workplace, as well as showing how far these companies still are from achieving sexual equality in board membership. A fascinating question to ask is whether boards with both women and men as members and the companies they govern actually show better performance than those made up solely of men. ThePrinciples of Social Psychology 547 answer, perhaps not surprisingly, appears to be yes.
The current Reuters study found that companies with mixed-gender boards had slightly better performance than companies with no women on their boards, and an earlier Reuters study conducted in February 2012 indicated that corporations with more women managers had healthier share prices during turbulent periods in the financial markets. Andre Chanavat, product manager, Environmental, Social & Governance (ESG) at Thomson Reuters, concluded that “This study suggests that the performance of companies with mixed boards matched or even slightly outperformed companies with boards comprised solely of men, further reinforcing the idea that gender equality in the workplace makes good investment and business sense.” Social psychologists who study group performance and decision making have been particularly curious about when and why having a more diverse group membership can affect group dynamics and functioning. It turns out that there are many possible answers, as we will see in this chapter.
Source: Mining The Metrics Of Board Diversity – Thompson Reuters. Although people and their worlds have changed dramatically over the course of our history, one fundamental aspect of human existence remains essentially the same. Just as our primitive ancestors lived together in small social groups of families, tribes, and clans, people today still spend a great deal of time in social groups.
We go to bars and restaurants, we study together in groups, and we work together on production lines and in businesses. We form governments, play together on sports teams, and use social media to communicate with others. It seems that no matter how much our world changes, humans will always remain social creatures.
It is probably not incorrect to say that the human group is the very foundation of human existence; without our interactions with each other, we would simply not be people, and there would be no human culture. We can define a social group as a set of individuals with a shared purpose and who normally share a positive social identity. While social groups form the basis of human culture and productivity, they also produce some of our most profound disappointments.
Groups sometimes create the very opposite of what we might hope for, such as when a group of highly intelligent advisors lead their president to make a poor decision, when a peaceful demonstration turns into a violent riot, or when the members of a clique at a high school tease other students until they become violent. In this chapter, we will first consider how social psychologists define social groups. This definition will be important not only in this chapter, which deals with small groups working on projects or making decisions, but also in Chapter 11, “Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination,” and Chapter 12, “Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds,” in which we will discuss relationships between larger social groups.
In this chapter, we will also review some key lessons from social psychology about effective (and ineffective) group performance and decision making, which have important implications for business, education, politics, law, and many other areas (Kovera & Borgida, 2010; Straus, Parker, & Bruce, 2011). Taking all the data together, one psychologist once went so far as to comment that “humans would do better without groups!” (Buys, 1978, p. 123).
What Buys probably meant by this comment was to acknowledge the enormous force of social groups and to point out the importance of being aware that548 Dr. Hammond Tarry these forces can have both positive and negative consequences (Allen & Hecht, 2004; Kozlowski & Ilgen, 2006; Larson, 2010; Nijstad, 2009). Keep this important idea in mind as you read this chapter.
References Allen, N. J., & Hecht, T. D.
(2004). The “romance of teams”: Toward an understanding of its psychological underpinnings and implications. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 77(4), 439–461.
doi: 10.1348/0963179042596469. Buys, B. J.
(1978). Humans would do better without groups. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4, 123–125.
Kovera, M. B., & Borgida, E. (2010).
Social psychology and law. In S. T.
Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 1343–1385).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Kozlowski, S. W.
J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006).
Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and teams. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7(3), 77–124. doi: 10.1111/ j.1529–1006.2006.00030.x.
Larson, J. R., Jr. (2010).
In search of synergy in small group performance. New York, NY: Psychology Press. Levi, D.
(2007). Group dynamics for teams (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nijstad, B. A. (2009).
Group performance. New York, NY: Psychology Press. Straus, S.
G., Parker, A. M., & Bruce, J. B.
(2011). The group matters: A review of processes and outcomes in intelligence analysis. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 15(2), 128–146.
Media Attributions • “Business Meeting” by thetaxhaven is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.10.1 Understanding Social Groups Learning Objectives 1. Define the factors that create social groups and perceptions of entitativity. 2.
Define the concept of social identity, and explain how it applies to social groups. 3. Review the stages of group development and dissolution.
Figure 10.2 We work together in social groups to help us perform tasks and make decisions. Although it might seem that we could easily recognize a social group when we come across one, it is actually not that easy to define what makes a group of people a social group. Imagine, for instance, a half dozen people waiting in a checkout line at a supermarket.
You would probably agree that this set of individuals should not be considered a social group because the people are not meaningfully related to each other. And the individuals watching a movie at a theater or those attending a large lecture class might also be considered simply as individuals who are in the same place at the same time but who are not connected as a social group. Of course, a group of individuals who are currently in the same place may nevertheless easily turn into a social group if something happens that brings them “together.” For instance, if a man in the checkout line of the supermarket suddenly collapsed on the floor, it is likely that the others around him would begin to work together to help him.
Someone would call an ambulance, another might give CPR, and another might attempt to contact his family. Similarly, if the movie theater were to catch on fire, a group would form as the individuals attempted to leave the theater. And even the class of students might come to feel like a group if the instructor continually praised it for being the best (or worst) class that he or she has ever had.
It has been a challenge to characterize what the “something” is that makes a group a group, but one term that has been used is entitativity (Campbell, 1958; Lickel et al., 2000). Entitativity refers to something like “groupiness”—the perception, either by the group members themselves or by others, that the people together are a group. 549550 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making The concept of entitativity is an important one, both in relation to how we view our ingroups, and also in terms of our perceptions of and behavior toward our outgroups. For example, strong perceptions of ingroup entitativity can help people to retain their sense of collective self-esteem in the face of difficult circumstances (Bougie, Usborne, de la Sablonniere, & Taylor, 2011). Seeing our ingroups as more entitative can also help us to achieve our individual psychological needs (Crawford & Salaman, 2012).
With our outgroups, our perceptions of their entitativity can influence both our prosocial and antisocial behaviors toward them. For instance, although in some situations individuals may feel more xenophobic toward outgroups that they perceive as more entitative (Ommundsen, van der Veer, Yakushko, & Ulleberg, 2013), they may in other contexts choose to donate more money to help more entitative outgroups (Smith, Faro, & Burson, 2013). Similarity One determinant of entitativity is a cognitive one—the perception of similarity.
As we saw in our discussions of liking and loving, similarity is important across many dimensions, including beliefs, values, and traits. A group can only be a group to the extent that its members have something in common; at minimum, they are similar because they all belong to the group. If a collection of people are interested in the same things, share the same opinions and beliefs, or work together on the same task, then it seems they should be considered—by both themselves and others—to be a group.
However, if there are a lot of differences among the individuals, particularly in their goals, values, beliefs, and behaviors, then they are less likely to be seen as a group. Given the many differences that we have discussed in other chapters between members of individualistic and collectivistic cultures in terms of how they see their social worlds, it should come as no surprise that different types of similarity relate more strongly to perceptions of entitativity in each type of culture. For instance, similarity in terms of personal traits has been found to be more strongly associated with entiativity in American versus Japanese participants, with the opposite pattern found for similarity in terms of common goals and outcomes (Kurebayashi, Hoffman, Ryan, & Murayama, 2012).
People, then, generally get together to form groups precisely because they are similar. For example, perhaps they are all interested in playing poker, or follow the same soccer team, or like martial arts. And groups are more likely to fall apart when the group members become dissimilar and thus no longer have enough in common to keep them together (Crump, Hamilton, Sherman, Lickel, & Thakkar, 2010; Miles & Kivlighan, 2008).
Communication, Interdependence, and Group Structure Although similarity is important, it is not the only factor that creates a group. Groups have more entitativity when the group members have frequent interaction and communication with each other (Johnson & Johnson, 2012). Although communication can occur in groups that meet together in a single place, it can also occur among individuals who are at great distances from each other.
The members of a research team who communicate regularly via Skype, for instance, might have frequent interactions and feel as if they are a group even though they never or rarely meet in person.10.1 Understanding Social Groups 551 Interaction is particularly important when it is accompanied by interdependence—the extent to which the group members are mutually dependent upon each other to reach a goal. In some cases, and particularly in working groups, interdependence involves the need to work together to successfully accomplish a task. Individuals playing baseball are dependent upon each other to be able to play the game and also to play well.
Each individual must do his or her job in order for the group to function. We are also interdependent when we work together to write a research article or create a class project. When group members are interdependent, they report liking each other more, tend to cooperate and communicate with each other to a greater extent, and may be more productive (Deutsch, 1949).
Still another aspect of working groups whose members spend some time working together and that makes them seem “groupy” is that they develop group structure—the stable norms and roles that define the appropriate behaviors for the group as a whole and for each of the members. The relevant social norms for groups include customs, traditions, standards, and rules, as well as the general values of the group. Particularly important here are injunctive norms, which specify how group members are expected to behave.
Some of these are prescriptive norms, which tell the group members what to do, whereas some are proscriptive norms, which tell them what not to do. In general, the more clearly defined and the widely agreed upon the norms in a group are, the more entitativity that the group members will feel. Effective groups also develop and assign social roles (the expected behaviors) to group members.
For instance, some groups may be structured such that they have a president, a secretary, and many different working committees. Different roles often come with different levels of status, or perceived power, and these hierarchies. In general, groups are more effective when the roles assigned to each member are clearly defined and appropriate to those individuals’ skills and goals.
Also, if members have more than one role, for example, player and coach, it is important that these roles are compatible rather than contradictory. High-performing groups are thus able to avoid placing members under role stress. This occurs when individuals experience incompatible demands and expectations within or between the roles that they occupy, which often negatively impacts their ability to be successful in those roles (Forsyth, 2010).
Social Identity Although cognitive factors such as perceived similarity, communication, interdependence, and structure are often important parts of what we mean by being a group, they do not seem to always be necessary. In some situations, groups may be seen as groups even if they have little independence, communication, or structure. Partly because of this difficulty, an alternative approach to thinking about groups, and one that has been very important in social psychology, makes use of the affective feelings that we have toward the groups that we belong to.
As we have read, social identity refers to the part of the self-concept that results from our membership in social groups (Hogg, 2003). Generally, because we prefer to remain in groups that we feel good about, the outcome of group membership is a positive social identity—our group memberships make us feel good about ourselves. According to the social identity approach, a group is a group when the members experience social identity—when they define themselves in part by the group that they belong to and feel good about their group membership (Hogg, 2010).
This identity might be seen as a tendency on the part of the individual to talk positively about the group to others, a general enjoyment of being part of the group,552 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making and a feeling of pride that comes from group membership. Because identity is such an important part of group membership, we may attempt to create it to make ourselves feel good, both about our group and about ourselves.
Perhaps you know some people—maybe you are one—who wear the clothes of their sports team to highlight their identity with the group because they want to be part of, and accepted by, the other group members. Indeed, the more that we see our social identities as part of our membership of a group, the more likely we are to remain in them, even when attractive alternatives exist (Van Vugt & Hart, 2004). The Stages of Group Development Although many groups are basically static, performing the same types of tasks day in and day out, other groups are more dynamic.
In fact, in almost all groups there is at least some change; members come and go, and the goals of the group may change. And even groups that have remained relatively stable for long periods of time may suddenly make dramatic changes; for instance, when they face a crisis, such as a change in task goals or the loss of a leader. Groups may also lose their meaning and identity as they successfully meet the goals they initially set out to accomplish.
One way to understand group development is to consider the potential stages that groups generally go through. One widely used approach here is the model developed by Tuckman and Jensen (1977). As you can see in Figure 10.3, “Stages of Group Development,” the different stages involve forming, storming, norming and performing, and adjourning.
Figure 10.3 Stages of Group Development10.1 Understanding Social Groups 553 The forming stage occurs when the members of the group come together and begin their existence as a group. In some cases, when a new group, such as a courtroom jury, forms to accomplish a goal, the formation stage occurs relatively quickly and is appropriately considered the group’s first stage. In other cases, however, the process of group formation occurs continually over a long period of time, such as when factory workers leave their jobs and are replaced by new employees.
The forming stage is important for the new members, as well as for the group itself. During this time, the group and the individual will exchange knowledge about appropriate norms, including any existing group structures, procedures, and routines. Each individual will need to learn about the group and determine how he or she is going to fit in.
And the group may be inspecting the individual’s characteristics and appropriateness as a group member. This initial investigation process may end up with the individual rejecting the group or the group rejecting the individual. If the forming stage can be compared to childhood, there is no doubt that the next stage—storming—can be compared to adolescence.
As the group members begin to get to know each other, they may find that they don’t always agree on everything. In the storming stage, members may attempt to make their own views known, expressing their independence and attempting to persuade the group to accept their ideas. Storming may occur as the group first gets started, and it may recur at any point during the group’s development, particularly if the group experiences stress caused by a negative event, such as a setback in progress toward the group goal.
In some cases, the conflict may be so strong that the group members decide that the group is not working at all and they disband. In fact, field studies of real working groups have shown that a large percentage of new groups never get past the forming and storming stages before breaking up (Kuypers, Davies, & Hazewinkel, 1986). Although storming can be harmful to group functioning and thus groups must work to keep it from escalating, some conflict among group members may in fact be helpful.
Sometimes the most successful groups are those that have successfully passed through a storming stage, because conflict may increase the productivity of the group, unless the conflict becomes so extreme that the group disbands prematurely (Rispens & Jehn, 2011). Groups that experience no conflict at all may be unproductive because the members are bored, uninvolved, and unmotivated, and because they do not think creatively or openly about the topics of relevance to them (Tjosvold, 1991). In order to progress, the group needs to develop new ideas and approaches, and this requires that the members discuss their different opinions about the decisions that the group needs to make.
Assuming that the storming does not escalate too far, the group will move into the norming stage, which is when the appropriate norms and roles for the group are developed. Once these norms have been developed, they allow the group to enter the performing stage, which is when group members establish a routine and effectively work together. At this stage, the individual group members may report great satisfaction and identification with the group, as well as strong group identity.
Groups that have effectively reached this stage have the ability to meet goals and survive challenges. And at this point, the group becomes well tuned to its task and is able to perform the task efficiently. In one interesting observational study of the group development process in real groups, Gersick (1988, 1989) observed a number of teams as they worked on different projects.
The teams were selected so that they were all working within a specific time frame, but the time frame itself varied dramatically—from eight to 25 meetings held over periods ranging from 11 days to six months. Despite this variability, Gersick found that each of the teams followed a very similar pattern of norming and554 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making then performing.
In each case, the team established well-defined norms regarding its method of attacking its task in its very first meeting. And each team stayed with this approach, with very little deviation, during the first half of the time it had been allotted. However, midway through the time it had been given to complete the project (and regardless of whether that was after four meetings or after 12), the group suddenly had a meeting in which it decided to change its approach.
Then, each of the groups used this new method of performing the task during the rest of its allotted time. It was as if an alarm clock went off at the halfway point, which led each group to rethink its approach. Most groups eventually come to the adjourning stage, where group members prepare for the group to end.
In some cases, this is because the task for which the group was formed has been completed, whereas in other cases it occurs because the group members have developed new interests outside the group. In any case, because people who have worked in a group have likely developed a strong identification with the group and the other group members, the adjournment phase is frequently stressful, and participants may resist the breakup. Faced with these situations, individuals frequently plan to get together again in the future, exchanging addresses and phone numbers, even though they may well know that it is unlikely they will actually do so.
Sometimes it is useful for the group to work ahead of time to prepare members for the breakup. Keep in mind that this model represents only a general account of the phases of group development, beginning with forming and ending with adjourning, and will not apply equally well to all groups . For instance, the stages are not necessarily sequential: some groups may cycle back and forth between earlier and later stages in response to the situations they face.
Also, not all groups will necessarily pass through all stages. Nevertheless, the model has been useful in describing the evolution of a wide range of groups (Johnson & Johnson, 2012). Key Takeaways • Social groups form the foundation of human society—without groups, there would be no human culture.
Working together in groups, however, may lead to a variety of negative outcomes as well. • Similarity, communication, interdependence, and group structure are variables that make a collection of individuals seem more like a group—the perception of group entitativity. • Most groups that we belong to provide us with a positive social identity—the part of the self- concept that results from our membership in social groups.
• The more we feel that our identities are tied to the our group memberships, the less likely we are to leave the groups we belong to. • One way to understand group development is to consider the potential stages that groups generally go through. The normal stages are forming, storming, norming and performing, and adjourning.10.1 Understanding Social Groups 555 Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Compare some of the social groups that you belong to that you feel have high and low levels of entitativity. How do these groups differ in terms of their perceived similarity, communication, interdependence, and structure? 2.
Describe a situation where you experienced role stress. What were the causes of that stress and how did it affect your performance in that role? 3.
Think about a group that you belong to now, which is very important to you. Identify one prescriptive and one proscriptive norm for this group. How do you think that these norms help the group to function effectively?
What do you think would happen if a group member violated those norms? 4. Consider groups that provide a particularly strong social identity for their members.
Why do you think social identity is so strong in these groups, and how do you think that the experience of identity influence the group members’ behavior? 5. Think about a group that you have been a member of for a long time.
Which of Tuckman and Jensen’s stages do you think that the group is currently in? Overall, how well do you think that their stage model helps to explain how this group has developed over time? References Bougie, E., Usborne, E., de la Sablonnière, R., & Taylor, D.
M. (2011). The cultural narratives of Francophone and Anglophones Quebecers: Using a historical perspective to explore the relationships among collective relative deprivation, in‐group entitativity, and collective esteem.
British Journal Of Social Psychology,50 (4), 726-746. Campbell, D. T.
(1958). Common fate, similarity, and other indices of the status of aggregate persons as social entities. Behavioral Science, 3, 14-25.
Crawford, M. T., & Salaman, L. (2012).
Entitativity, identity, and the fulfilment of psychological needs. Journal Of Experimental Social Psychology,48 (3), 726-730. Crump, S.
A., Hamilton, D. L., Sherman, S. J., Lickel, B., & Thakkar, V.
(2010). Group entitativity and similarity: Their differing patterns in perceptions of groups. European Journal of Social Psychology, 40(7), 1212–1230.
doi: 10.1002/ejsp.716. Deutsch, M. (1949).
An experimental study of the effects of cooperation and competition upon group processes. Human Relations, 2, 199–231. Forsyth, D.
(2010). Group dynamics (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Gersick, C. J. (1988).
Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new model of group development. Academy of Management Journal, 31(1), 9–41.556 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Gersick, C.
J. (1989). Marking time: Predictable transitions in task groups.
Academy of Management Journal, 32, 274–309. Hogg, M. A.
(2003). Social identity. In M.
R. Leary & J. P.
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 462–479). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Hogg, M. A. (2010).
Human groups, social categories, and collective self: Social identity and the management of self-uncertainty. In R. M.
Arkin, K. C. Oleson, & P.
J. Carroll (Eds.), Handbook of the uncertain self (pp. 401–420).
New York, NY: Psychology Press. Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, F.P. (2012).
Joining Together – Group Theory and Group Skills (11th ed). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Kurebayashi, K., Hoffman, L., Ryan, C.
S., & Murayama, A. (2012). Japanese and American perceptions of group entitativity and autonomy: A multilevel analysis.
Journal Of Cross-Cultural Psychology,43(2), 349-364. Kuypers, B. C., Davies, D., & Hazewinkel, A.
(1986). Developmental patterns in self-analytic groups. Human Relations, 39(9), 793–815.
Lickel, B., Hamilton, D. L., Wieczorkowska, G., Lewis, A., Sherman, S. J., & Uhles, A.
N. (2000). Varieties of groups and the perception of group entitativity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(2), 223–246. Miles, J. R., & Kivlighan, D.
M., Jr. (2008). Team cognition in group interventions: The relation between coleaders’ shared mental models and group climate.
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 12(3), 191–209. doi: 10.1037/1089–2699.12.3.191 Ommundsen R, van der Veer K, Yakushko O, Ulleberg P. Exploring the relationships between fear- related xenophobia, perceptions of out-group entitativity, and social contact in Norway.
Psychological Reports [serial online]. February 2013;112(1):109-124. Rispens, S., & Jehn, K.
A. (2011). Conflict in workgroups: Constructive, destructive, and asymmetric conflict.
In D. De Cremer, R. van Dick, & J.
K. Murnighan (Eds.), Social psychology and organizations (pp. 185–209).
New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. Smith, R. W., Faro, D., & Burson, K.
A. (2013). More for the many: The influence of entitativity on charitable giving.
Journal Of Consumer Research, 39(5), 961-975. Tjosvold, D. (1991).
The conflict-positive organization. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Tuckman, B., & Jenson, M.
(1977). Stages of small group development revisited. Group and Organizational Studies, 2, 419-427.
Van Vugt, M., & Hart, C. M. (2004).
Social identities as glue: The origins of group loyalty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 585-598. Media Attributions • “Randy, Ruth & Sarah” by Eric Peacock is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence.
• “Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) (201208050011HQ)” by NASA HQ PHOTO is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence. • “The Cultural Competency team get to work” by Poughkeepsie Day School is licensed under10.1 Understanding Social Groups 557 a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.10.2 Group Performance Learning Objectives 1. Describe the situations under which social facilitation and social inhibition might occur, and review the theories that have been used to explain these processes.
2. Outline the effects of member characteristics, process gains, and process losses on group performance. 3.
Summarize how social psychologists classify the different types of tasks that groups are asked to perform. 4. Explain the influence of social loafing on group performance.
When important tasks need to be performed quickly or effectively, we frequently create groups to accomplish them. Many people believe that groups are more effective than individuals in performing tasks (Nijstad, Stroebe, & Lodewijkx, 2006), and such a belief seems commonsensical. After all, because groups have many members, they will also have more resources and thus more ability to efficiently perform tasks and make good decisions.
However, although groups sometimes do perform better than individuals, this outcome is not guaranteed. Let’s consider some of the many variables that can influence group performance. Social Facilitation and Social Inhibition In one of the earliest social psychological studies, Norman Triplett (1898) investigated how bicycle racers were influenced by the social situation in which they raced.
Triplett found something very interesting: the racers who were competing with other cyclists on the same track rode significantly faster than those who were racing alone, against the clock. This led Triplett to hypothesize that people perform tasks better when the social context includes other people than when they do the tasks alone. Subsequent findings validated Triplett’s results, and other experiments have shown that the presence of others can increase performance on many types of tasks, including jogging, playing pool, lifting weights, and working on mathematics and computer problems (Geen, 1989; Guerin, 1983; Robinson- Staveley & Cooper, 1990; Strube, Miles, & Finch, 1981).
The tendency to perform tasks better or faster in the presence of others is known as social facilitation. Although people sometimes perform better when they are in groups than they do alone, the situation is not that simple. Perhaps you can remember a time when you found that a task you could perform well alone (e.g., giving a presentation, playing a video game, shooting a basketball free throw, or making a soccer penalty kick) was not performed as well when you tried it with, or in front of, others.
Thus it 559560 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making seems that the conclusion that being with others increases performance cannot be entirely true and that sometimes the presence of others can worsen our performance. The tendency to perform tasks more poorly or slower in the presence of others is known as social inhibition.
So, as the presence of other people can both improve and worsen individual performance, it is important to explore the different conditions that promote these opposite outcomes. To study social facilitation and social inhibition, Hazel Markus (1978) gave research participants both an easy task (putting on and tying their shoes) and an unfamiliar and thus more difficult task (putting on and tying a lab coat that tied in the back). The research participants were asked to perform both tasks in one of three social situations: (a) alone, (b) with a confederate present who was watching them, or (c) with a confederate present who sat in the corner of the room repairing a piece of equipment without watching.
As you can see in Figure 10.4, “Group Task Performance,” Markus found first that the difficult task was performed more slowly overall. But she also found an interaction effect, where the participants performed the easy task faster but the more difficult task slower when a confederate was present in the room. Furthermore, it did not matter whether the other person was paying attention to the performance or whether the other person just happened to be in the room working on another task—the mere presence of another person nearby influenced performance.
Figure 10.4 Group Task Performance In this experiment, participants were asked to perform a well-learned task (tying their shoes) and a poorly learned task (putting on a lab coat that tied in the back). There is both a main effect of task difficulty and a task-difficulty-by-performance-condition interaction. Data are from Markus (1978).
These results convincingly demonstrated that working around others could either help or hinder performance. But why would this be? One explanation of the influence of others on task performance was proposed by Robert Zajonc (1965).
As shown in Figure 10.5, “Explaining Social Facilitation and Social Inhibition,” Zajonc made use of the affective component of arousal in his explanation. Zajonc argued that when we are with others, we experience more arousal than we do when we are alone, and that this arousal increases the likelihood that we will perform the dominant response—the action that we are most likely to emit in any given situation.10.2 Group Performance 561 Figure 10.5 Explaining Social Facilitation and Social Inhibition. According to the social facilitation model of Robert Zajonc (1965), the mere presence of others produces arousal, which increases the probability that the dominant response will occur.
If the562 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making dominant response is correct, the task is performed better, whereas if the dominant response is incorrect, the task is performed more poorly. The important aspect of Zajonc’s theory was that the experience of arousal and the resulting increase in the performance of the dominant response could be used to predict whether the presence of others would produce social facilitation or social inhibition.
Zajonc argued that if the task to be performed was relatively easy, or if the individual had learned to perform the task very well (a task such as pedaling a bicycle or tying one’s shoes), the dominant response was likely to be the correct response, and the increase in arousal caused by the presence of others would improve performance. On the other hand, if the task was difficult or not well learned (e.g., solving a complex problem, giving a speech in front of others, tying a lab apron behind one’s back), the dominant response was likely to be the incorrect one; and because the increase in arousal would increase the occurrence of the (incorrect) dominant response, performance would be hindered. Zajonc’s theory explained how the presence of others can increase or decrease performance, depending on the nature of the task, and a great deal of experimental research has now confirmed his predictions.
In a meta-analysis, Bond and Titus (1983) looked at the results of over 200 studies using over 20,000 research participants and found that the presence of others did significantly increase the rate of performance on simple tasks and decrease both the rate and the quality of performance on complex tasks. One interesting aspect of Zajonc’s theory is that because it only requires the concepts of arousal and dominant response to explain task performance, it predicts that the effects of others on performance will not necessarily be confined to humans. Zajonc reviewed evidence that dogs ran faster, chickens ate more feed, ants built bigger nests, and rats had more sex when other dogs, chickens, ants, and rats, respectively, were around (Zajonc, 1965).
In fact, in one of the most unusual of all social psychology experiments, Zajonc, Heingartner, and Herman (1969) found that cockroaches ran faster on straight runways when other cockroaches were observing them (from behind a plastic window) but that they ran slower, in the presence of other roaches, on a maze that involved making a difficult turn, presumably because running straight was the dominant response, whereas turning was not. Although the arousal model proposed by Zajonc is perhaps the most elegant, other explanations have also been proposed to account for social facilitation and social inhibition. One modification argues that we are particularly influenced by others when we perceive that the others are evaluating us or competing with us (Szymanski & Harkins, 1987).
This makes sense because in these cases, another important motivator of human behavior—the desire to enhance the self—is involved in addition to arousal. In one study supporting this idea, Strube and his colleagues (Strube, Miles, & Finch, 1981) found that the presence of spectators increased the speed of joggers only when the spectators were facing the joggers and thus could see them and assess their performance. The presence of others who expect us to do well and who are thus likely to be particularly distracting has been found to have important consequences in some real-world situations.
For example, Baumeister and Steinhilber (1984) found that professional athletes frequently performed more poorly than would be expected in crucial games that were played in front of their own fans.10.2 Group Performance 563 Process Losses and Process Gains So far in this section, we have been focusing on how being in a group affects individual performance. What about the broader question of whether performance is enhanced when people work in groups, compared with what group members would have achieved if they had been working on their own? Working in groups clearly has some benefits.
Because groups consist of many members, group performance is almost always better than the performance of an individual acting alone. Many heads are better than one in terms of knowledge, collective memory, physical strength, and other abilities. The group from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) that worked together to land a human on the moon, a music band whose members are writing a new song together, or a surgical team in the middle of a complex operation may coordinate their efforts so well that is clear that the same outcome could never have occurred if the individuals had worked alone, or in another group of less well-suited individuals.
In these cases, the knowledge and skills of the individuals seem to work together to be effective, and the outcome of the group appears to be enhanced. When groups work better than we would expect, given the individuals who form them, we call the outcome a process gain. There are at least some data suggesting that groups may in some cases experience process gains.
For instance, Weber and Hertel (2007) found in a recent meta-analysis that individuals can in some cases exert higher motivation when working in a group compared with working individually, resulting in increased group performance. This is particularly true for less capable group members who seem to become inspired to work harder when they are part of a group. On the other hand, there are also costs to working in groups—sometimes being in a group can stifle creativity and increase procrastination, for example.
In these cases, the groups experience process losses. A process loss occurs when groups perform more poorly than we would expect, given the characteristics of the members of the group. One way to think about the benefits of groups is to compare the potential productivity of the group—that is, what the group should be able to do, given its membership—with the actual productivity of the group.
For example, on a rope-pulling task, the potential group productivity (the strength with which the group should pull when working together) would be calculated as the sum of all the individual inputs. The difference between the expected productivity of the group and the actual productivity of the group (i.e., the extent to which the group is more or less than the sum of its parts) is determined by the group process, defined as the events that occur while the group is working together on the task. When the outcome of the group performance is better than would be expected on the basis of the members’ characteristics (the group pulls harder than expected), there is a process gain; when the outcome of the group performance is worse than would be expected on the basis of the members’ characteristics, there is a process loss.
Mathematically, we can write the following equation to express this relationship: actual productivity = potential productivity − process loss + process gain. Group performance is another example of a case in which person and situation variables work together because it depends on both the skills of the people in the group and the way these resources are combined as the group members work together. Let’s now turn to exploring these personal and situational factors in more detail.564 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Figure 10.6 People work together in a variety of ways for a variety of reasons. Groups are sometimes effective, but they are often less so than we might hope. Person Variables: Group Member Characteristics No matter what type of group we are considering, the group will naturally attempt to recruit the best people they can find to help them meet their goals.
Member characteristics are the relevant traits, skills, or abilities of the individual group members. On a rope-pulling task, for instance, the member characteristic is the ability of each of group member to pull hard on the rope on his or her own. In addition to having different skills, people differ in personality factors that relate to group performance.
Some people are highly motivated to join groups and to make positive contributions to those groups, whereas others are more wary of group membership and prefer to meet their goals working alone. Furthermore, when they are in groups, people may be expected to respond somewhat differently in group interactions, because each is using the group to meet his or her own social and personal goals. The extent to which member skill influences group performance varies across different group tasks.
On a car assembly line, performing the task requires only relatively minimal skills, and there is not a lot of coordination among the individuals involved. In this case, it is primarily the number and skill of the individuals who are working on the task that influences the group outcome. In other cases, such as a surgical team or a work team within a corporation, the group includes individuals with a wide variety of different skills, each working at very different tasks.
In cases such as these, communication and coordination among the group members is essential, and thus group process will be very important. As an example of variation in the importance of member skills in different sporting contexts, Jones (1974) found that the skill of individual baseball players accounted for 99% of the team performance on baseball teams (and thus group process accounted for only 1%) but that the skill of individual basketball players accounted for only 35% of the team performance on basketball teams (and thus group process accounted for 65%). The Importance of the Social Situation: Task Characteristics Although the characteristics of the group members themselves are critical, they represent only the person part of the equation.
To fully understand group performance, we must also consider the particulars of the group’s situation—for instance, the task that the group needs to accomplish. Let’s now consider some of the different types of tasks that might be performed by groups and how they might influence performance (Hackman & Morris, 1975; Straus, 1999).10.2 Group Performance 565 One basic distinction concerns whether the task can be divided into smaller subtasks or has to be done as a whole. Building a car on an assembly line or painting a house is a divisible task, because each of the group members working on the job can do a separate part of the job at the same time.
Groups are likely to be particularly productive on divisible tasks when the division of the work allows the group members to specialize in those tasks that they are best at performing. Writing a group term paper is facilitated if one group member is an expert typist, another is an expert at library research, and so forth. Climbing a mountain or moving a piano, on the other hand, is a unitary task, because it has to be done all at once and cannot be divided up.
In this case, specialization among group members is less useful, because each group member has to work on the same task at the same time. Another way of classifying tasks is by the way the contributions of the group members are combined. On an additive task, the inputs of each group member are added together to create the group performance, and the expected performance of the group is the sum of group members’ individual inputs.
A tug of war is a good example of an additive task because the total performance of a team is expected to be the sum of all the team members’ individual efforts. On a compensatory (averaging) task, however, the group input is combined such that the performance of the individuals is averaged rather than added. Imagine that you wanted to estimate the current temperature in your classroom, but you had no thermometer.
One approach to getting an estimate would be to have each of the individuals in your class make his or her estimate of the temperature and then average the estimates together to create a group judgment. On decisions such as this, the average group judgment is likely to be more accurate than that made by most individuals (Armstrong, 2001; Surowiecki, 2004). Another task classification involves comparing tasks in which the group performance is dependent upon the abilities of the best member or members of the group with tasks in which the group performance is dependent upon the abilities of the worst member or members of the group.
When the group’s performance is determined by the best group member, we call it a disjunctive task. Consider what might happen when a group is given a complicated problem to solve, such as this horse-trading problem: A man buys a horse for $50. He later decides he wants to sell his horse and he gets $60.
He then decides to buy it back and pays $70. However, he can no longer keep it, and he sells it for $80. Did he make money, lose money, or break even?
Explain why. The correct answer to the problem is not immediately apparent, and each group member will attempt to solve the problem. With some luck, one or more of the members will discover the correct solution, and when that happens, the other members will be able to see that it is indeed the correct answer.
At this point, the group as a whole has correctly solved the problem, and the performance of the group is thus determined by the ability of the best member of the group. In contrast, on a conjunctive task, the group performance is determined by the ability of the group member who performs most poorly. Imagine an assembly line in which each individual working on the line has to insert one screw into the part being made and that the parts move down the line at a constant speed.
If any one individual is substantially slower than the others, the speed of the entire line will need to be slowed down to match the capability of that individual. As another example, hiking up a mountain in a group is also conjunctive because the group must wait for the slowest hiker to catch up.566 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Still another distinction among tasks concerns the specific product that the group is creating and how that group output is measured.
An intellective task involves the ability of the group to make a decision or a judgment and is measured by studying either the processes that the group uses to make the decision (such as how a jury arrives at a verdict) or the quality of the decision (such as whether the group is able to solve a complicated problem). A maximizing task, on the other hand, is one that involves performance that is measured by how rapidly the group works or how much of a product they are able to make (e.g., how many computer chips are manufactured on an assembly line, how many creative ideas are generated by a brainstorming group, how fast a construction crew can build a house). Finally, we can differentiate intellective task problems for which there is an objectively correct decision from those in which there is not a clear best decision.
On a criterion task, the group can see that there is a clearly correct answer to the problem that is being posed. Some examples would be finding solutions to mathematics or logic problems, such as the horse-trading problem. On some criterion tasks, the correct answer is immediately seen as the correct one once it is found.
For instance, what is the next letter in each of the following two patterns of letters? J F M A M _ O T T F F _ In criterion problems such as this one, as soon as one of the group members finds the correct answer, the problem is solved because all the group members can see that it is correct. Criterion tasks in which the correct answer is obvious once it is found are known as “Eureka!” or “Aha!” tasks (Lorge, Fox, Davitz, & Brenner, 1958), named for the response that we have when we see the correct solution.
In other types of criterion-based tasks, there is an objectively correct answer, although that answer is not immediately obvious. For instance, consider again the horse-trading problem. In this case, there is a correct answer, but it may not be apparent to the group members even when it is proposed by one or more of them (for this reason, we might call this a “non-Eureka” task).
In fact, in one study using the horse-trading problem, only 80% of the groups in which the correct answer was considered actually decided upon that answer as the correct one after the members had discussed it together. In still other criterion-based tasks, experts must be used to assess the quality or creativity of the group’s performance. Einhorn, Hogarth, and Klempner (1977) asked groups of individuals to imagine themselves as a group of astronauts who are exploring the moon but who have become stranded from their base.
The problem is to determine which of the available pieces of equipment (e.g., oxygen bottles, a rope, a knife) they should take with them as they attempt to reach the base. To assess group performance, experts on the difficulties of living in space made judgments about the quality of the group decisions. Non-Eureka tasks represent an interesting challenge for groups because even when they have found what they think is a good answer, they may still need to continue their discussion to convince themselves that their answer is the best they can do and that they can therefore stop their deliberation.
In contrast to a criterion task, in a judgmental task there is no clearly correct answer to the problem. Judgmental tasks involve such decisions as determining the innocence or guilt of an accused person in a jury or making an appropriate business decision. Because there is no objectively correct answer on10.2 Group Performance 567 judgmental tasks, the research approach usually involves studying the processes that the group uses to make the decision rather than measuring the outcome of the decision itself.
Thus the question of interest on judgmental tasks is not “Did the group get the right answer?” but rather “How did the group reach its decision?” Evaluating the quality of how the decision was reached, compared with the decision itself, can be particularly challenging (Johnson & Johnson, 2012). So, clearly the nature of the task will influence group performance and whether people perform better together, as opposed to alone. One phenomenon that dramatically illustrates these points is that of social loafing.
Social Loafing In a seminal study of group effects on individual performance, Ringelmann (1913; reported in Kravitz & Martin, 1986) investigated the ability of individuals to reach their full potential when working together on tasks. Ringelmann had individual men and groups of various numbers of men pull as hard as they could on ropes while he measured the maximum amount that they were able to pull. Because rope pulling is an additive task, the total amount that could be pulled by the group should be the sum of the contributions of the individuals.
However, as shown in Figure 10.7, “The Ringelmann Effect,” although Ringelmann did find that adding individuals to the group increased the overall amount of pulling on the rope (the groups were better than any one individual), he also found a substantial process loss. In fact, the loss was so large that groups of three men pulled at only 85% of their expected capability, whereas groups of eight pulled at only 37% of their expected capability. Figure 10.7 The Ringelmann Effect Ringelmann found that although more men pulled harder on a rope than fewer men did, there was a substantial process loss in comparison with what would have been expected on the basis of their individual performances.
This type of process loss, in which group productivity decreases as the size of the group increases, has been found to occur on a wide variety of tasks, including maximizing tasks such as clapping and cheering and swimming (Latané, Williams, & Harkins, 1979; Williams, Nida, Baca, & Latané, 1989), and judgmental tasks such as evaluating a poem (Petty, Harkins, Williams, & Latané,568 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making 1977). Furthermore, these process losses have been observed in different cultures, including India, Japan, and Taiwan (Gabrenya, Wang, & Latané, 1985; Karau & Williams, 1993).
Process losses in groups occur in part simply because it is difficult for people to work together. The maximum group performance can only occur if all the participants put forth their greatest effort at exactly the same time. Since, despite the best efforts of the group, it is difficult to perfectly coordinate the input of the group members, the likely result is a process loss such that the group performance is less than would be expected, as calculated as the sum of the individual inputs.
Thus actual productivity in the group is reduced in part by these coordination losses. Coordination losses become more problematic as the size of the group increases because it becomes correspondingly more difficult to coordinate the group members. Kelley, Condry, Dahlke, and Hill (1965) put individuals into separate booths and threatened them with electrical shock.
Each person could avoid the shock, however, by pressing a button in the booth for three seconds. But the situation was arranged so that only one person in the group could press the button at one time, and therefore the group members needed to coordinate their actions. Kelley and colleagues found that larger groups had significantly more difficulty coordinating their actions to escape the shocks than did smaller groups.
However, coordination loss at the level of the group is not the only explanation of reduced performance. In addition to being influenced by the coordination of activities, group performance is influenced by self-concern on the part of the individual group members. Since each group member is motivated at least in part by individual self-concerns, each member may desire, at least in part, to gain from the group effort without having to contribute very much.
You may have been in a work or study group that had this problem—each group member was interested in doing well but also was hoping that the other group members would do most of the work for them. A group process loss that occurs when people do not work as hard in a group as they do when they are alone is known as social loafing (Karau & Williams, 1993). Research Focus Differentiating Coordination Losses from Social Loafing Latané, Williams, and Harkins (1979) conducted an experiment that allowed them to measure the extent to which process losses in groups were caused by coordination losses and by social loafing.
Research participants were placed in a room with a microphone and were instructed to shout as loudly as they could when a signal was given. Furthermore, the participants were blindfolded and wore headsets that prevented them from either seeing or hearing the performance of the other group members. On some trials, the participants were told (via the headsets) that they would be shouting alone, and on other trials, they were told that they would be shouting with other participants.
However, although the individuals sometimes did shout in groups, in other cases (although they still thought that they were shouting in groups) they actually shouted alone. Thus Latané and his colleagues were able to measure the contribution of the individuals, both when they thought they were shouting alone and when they thought they were shouting in a group. The results of the experiment are presented in Figure 10.8, which shows the amount of sound produced per person.
The top line represents the potential productivity of the group, which was calculated as the sum of the sound produced by the individuals as they performed alone. The middle line represents the performance of hypothetical groups, computed by summing the sound in the conditions in which the10.2 Group Performance 569 participants thought that they were shouting in a group of either two or six individuals, but where they were actually performing alone. Finally, the bottom line represents the performance of real two-person and six-person groups who were actually shouting together.
Figure 10.8 Coordination and Motivation Losses in Working Groups Individuals who were asked to shout as loudly as they could shouted much less so when they were in larger groups, and this process loss was the result of both motivation and coordination losses. Data from Latané, Williams, and Harkins (1979). The results of the study are very clear.
First, as the number of people in the group increased (from one to two to six), each person’s individual input got smaller, demonstrating the process loss that the groups created. Furthermore, the decrease for real groups (the lower line) is greater than the decrease for the groups created by summing the contributions of the individuals. Because performance in the summed groups is a function of motivation but not coordination, and the performance in real groups is a function of both motivation and coordination, Latané and his colleagues effectively showed how much of the process loss was due to each.
Social loafing is something that everyone both engages in and is on the receiving end of from time to time. It has negative effects on a wide range of group endeavors, including class projects (Ferrari & Pychyl, 2012), occupational performance (Ülke, & Bilgiç, 2011), and team sports participation (Høigaard, Säfvenbom, & Tønnessen, 2006). Given its many social costs, what can be done to reduce social loafing?
In a meta-analytic review, Karau and Williams (1993) concluded that loafing is more likely when groups are working on additive than non-additive tasks. They also found that it was reduced when the task was meaningful and important to group members, when each person was assigned identifiable areas of responsibility, and was recognized and praised for the contributions that he or she made. These are some important lessons for all us to take forward here, for the next time we have to complete a group project, for instance!
As well as being less likely to occur in certain tasks under certain conditions, there are also some personal factors that affect rates of social loafing. On average, women loaf less than men (Karau & Williams, 1993). Men are also more likely to react to social rejection by loafing, whereas women tend to work harder following rejection (Williams & Sommer, 1997).
These findings could well help to shed some light on our chapter case study, where we noted that mixed-gender corporate boards570 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making outperformed their all-male counterparts. Simply put, we would predict that groups that included women would engage in less loafing, and would therefore show higher performance.
Culture, as well as gender, has been shown to affect rates of the social loafing. On average, people in individualistic cultures loaf more than those in collectivistic cultures, where the greater emphasis on interdependence can sometimes make people work harder in groups than on their own (Karau & Williams, 1993). Key Takeaways • In some situations, social inhibition reduces individuals’ performance in group settings, whereas in other settings, group facilitation enhances individual performance.
• Although groups may sometimes perform better than individuals, this will occur only when the people in the group expend effort to meet the group goals and when the group is able to efficiently coordinate the efforts of the group members. • The benefits or costs of group performance can be computed by comparing the potential productivity of the group with the actual productivity of the group. The difference will be either a process loss or a process gain.
• Group member characteristics can have a strong effect on group outcomes, but to fully understand group performance, we must also consider the particulars of the group’s situation. • Classifying group tasks can help us understand the situations in which groups are more or less likely to be successful. • Some group process losses are due to difficulties in coordination and motivation (social loafing).
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Outline a group situation where you experienced social inhibition. What task were you performing and why do you think your performance suffered?
2. Describe a time when your performance improved through social facilitation. What were you doing, and how well do you think Zajonc’s theory explained what happened?
3. Consider a time when a group that you belonged to experienced a process loss. Which of the factors discussed in this section do you think were important in creating the problem?
4. In what situations in life have you seen other people social loafing most often? Why do you think that was?
Describe some times when you engaged in social loafing and outline which factors from the research we have discussed best explained your loafing behavior?10.2 Group Performance 571 References Armstrong, J. S. (2001).
Principles of forecasting: A handbook for researchers and practitioners. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Baumeister, R.
F., & Steinhilber, A. (1984). Paradoxical effects of supportive audiences on performance under pressure: The home field disadvantage in sports championships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(1), 85–93. Bond, C. F., & Titus, L.
J. (1983). Social facilitation: A meta-analysis of 241 studies.
Psychological Bulletin, 94(2), 265–292. Einhorn, H. J., Hogarth, R.
M., & Klempner, E. (1977). Quality of group judgment.
Psychological Bulletin, 84(1), 158–172. Ferrari, J. R., & Pychyl, T.
A. (2012). ‘If I wait, my partner will do it:’ The role of conscientiousness as a mediator in the relation of academic procrastination and perceived social loafing.
North American Journal Of Psychology, 14< (1), 13-24. Gabrenya, W. K., Wang, Y., & Latané, B.
(1985). Social loafing on an optimizing task: Cross-cultural differences among Chinese and Americans. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 16(2), 223–242.
Geen, R. G. (1989).
Alternative conceptions of social facilitation. In P. Paulus (Ed.), Psychology of group influence (2nd ed., pp.
15–51). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Guerin, B.
(1983). Social facilitation and social monitoring: A test of three models. British Journal of Social Psychology, 22(3), 203–214.
Hackman, J., & Morris, C. (1975). Group tasks, group interaction processes, and group performance effectiveness: A review and proposed integration.
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 8, pp.
45–99). New York, NY: Academic Press. Høigaard, R., Säfvenbom, R., & Tønnessen, F.
(2006). The Relationship Between Group Cohesion, Group Norms, and Perceived Social Loafing in Soccer Teams. Small Group Research,37(3), 217-232.
Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, F.P. (2012). Joining together – group theory and group skills (11th ed).
Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Jones, M. B.
(1974). Regressing group on individual effectiveness. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 11(3), 426–451.
Karau, S. J., & Williams, K. D.
(1993). Social loafing: A meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(4), 681–706.
Kelley, H. H., Condry, J. C., Jr., Dahlke, A.
E., & Hill, A. H. (1965).
Collective behavior in a simulated panic situation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1, 19–54. Kravitz, D.
A., & Martin, B. (1986). Ringelmann rediscovered: The original article.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 936–941. Latané, B., Williams, K., & Harkins, S. (1979).
Many hands make light the work: The causes and consequences of social loafing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(6), 822–832. Lorge, I., Fox, D., Davitz, J., & Brenner, M.
(1958). A survey of studies contrasting the quality of group performance and individual performance, 1920-1957. Psychological Bulletin,55(6), 337-372.572 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Markus, H. (1978). The effect of mere presence on social facilitation: An unobtrusive test.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14, 389–397. Nijstad, B. A., Stroebe, W., & Lodewijkx, H.
F. M. (2006).
The illusion of group productivity: A reduction of failures explanation. European Journal of Social Psychology, 36(1), 31–48. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.295 Petty, R.
E., Harkins, S. G., Williams, K. D., & Latané, B.
(1977). The effects of group size on cognitive effort and evaluation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 3(4), 579–582.
Robinson-Staveley, K., & Cooper, J. (1990). Mere presence, gender, and reactions to computers: Studying human-computer interaction in the social context.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 26(2), 168–183. Straus, S. G.
(1999). Testing a typology of tasks: An empirical validation of McGrath’s (1984) group task circumplex. Small Group Research, 30(2), 166–187.
Strube, M. J., Miles, M. E., & Finch, W.
H. (1981). The social facilitation of a simple task: Field tests of alternative explanations.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7(4), 701–707. Surowiecki, J. (2004).
The wisdom of crowds: Why the many are smarter than the few and how collective wisdom shapes business, economies, societies, and nations (1st ed.). New York, NY: Doubleday. Szymanski, K., & Harkins, S.
G. (1987). Social loafing and self-evaluation with a social standard.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(5), 891–897. Triplett, N. (1898).
The dynamogenic factors in pacemaking and competition. American Journal of Psychology, 9(4), 507–533. Ülke, H., & Bilgiç, R.
(2011). Investigating the role of the big five on the social loafing of information technology workers. International Journal Of Selection And Assessment, 19(3), 301-312.
Weber, B., & Hertel, G. (2007). Motivation gains of inferior group members: A meta-analytical review.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93(6), 973–993. Williams, K. D., Nida, S.
A., Baca, L. D., & Latané, B. (1989).
Social loafing and swimming: Effects of identifiability on individual and relay performance of intercollegiate swimmers. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 10(1), 73–81. Williams, K.
D., & Sommer, K. L. (1997).
Social ostracism by coworkers: Does rejection lead to loafing or compensation?.Personality And Social Psychology Bulletin,23(7), 693-706. Zajonc, R. B.
(1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 269–274.
Zajonc, R. B., Heingartner, A., & Herman, E. M.
(1969). Social enhancement and impairment of performance in the cockroach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 13(2), 83–92.
Media Attributions • “Royal Navy Medics in an Operating Theatre Onboard HMS Illustrious” by Defence Imagery is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence. • “Pulling for their Regiment at the Glengarry Highland Games” by Jamie McCaffrey is licensed under a CC BY-NC 2.0 licence.10.2 Group Performance 573 • “Dragon boats” by Tom Magliery is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence.10.3 Group Decision Making Learning Objectives 1. Explain factors that can lead to process gain in group versus individual decision making.
2. Explain how groupthink can harm effective group decision making. 3.
Outline the ways that lack of information sharing can reduced decision-making quality in group contexts. 4. Explain why brainstorming can often be counterproductive to sound decision making in groups.
5. Describe how group polarization can lead groups to make more extreme decisions than individuals. 6.
Explore important factors that lead juries to make better or worse decisions. In the previous section, we explored some of the important ways that being in a group affects individual group members’ behavior, and, in turn, influences the group’s overall performance. As well as achieving high levels of performance, another important task of groups is to make decisions.
Indeed, we often entrust groups, rather than individuals, with key decisions in our societies—for example, those made by juries and political parties. An important question to ask here is whether we are right to trust groups more than individuals to reach sound decisions. Are many heads really better than one?
It turns out that this question can be a hard one to answer. For one thing, studying decision making is hard, because it is difficult to assess the quality of a decision on the basis of what was known at the time, independently of its outcome. This is particularly challenging as we naturally tend to look too much at the outcome when we evaluate decision making, a phenomenon known as the outcome bias.
Moreover, studying decision making in laboratory environments has generally involved providing group members with more information than they would typically have in the real world (Johnson & Johnson, 2012), and so the results may not always generalize here. Nevertheless, with these caveats in mind, it is possible to draw some tentative conclusions about when and why groups make better decisions than individuals, and also when and why they may end up making worse ones. Process Gains in Group versus Individual Decision Making One important factor that helps groups to outperform individuals on decision-making tasks is the type of interdependence they have.
In general, positively interdependent (cooperative) groups tend to make better decisions than both negatively interdependent (competitive) groups and individuals, particularly 575576 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making in complex tasks (Johnson & Johnson, 2012). These process gains come from a variety of factors.
One is that when group members interact, they often generate new ideas and solutions that they would not have arrived at individually (Watson, 1931). Group members are also more likely than individuals to notice and correct mistakes that can harm sound decision making (Ziller, 1957). They additionally have better collective memory, meaning that many minds hold more relevant information than one, and superior transactive memory, which occurs when interactions between group members facilitate the recall of important material (Forsyth, 2010).
Also, when individual group members share information that is unique to them, they increase the total amount of data that the group can then draw on when making sound decisions (Johnson & Johnson, 2012). Given these obvious advantages, are there ever times when groups might make less optimal decisions than individuals? If you have ever sat in a group where, with hindsight, a fairly foolhardy decision was reached, then you probably already have your own answer to that question.
The more interesting question then becomes why are many heads sometimes worse than one? Let’s explore some of the most dramatic reasons. Process Losses Due to Group Conformity Pressures: Groupthink Groups can make effective decisions only when they are able to make use of the advantages outlined above that come with group membership.
However, these conditions are not always met in real groups. As we saw in the chapter opener, one example of a group process that can lead to very poor group decisions is groupthink. Groupthink occurs when a group that is made up of members who may actually be very competent and thus quite capable of making excellent decisions nevertheless ends up making a poor one as a result of a flawed group process and strong conformity pressures (Baron, 2005; Janis, 2007).
Groupthink is more likely to occur in groups in which the members are feeling strong social identity—for instance, when there is a powerful and directive leader who creates a positive group feeling, and in times of stress and crisis when the group needs to rise to the occasion and make an important decision. The problem is that groups suffering from groupthink become unwilling to seek out or discuss discrepant or unsettling information about the topic at hand, and the group members do not express contradictory opinions. Because the group members are afraid to express ideas that contradict those of the leader or to bring in outsiders who have other information, the group is prevented from making a fully informed decision.
Figure 10.9, “Antecedents and Outcomes of Groupthink,” summarizes the basic causes and outcomes of groupthink.10.3 Group Decision Making 577 Figure 10.9 Antecedents and Outcomes of Groupthink. [Image description] Although at least some scholars are skeptical of the importance of groupthink in real group decisions (Kramer, 1998), many others have suggested that groupthink was involved in a number of well-known and important, but very poor, decisions made by government and business groups. Key historical decisions analyzed in terms of groupthink include the decision to invade Iraq made by President George Bush and his advisors, with the support of other national governments, including those from the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, South Korea, Japan, Singapore, and Australia; the decision of President John F.
Kennedy and his advisors to commit U.S. forces to help with an invasion of Cuba, with the goal of overthrowing Fidel Castro in 1962; and the policy of appeasement of Nazi Germany pursued by many European leaders in 1930s, in the lead-up to World War II. Groupthink has also been applied to some less well-known, but also important, domains of decision making, including pack journalism (Matusitz, & Breen, 2012).
Intriguingly, groupthink has even been used to try to account for perceived anti-right-wing political biases of social psychologists (Redding, 2012). Careful analyses of the decision-making process in the historical cases outlined above have documented the role of conformity pressures. In fact, the group process often seems to be arranged to maximize the amount of conformity rather than to foster free and open discussion.
In the meetings of the Bay of Pigs advisory committee, for instance, President Kennedy sometimes demanded that the group members give a voice vote regarding their individual opinions before the group actually discussed the pros and cons of a new idea. The result of these conformity pressures is a general unwillingness to express ideas that do not match the group norm. The pressures for conformity also lead to the situation in which only a few of the group members are actually involved in conversation, whereas the others do not express any opinions.
Because little or no dissent is expressed in the group, the group members come to believe that they are in complete agreement. In some cases, the leader may even select individuals (known as mindguards) whose job it is to help quash dissent and to increase conformity to the leader’s opinions. An outcome of the high levels of conformity found in these groups is that the group begins to see itself as extremely valuable and important, highly capable of making high-quality decisions, and invulnerable.
In short, the group members develop extremely high levels of conformity and social identity. Although this social identity may have some positive outcomes in terms of a commitment to578 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making work toward group goals (and it certainly makes the group members feel good about themselves), it also tends to result in illusions of invulnerability, leading the group members to feel that they are superior and that they do not need to seek outside information.
Such a situation is often conducive to poor decision making, which can result in tragic consequences. Interestingly, the composition of the group itself can affect the likelihood of groupthink occurring. More diverse groups, for instance, can help to ensure that a wider range of views are available to the group in making their decision, which can reduce the risk of groupthink.
Thinking back to our case study, the more homogeneous the group are in terms of internal characteristics such as beliefs, and external characteristics such as gender, the more at risk of groupthink they may become (Kroon, Van Kreveld, & Rabbie, 1992). Perhaps, then, mixed gender corporate boards are more successful partly because they are better able to avoid the dangerous phenomenon of groupthink. Cognitive Process Losses: Lack of Information Sharing Although group discussion generally improves the quality of a group’s decisions, this will only be true if the group discusses the information that is most useful to the decision that needs to be made.
One difficulty is that groups tend to discuss some types of information more than others. In addition to the pressures to focus on information that comes from leaders and that is consistent with group norms, discussion is influenced by the way the relevant information is originally shared among the group members. The problem is that group members tend to discuss information that they all have access to while ignoring equally important information that is available to only a few of the members, a tendency known as the shared information bias (Faulmüller, Kerschreiter, Mojzisch, & Schulz-Hardt, 2010; Reimer, Reimer, & Czienskowski (2010).
Research Focus Poor Information Sharing in Groups In one demonstration of the shared information bias, Stasser and Titus (1985) used an experimental design based on the hidden profile task, as shown in Table 10.1. Students read descriptions of two candidates for a hypothetical student body presidential election and then met in groups to discuss and pick the best candidate. The information about the candidates was arranged so that one of the candidates (Candidate A) had more positive qualities overall in comparison with the other (Candidate B).
Reflecting this superiority, in groups in which all the members were given all the information about both candidates, the members chose Candidate A 83% of the time after their discussion.10.3 Group Decision Making 579 Table 10.1 Hidden Profiles Group member Information favoring Candidate A Information favoring Candidate B X a1, a2 b1, b2, b3 Y a1, a3 b1, b2, b3 Z a1, a4 b1, b2, b3 This is an example of the type of “hidden profile” that was used by Stasser and Titus (1985) to study information sharing in group discussion. Stasser, G., & Titus, W. (1985).
Pooling of unshared information in group decision making: Biased information sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(6), 1467–1478. (The researchers’ profiles were actually somewhat more complicated.) The three pieces of favorable information about Candidate B (b1, b2, and b3) were seen by all of the group members, but the favorable information about Candidate A (a1, a2, a3, and a4) was not given to everyone.
Because the group members did not share the information about Candidate A, Candidate B was erroneously seen as a better choice. However, in some cases, the experimenters made the task more difficult by creating a “hidden profile,” in which each member of the group received only part of the information. In these cases, although all the information was potentially available to the group, it was necessary that it be properly shared to make the correct choice.
Specifically, in this case, in which the information favoring Candidate B was shared, but the information favoring Candidate A was not, only 18% of the groups chose A, whereas the others chose the inferior candidate. This occurred because although the group members had access to all the positive information collectively, the information that was not originally shared among all the group members was never discussed. Furthermore, this bias occurred even in participants who were given explicit instructions to be sure to avoid expressing their initial preferences and to review all the available facts (Stasser, Taylor, & Hanna, 1989).
Although the tendency to share information poorly seems to occur quite frequently, at least in experimentally created groups, it does not occur equally under all conditions. For one, groups have been found to better share information when the group members believe that there is a correct answer that can be found if there is sufficient discussion (Stasser & Stewart, 1992), and if they are forced to continue their discussion even after they believe that they have discussed all the relevant information (Larson, Foster-Fishman, & Keys, 1994). These findings suggest that an important job of the group leader is to continue group discussion until he or she is convinced that all the relevant information has been addressed.
The structure of the group will also influence information sharing (Stasser & Taylor, 1991). Groups in which the members are more physically separated and thus have difficulty communicating with each other may find that they need to reorganize themselves to improve communication. And the status of the group members can also be important.
Group members with lower status may have less confidence and thus be unlikely to express their opinions. Wittenbaum (1998) found that group members with higher status were more likely to share new information. However, those with higher status may sometimes dominate the discussion, even if the information that they have is not more valid or important (Hinsz, 1990).
Groups are also likely to share unique information when the group members do not initially know the alternatives that need to be determined or the preferences of the other group members (Mojzisch & Schulz-Hardt, 2010; Reimer, Reimer, & Hinsz, 2010).580 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Findings showing that groups neither share nor discuss originally unshared information have very disconcerting implications for group decision making because they suggest that group discussion is likely to lead to very poor judgments. Not only is unshared information not brought to the table, but because the shared information is discussed repeatedly, it is likely to be seen as more valid and to have a greater influence on decisions as a result of its high cognitive accessibility.
It is not uncommon that individuals within a working group come to the discussion with different types of information, and this unshared information needs to be presented. For instance, in a meeting of a design team for a new building, the architects, the engineers, and the customer representatives will have different and potentially incompatible information. Thus leaders of working groups must be aware of this problem and work hard to foster open climates that encourages information sharing and discussion.
Given its obvious pitfalls, an interesting question to ask is why the shared information bias seems to be so pervasive. Recalling the confirmation bias that we discussed in the chapter on social cognition, perhaps it reflects this tendency played out at the group level, where group members collaborate to provide confirmatory evidence for each other’s positions. Leading on from this, it could also reflect the tendency for people to wish to use groups to reinforce their own views.
Perhaps sometimes groups become places where people seek to mutually validate each other’s shared perspectives, to the detriment of them searching out the alternatives. If these ideas are correct, given that we often choose to associate with similar others, then it may be important to seek out the views of group members that are likely to be most different from our own, in seeking to weaken the damaging effects of the shared information bias (Morrow & Deidan, 1992). Cognitive Process Losses: Ineffective Brainstorming One technique that is frequently used to produce creative decisions in working groups is known as brainstorming.
The technique was first developed by Osborn (1953) in an attempt to increase the effectiveness of group sessions at his advertising agency. Osborn had the idea that people might be able to effectively use their brains to “storm” a problem by sharing ideas with each other in groups. Osborn felt that creative solutions would be increased when the group members generated a lot of ideas and when judgments about the quality of those ideas were initially deferred and only later evaluated.
Thus brainstorming was based on the following rules: • Each group member was to create as many ideas as possible, no matter how silly, unimportant, or unworkable they were thought to be. • As many ideas as possible were to be generated by the group. • No one was allowed to offer opinions about the quality of an idea (even one’s own).
• The group members were encouraged and expected to modify and expand upon other’s ideas. Researchers have devoted considerable effort to testing the effectiveness of brainstorming, and yet, despite the creativeness of the idea itself, there is very little evidence to suggest that it works (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987, 1991; Stroebe & Diehl, 1994). In fact, virtually all individual studies, as well as meta- analyses of those studies, find that regardless of the exact instructions given to a group, brainstorming groups do not generate as many ideas as one would expect, and the ideas that they do generate are usually of lesser quality than those generated by an equal number of individuals working alone who10.3 Group Decision Making 581 then share their results.
Thus brainstorming represents still another example of a case in which, despite the expectation of a process gain by the group, a process loss is instead observed. A number of explanations have been proposed for the failure of brainstorming to be effective, and many of these have been found to be important. One obvious problem is social loafing by the group members, and at least some research suggests that this does cause part of the problem.
For instance, Paulus and Dzindolet (1993) found that social loafing in brainstorming groups occurred in part because individuals perceived that the other group members were not working very hard, and they matched they own behavior to this perceived norm. To test the role of social loafing more directly, Diehl and Stroebe (1987) compared face-to-face brainstorming groups with equal numbers of individuals who worked alone; they found that face-to-face brainstorming groups generated fewer and less creative solutions than did an equal number of equivalent individuals working by themselves. However, for some of the face-to-face groups, the researchers set up a television camera to record the contributions of each of the participants in order to make individual contributions to the discussion identifiable.
Being identifiable reduced social loafing and increased the productivity of the individuals in the face-to-face groups; but the face-to-face groups still did not perform as well as the individuals. Even though individuals in brainstorming groups are told that no evaluation of the quality of the ideas is to be made, and thus that all ideas are good ones, individuals might nevertheless be unwilling to state some of their ideas in brainstorming groups because they are afraid that they will be negatively evaluated by the other group members. When individuals are told that other group members are more knowledgeable than they are, they reduce their own contributions (Collaros & Anderson, 1969), and when they are convinced that they themselves are experts, their contributions increase (Diehl & Stroebe, 1987).
Although social loafing and evaluation apprehension seem to cause some of the problem, the most important difficulty that reduces the effectiveness of brainstorming in face-to-face groups is that being with others in a group hinders opportunities for idea production and expression. In a group, only one person can speak at a time, and this can cause people to forget their ideas because they are listening to others, or to miss what others are saying because they are thinking of their own ideas, a problem known as production blocking. Considered another way, production blocking occurs because although individuals working alone can spend the entire available time generating ideas, participants in face-to- face groups must perform other tasks as well, and this reduces their creativity.
Diehl and Stroebe (1987) demonstrated the importance of production blocking in another experiment that compared individuals with groups. In this experiment, rather than changing things in the real group, they created production blocking in the individual conditions through a turn-taking procedure, such that the individuals, who were working in individual cubicles, had to express their ideas verbally into a microphone, but they were only able to speak when none of the other individuals was speaking. Having to coordinate in this way decreased the performance of individuals such that they were no longer better than the face-to-face groups.
Follow-up research (Diehl & Stroebe, 1991) showed that the main factor responsible for productivity loss in face-to-face brainstorming groups is that the group members are not able to make good use of the time they are forced to spend waiting for others. While they are waiting, they tend to forget their ideas because they must concentrate on negotiating when it is going to be their turn to speak. In fact, even when the researchers gave the face-to-face groups extra time to perform the task (to make up for582 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making having to wait for others), they still did not reach the level of productivity of the individuals. Thus the necessity of monitoring the behavior of others and the delay that is involved in waiting to be able to express one’s ideas reduce the ability to think creatively (Gallupe, Cooper, Grise, & Bastianutti, 1994). Although brainstorming is a classic example of a group process loss, there are ways to make it more effective.
One variation on the brainstorming idea is known as the nominal group technique (Delbecq, Van de Ven, & Gustafson, 1975). The nominal group technique capitalizes on the use of individual sessions to generate initial ideas, followed by face-to-face group meetings to discuss and build on them. In this approach, participants first work alone to generate and write down their ideas before the group discussion starts, and the group then records the ideas that are generated.
In addition, a round-robin procedure is used to make sure that each individual has a chance to communicate his or her ideas. Other similar approaches include the Delphi technique (Clayton, 1997; Hornsby, Smith, & Gupta, 1994) and Synectics (Stein, 1978). Contemporary advances in technology have created the ability for individuals to work together on creativity tasks via computer.
These computer systems, generally known as group support systems, are used in many businesses and other organizations. One use involves brainstorming on creativity tasks. Each individual in the group works at his or her own computer on the problem.
As he or she writes suggestions or ideas, they are passed to the other group members via the computer network, so that each individual can see the suggestions of all the group members, including their own. A number of research programs have found that electronic brainstorming is more effective than face-to- face brainstorming (Dennis & Valacich, 1993; Gallupe, Cooper, Grise, & Bastianutti, 1994; Siau, 1995), in large part because it reduces the production blocking that occurs in face-to-face groups. Groups that work together virtually rather than face-to-face have also been found to be more likely to share unique information (Mesmer-Magnus, DeChurch, Jimenez-Rodriguez, Wildman, & Schuffler, 2011).
Each individual has the comments of all the other group members handy and can read them when it is convenient. The individual can alternate between reading the comments of others and writing his or her own comments and therefore is not required to wait to express his or her ideas. In addition, electronic brainstorming can be effective because it reduces evaluation apprehension, particularly when the participants’ contributions are anonymous (Connolly, Routhieaux, & Schneider, 1993; Valacich, Jessup, Dennis, & Nunamaker, 1992).
In summary, the most important conclusion to be drawn from the literature on brainstorming is that the technique is less effective than expected because group members are required to do other things in addition to being creative. However, this does not necessarily mean that brainstorming is not useful overall, and modifications of the original brainstorming procedures have been found to be quite effective in producing creative thinking in groups. Techniques that make use of initial individual thought, which is later followed by group discussion, represent the best approaches to brainstorming and group creativity.
When you are in a group that needs to make a decision, you can make use of this knowledge. Ask the group members to spend some time thinking about and writing down their own ideas before the group begins its discussion. Group Polarization One common decision-making task of groups is to come to a consensus regarding a judgment, such as where to hold a party, whether a defendant is innocent or guilty, or how much money a corporation10.3 Group Decision Making 583 should invest in a new product.
Whenever a majority of members in the group favors a given opinion, even if that majority is very slim, the group is likely to end up adopting that majority opinion. Of course, such a result would be expected, since, as a result of conformity pressures, the group’s final judgment should reflect the average of group members’ initial opinions. Although groups generally do show pressures toward conformity, the tendency to side with the majority after group discussion turns out to be even stronger than this.
It is commonly found that groups make even more extreme decisions, in the direction of the existing norm, than we would predict they would, given the initial opinions of the group members. Group polarization is said to occur when, after discussion, the attitudes held by the individual group members become more extreme than they were before the group began discussing the topic (Brauer, Judd, & Gliner, 2006; Myers, 1982). This may seem surprising, given the widespread belief that groups tend to push people toward consensus and the middle-ground in decision making.
Actually, they may often lead to more extreme decisions being made than those that individuals would have taken on their own. Group polarization was initially observed using problems in which the group members had to indicate how an individual should choose between a risky, but very positive, outcome and a certain, but less desirable, outcome (Stoner, 1968). Consider the following question: Frederica has a secure job with a large bank.
Her salary is adequate but unlikely to increase. However, Frederica has been offered a job with a relatively unknown startup company in which the likelihood of failure is high and in which the salary is dependent upon the success of the company. What is the minimum probability of the startup company’s success that you would find acceptable to make it worthwhile for Frederica to take the job?
(choose one) 1 in 10, 3 in 10, 5 in 10, 7 in 10, 9 in 10 Research has found group polarization on these types of decisions, such that the group recommendation is more risky (in this case, requiring a lower probability of success of the new company) than the average of the individual group members’ initial opinions. In these cases, the polarization can be explained partly in terms of diffusion of responsibility (Kogan & Wallach, 1967). Because the group as a whole is taking responsibility for the decision, the individual may be willing to take a more extreme stand, since he or she can share the blame with other group members if the risky decision does not work out.
But group polarization is not limited to decisions that involve risk. For instance, in an experiment by Myers and Kaplan (1976), groups of students were asked to assess the guilt or innocence of defendants in traffic cases. The researchers also manipulated the strength of the evidence against the defendant, such that in some groups the evidence was strong and in other groups the evidence was weak.
This resulted in two groups of juries—some in which the majority of the students initially favored conviction (on the basis of the strong evidence) and others in which a majority initially favored acquittal (on the basis of only weak evidence). The researchers asked the individuals to express their opinions about the guilt of the defendant both before and after the jury deliberated. As you can see in Figure 10.10, “Group Polarization,” the opinions that the individuals held about the guilt or innocence of the defendants were found to be more extreme after discussion than they were, on average, before the discussion began.
That is, members of juries in which the majority of the individuals initially favored conviction became more likely to believe the defendant was guilty after the584 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making discussion, and members of juries in which the majority of the individuals initially favored acquittal became more likely to believe the defendant was innocent after the discussion. Similarly, Myers and Bishop (1970) found that groups of college students who had initially racist attitudes became more racist after group discussion, whereas groups of college students who had initially antiracist attitudes became less racist after group discussion.
Similar findings have been found for groups discussing a very wide variety of topics and across many different cultures. Figure 10.10 Group Polarization The juries in this research were given either strong or weak evidence about the guilt of a defendant and then were either allowed or not allowed to discuss the evidence before making a final decision. Demonstrating group polarization, the juries that discussed the case made significantly more extreme decisions than did the juries that did not discuss the case.
Data are from Myers and Kaplan (1976). Group polarization does not occur in all groups and in all settings but tends to happen most often when two conditions are present: First, the group members must have an initial leaning toward a given opinion or decision. If the group members generally support liberal policies, their opinions are likely to become even more liberal after discussion.
But if the group is made up equally of both liberals and conservatives, group polarization would not be expected. Second, group polarization is strengthened by discussion of the topic. For instance, in the research by Myers and Kaplan (1976) just reported, in some experimental conditions, the group members expressed their opinions but did not discuss the issue, and these groups showed less polarization than groups that discussed the issue.
Group polarization has also been observed in important real-world contexts, including financial decision making in corporate boardrooms (Cheng & Chiou, 2008; Zhu, 2010). It has also been argued that the recent polarization in political attitudes in many countries, for example in the United States between the “blue” Democratic states versus the “red” Republican states, is occurring in large part because each group spends time communicating with other like-minded group members, leading to more extreme opinions on each side. And some have argued that terrorist groups develop their extreme positions and engage in violent behaviors as a result of the group polarization that occurs in their everyday interactions (Drummond, 2002; McCauley, 1989).
As the group members, all of whom initially have some radical beliefs, meet and discuss their concerns and desires, their opinions polarize,10.3 Group Decision Making 585 allowing them to become progressively more extreme. Because they are also away from any other influences that might moderate their opinions, they may eventually become mass killers. Group polarization is the result of both cognitive and affective factors.
The general idea of the persuasive arguments approach to explaining group polarization is cognitive in orientation. This approach assumes that there is a set of potential arguments that support any given opinion and another set of potential arguments that refute that opinion. Furthermore, an individual’s current opinion about the topic is predicted to be based on the arguments that he or she is currently aware of.
During group discussion, each member presents arguments supporting his or her individual opinions. And because the group members are initially leaning in one direction, it is expected that there will be many arguments generated that support the initial leaning of the group members. As a result, each member is exposed to new arguments supporting the initial leaning of the group, and this predominance of arguments leaning in one direction polarizes the opinions of the group members (Van Swol, 2009).
Supporting the predictions of persuasive arguments theory, research has shown that the number of novel arguments mentioned in discussion is related to the amount of polarization (Vinokur & Burnstein, 1978) and that there is likely to be little group polarization without discussion (Clark, Crockett, & Archer, 1971). Notice here the parallels between the persuasive arguments approach to group polarization and the concept of informational conformity. But group polarization is in part based on the affective responses of the individuals—and particularly the social identity they receive from being good group members (Hogg, Turner, & Davidson, 1990; Mackie, 1986; Mackie & Cooper, 1984).
The idea here is that group members, in their desire to create positive social identity, attempt to differentiate their group from other implied or actual groups by adopting extreme beliefs. Thus the amount of group polarization observed is expected to be determined not only by the norms of the ingroup but also by a movement away from the norms of other relevant outgroups. In short, this explanation says that groups that have well-defined (extreme) beliefs are better able to produce social identity for their members than are groups that have more moderate (and potentially less clear) beliefs.
Once again, notice the similarity of this account of polarization to the notion of normative conformity. Group polarization effects are stronger when the group members have high social identity (Abrams, Wetherell, Cochrane, & Hogg, 1990; Hogg, Turner, & Davidson, 1990; Mackie, 1986). Diane Mackie (1986) had participants listen to three people discussing a topic, supposedly so that they could become familiar with the issue themselves to help them make their own decisions.
However, the individuals that they listened to were said to be members of a group that they would be joining during the upcoming experimental session, members of a group that they were not expecting to join, or some individuals who were not a group at all. Mackie found that the perceived norms of the (future) ingroup were seen as more extreme than those of the other group or the individuals, and that the participants were more likely to agree with the arguments of the ingroup. This finding supports the idea that group norms are perceived as more extreme for groups that people identify with (in this case, because they were expecting to join it in the future).
And another experiment by Mackie (1986) also supported the social identity prediction that the existence of a rival outgroup increases polarization as the group members attempt to differentiate themselves from the other group by adopting more extreme positions. Taken together then, the research reveals that another potential problem with group decision making is that it can be polarized. These changes toward more extreme positions have a variety of causes and586 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making occur more under some conditions than others, but they must be kept in mind whenever groups come together to make important decisions. Social Psychology in the Public Interest Decision Making by a Jury Although many countries rely on the decisions of judges in civil and criminal trials, the jury is the foundation of the legal system in many other nations. The notion of a trial by one’s peers is based on the assumption that average individuals can make informed and fair decisions when they work together in groups.
But given all the problems facing groups, social psychologists and others frequently wonder whether juries are really the best way to make these important decisions and whether the particular composition of a jury influences the likely outcome of its deliberation (Lieberman, 2011). As small working groups, juries have the potential to produce either good or poor decisions, depending on many of the factors that we have discussed in this chapter (Bornstein & Greene, 2011; Hastie, 1993; Winter & Robicheaux, 2011). And again, the ability of the jury to make a good decision is based on both person characteristics and group process.
In terms of person variables, there is at least some evidence that the jury member characteristics do matter. For one, individuals who have already served on juries are more likely to be seen as experts, are more likely to be chosen as jury foreperson, and give more input during the deliberation (Stasser, Kerr, & Bray, 1982). It has also been found that status matters—jury members with higher-status occupations and education, males rather than females, and those who talk first are more likely be chosen as the foreperson, and these individuals also contribute more to the jury discussion (Stasser et al., 1982).
And as in other small groups, a minority of the group members generally dominate the jury discussion (Hastie, Penrod, & Pennington, 1983), And there is frequently a tendency toward social loafing in the group (Najdowski, 2010). As a result, relevant information or opinions are likely to remain unshared because some individuals never or rarely participate in the discussion. Perhaps the strongest evidence for the importance of member characteristics in the decision-making process concerns the selection of death-qualified juries in trials in which a potential sentence includes the death penalty.
In order to be selected for such a jury, the potential members must indicate that they would, in principle, be willing to recommend the death penalty as a punishment. In some countries, potential jurors who indicate being opposed to the death penalty cannot serve on these juries. However, this selection process creates a potential bias because the individuals who say that they would not under any condition vote for the death penalty are also more likely to be rigid and punitive and thus more likely to find defendants guilty, a situation that increases the chances of a conviction for defendants (Ellsworth, 1993).
Although there are at least some member characteristics that have an influence upon jury decision making, group process, as in other working groups, plays a more important role in the outcome of jury decisions than do member characteristics. Like any group, juries develop their own individual norms, and these norms can have a profound impact on how they reach their decisions. Analysis of group process within juries shows that different juries take very different approaches to reaching a verdict.
Some spend a lot of time in initial planning, whereas others immediately jump right into the deliberation. And some juries base their discussion around a review and reorganization of the evidence, waiting to take a vote until it has all been considered, whereas other juries first determine which10.3 Group Decision Making 587 decision is preferred in the group by taking a poll and then (if the first vote does not lead to a final verdict) organize their discussion around these opinions. These two approaches are used about equally often but may in some cases lead to different decisions (Hastie, 2008).
Perhaps most important, conformity pressures have a strong impact on jury decision making. As you can see in Figure 10.11, when there are a greater number of jury members who hold the majority position, it becomes more and more certain that their opinion will prevail during the discussion. This is not to say that minorities cannot ever be persuasive, but it is very difficult for them.
The strong influence of the majority is probably due to both informational conformity (i.e., that there are more arguments supporting the favored position) and normative conformity (people are less likely to want to be seen as disagreeing with the majority opinion). Figure 10.11 Conformity in Juries This figure shows the decisions of six-member mock juries that made “majority rules” decisions. When the majority of the six initially favored voting guilty, the jury almost always voted guilty, and when the majority of the six initially favored voting innocent, the jury almost always voted innocence.
The juries were frequently hung (could not make a decision) when the initial split was three to three. Data are from Stasser, Kerr, and Bray (1982). Research has also found that juries that are evenly split (three to three or six to six) tend to show a leniency bias by voting toward acquittal more often than they vote toward guilt, all other factors being equal (MacCoun & Kerr, 1988).
This is in part because juries are usually instructed to assume innocence unless there is sufficient evidence to confirm guilt—they must apply a burden of proof of guilt “beyond a reasonable doubt.” The leniency bias in juries does not always occur, although it is more likely to occur when the potential penalty is more severe (Devine et al., 2004; Kerr, 1978). Given what you now know about the potential difficulties that groups face in making good decisions, you might be worried that the verdicts rendered by juries may not be particularly effective, accurate, or fair. However, despite these concerns, the evidence suggests that juries may not do as badly as we would expect.
The deliberation process seems to cancel out many individual juror biases, and the importance of the decision leads the jury members to carefully consider the evidence itself.588 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Key Takeaways • Under certain situations, groups can show significant process gains in regards to decision making, compared with individuals. However, there are a number of social forces that can hinder effective group decision making, which can sometimes lead groups to show process losses.
• Some group process losses are the result of groupthink—when a group, as result of a flawed group process and strong conformity pressures, makes a poor judgment. • Process losses may result from the tendency for groups to discuss information that all members have access to while ignoring equally important information that is available to only a few of the members. • Brainstorming is a technique designed to foster creativity in a group.
Although brainstorming often leads to group process losses, alternative approaches, including the use of group support systems, may be more effective. • Group decisions can also be influenced by group polarization—when the attitudes held by the individual group members become more extreme than they were before the group began discussing the topic. • Understanding group processes can help us better understand the factors that lead juries to make better or worse decisions.
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Consider a time when a group that you belonged to experienced a process gain, and another time showed a process loss in terms of decision making. Which of the factors discussed in this section do you think help to explain these two different outcomes?
2. Describe a current social or political issue where you have seen groupthink in action. What features of groupthink outlined in this section were particularly evident?
When in your own life have you been in a group situation where groupthink was evident? What decision was reached and what was the outcome for you? 3.
When have you been in a group that has not shared information effectively? Why do you think that this happened and what were the consequences? 4.
Outline two situations, one when you were in a group that used brainstorming and you feel that it was helpful to the group decision-making process, and another when you think it was a hindrance. Why do you think the brainstorming had these opposite effects on the groups in the two situations? 5.
What examples of group polarization have you seen in the media recently? How well do the ideas of normative and informational conformity explain why polarization occurred in these situations? What other factors might also have been at work?
6. If you or someone you knew had a choice to be tried by either a judge or a jury, taking into10.3 Group Decision Making 589 account the research in this section, which would you choose, and why? References Abrams, D., Wetherell, M., Cochrane, S., & Hogg, M.
(1990). Knowing what to think by knowing who you are: Self-categorization and the nature of norm formation, conformity, and group polarization. British Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 97–119.
Baron, R. S. (2005).
So right it’s wrong: Groupthink and the ubiquitous nature of polarized group decision making. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 37, pp. 219–253).
San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. Bornstein, B. H., & Greene, E.
(2011). Jury decision making: Implications for and from psychology. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20(1), 63–67.
Brauer, M., Judd, C. M., & Gliner, M. D.
(2006). The effects of repeated expressions on attitude polarization during group discussions. In J.
M. Levine & R. L.
Moreland (Eds.), Small groups (pp. 265–287). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Cheng, P.-Y., & Chiou, W.-B. (2008). Framing effects in group investment decision making: Role of group polarization.
Psychological Reports, 102(1), 283–292. Clark, R. D., Crockett, W.
H., & Archer, R. L. (1971).
Risk-as-value hypothesis: The relationship between perception of self, others, and the risky shift. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 20, 425–429. Clayton, M.
J. (1997). Delphi: A technique to harness expert opinion for critical decision-making tasks in education.
Educational Psychology, 17(4), 373–386. doi: 10.1080/0144341970170401. Collaros, P.
A., & Anderson, I. R. (1969).
Effect of perceived expertness upon creativity of members of brainstorming groups. Journal of Applied Psychology, 53, 159–163. Connolly, T., Routhieaux, R.
L., & Schneider, S. K. (1993).
On the effectiveness of group brainstorming: Test of one underlying cognitive mechanism. Small Group Research, 24(4), 490–503. Delbecq, A.
L., Van de Ven, A. H., & Gustafson, D. H.
(1975). Group techniques for program planning: A guide to nominal group and delphi processes. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Dennis, A. R., & Valacich, J. S.
(1993). Computer brainstorms: More heads are better than one. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 531–537.
Devine, D. J., Olafson, K. M., Jarvis, L.
L., Bott, J. P., Clayton, L. D., & Wolfe, J.
M. T. (2004).
Explaining jury verdicts: Is leniency bias for real? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(10), 2069–2098. Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W.
(1987). Productivity loss in brainstorming groups: Toward the solution of a riddle. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 497–509.
Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1991). Productivity loss in idea-generating groups: Tracking down the blocking effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(3), 392–403.590 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Drummond, J. T.
(2002). From the Northwest Imperative to global jihad: Social psychological aspects of the construction of the enemy, political violence, and terror. In C.
E. Stout (Ed.), The psychology of terrorism: A public understanding (Vol. 1, pp.
49–95). Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers/ Greenwood Publishing Group. Ellsworth, P.
C. (1993). Some steps between attitudes and verdicts.
In R. Hastie (Ed.), Inside the juror: The psychology of juror decision making. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Faulmüller, N., Kerschreiter, R., Mojzisch, A., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2010). Beyond group-level explanations for the failure of groups to solve hidden profiles: The individual preference effect revisited.
Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 13(5), 653–671. Forsyth, D. (2010).
Group dynamics (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. Gallupe, R.
B., Cooper, W. H., Grise, M.-L., & Bastianutti, L. M.
(1994). Blocking electronic brainstorms. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(1), 77–86.
Hastie, R. (1993). Inside the juror: The psychology of juror decision making.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Hastie, R. (2008).
What’s the story? Explanations and narratives in civil jury decisions. In B.
H. Bornstein, R. L.
Wiener, R. Schopp, & S. L.
Willborn (Eds.), Civil juries and civil justice: Psychological and legal perspectives (pp. 23–34). New York, NY: Springer Science + Business Media.
Hastie, R., Penrod, S. D., & Pennington, N. (1983).
Inside the jury. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Hinsz, V.
B. (1990). Cognitive and consensus processes in group recognition memory performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(4), 705–718. Hogg, M. A., Turner, J.
C., & Davidson, B. (1990). Polarized norms and social frames of reference: A test of the self-categorization theory of group polarization.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 11(1), 77–100. Hornsby, J. S., Smith, B.
N., & Gupta, J. N. D.
(1994). The impact of decision-making methodology on job evaluation outcomes: A look at three consensus approaches. Group and Organization Management, 19(1), 112–128.
Janis, I. L. (2007).
Groupthink. In R. P.
Vecchio (Ed.), Leadership: Understanding the dynamics of power and influence in organizations (2nd ed., pp. 157–169). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, F.P. (2012). Joining together – group theory and group skills (11th ed).
Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Kerr, N. L.
(1978). Severity of prescribed penalty and mock jurors’ verdicts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(12), 1431–1442.
Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. (1967).
Risky-shift phenomenon in small decision-making groups: A test of the information-exchange hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 3, 75–84. Kramer, R.
M. (1998). Revisiting the Bay of Pigs and Vietnam decisions 25 years later: How well has the groupthink hypothesis stood the test of time?
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 73(2–3), 236–271.10.3 Group Decision Making 591 Kroon, M. B., Van Kreveld, D., & Rabbie, J. M.
(1992). Group versus individual decision making: Effects of accountability and gender on groupthink. Small Group Research, 23(4), 427-458.
Larson, J. R. J., Foster-Fishman, P.
G., & Keys, C. B. (1994).
The discussion of shared and unshared information in decision-making groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 446–461. Lieberman, J.
D. (2011). The utility of scientific jury selection: Still murky after 30 years.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20(1), 48–52. MacCoun, R. J., & Kerr, N.
L. (1988). Asymmetric influence in mock jury deliberation: Jurors’ bias for leniency.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(1), 21–33. Mackie, D. M.
(1986). Social identification effects in group polarization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(4), 720–728.
Mackie, D. M., & Cooper, J. (1984).
Attitude polarization: Effects of group membership. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, u575–585. Matusitz, J., & Breen, G.
(2012). An examination of pack journalism as a form of groupthink: A theoretical and qualitative analysis.Journal Of Human Behavior In The Social Environment, 22 (7), 896-915. McCauley, C.
R. (1989). Terrorist individuals and terrorist groups: The normal psychology of extreme behavior.
In J. Groebel & J. H.
Goldstein (Eds.), Terrorism: Psychological perspectives (p. 45). Sevilla, Spain: Universidad de Sevilla.
Mesmer-Magnus, J. R., DeChurch, L. A., Jimenez-Rodriguez, M., Wildman, J., & Shuffler, M.
(2011). A meta-analytic investigation of virtuality and information sharing in teams. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 115(2), 214–225.
Mojzisch, A., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2010). Knowing others’ preferences degrades the quality of group decisions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98(5), 794–808. Morrow, K. A., & Deidan, C.
T. (1992). Bias in the counseling process: How to recognize and avoid it.
Journal of Counseling and Development, 70, 571-577. Myers, D. G.
(1982). Polarizing effects of social interaction. In H.
Brandstatter, J. H. Davis, & G.
Stocher-Kreichgauer (Eds.), Contemporary problems in group decision-making (pp. 125–161). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Myers, D. G., & Bishop, G. D.
(1970). Discussion effects on racial attitudes. Science, 169(3947), 778–779.
doi: 10.1126/science.169.3947.778 Myers, D. G., & Kaplan, M. F.
(1976). Group-induced polarization in simulated juries. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2(1), 63–66.
Najdowski, C. J. (2010).
Jurors and social loafing: Factors that reduce participation during jury deliberations. American Journal of Forensic Psychology, 28(2), 39–64. Osborn, A.
F. (1953). Applied imagination.
Oxford, England: Scribner’s. Paulus, P. B., & Dzindolet, M.
T. (1993). Social influence processes in group brainstorming.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(4), 575–586. Redding, R. E.
(2012). Likes attract: The sociopolitical groupthink of (social) psychologists. Perspectives On Psychological Science, 7 (5), 512-515.592 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making Reimer, T., Reimer, A., & Czienskowski, U. (2010). Decision-making groups attenuate the discussion bias in favor of shared information: A meta-analysis.
Communication Monographs, 77(1), 121–142. Reimer, T., Reimer, A., & Hinsz, V. B.
(2010). Naïve groups can solve the hidden-profile problem. Human Communication Research, 36(3), 443–467.
Siau, K. L. (1995).
Group creativity and technology. Psychosomatics, 31, 301–312. Stasser, G., Kerr, N.
L., & Bray, R. M. (1982).
The social psychology of jury deliberations: Structure, process and product. In N. L.
Kerr & R. M. Bray (Eds.), The psychology of the courtroom(pp.
221–256). New York, NY: Academic Press. Stasser, G., & Stewart, D.
(1992). Discovery of hidden profiles by decision-making groups: Solving a problem versus making a judgment. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 63, 426–434.
Stasser, G., & Taylor, L. A. (1991).
Speaking turns in face-to-face discussions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60,675–684. Stasser, G., Taylor, L.
A., & Hanna, C. (1989). Information sampling in structured and unstructured discussions of three- and six-person groups.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(1), 67–78. Stasser, G., & Titus, W. (1985).
Pooling of unshared information in group decision making: Biased information sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(6), 1467–1478. Stein, M.
I. (1978). Methods to stimulate creative thinking.
Psychiatric Annals, 8(3), 65–75. Stoner, J. A.
(1968). Risky and cautious shifts in group decisions: The influence of widely held values. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 4, 442–459.
Stroebe, W., & Diehl, M. (1994). Why groups are less effective than their members: On productivity losses in idea-generating groups.
European Review of Social Psychology, 5, 271–303. Valacich, J. S., Jessup, L.
M., Dennis, A. R., & Nunamaker, J. F.
(1992). A conceptual framework of anonymity in group support systems. Group Decision and Negotiation, 1(3), 219–241.
Van Swol, L. M. (2009).
Extreme members and group polarization. Social Influence, 4(3), 185–199. Vinokur, A., & Burnstein, E.
(1978). Novel argumentation and attitude change: The case of polarization following group discussion. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8(3), 335–348.
Watson, G. (1931). Do groups think more effectively than individuals?
In G. Murphy & L. Murphy (Eds.), Experimental social psychology.
New York: Harper. Winter, R. J., & Robicheaux, T.
(2011). Questions about the jury: What trial consultants should know about jury decision making. In R.
L. Wiener & B. H.
Bornstein (Eds.), Handbook of trial consulting (pp. 63–91). New York, NY: Springer Science + Business Media.
Wittenbaum, G. M. (1998).
Information sampling in decision-making groups: The impact of members’ task-relevant status. Small Group Research, 29(1), 57–84. Zhu, H.
(2010). Group polarization on corporate boards: Theory and evidence on board decisions about acquisition premiums, executive compensation, and diversification. (Doctoral dissertation).
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.10.3 Group Decision Making 593 Ziller, R. (1957). Group size: A determinant of the quality and stability of group decision.
Sociometry, 20, 165-173. Image Descriptions Figure 10.9 Antecedents and Outcomes of Groupthink. Antecedent conditions: • Time pressures and stress • High cohesiveness and social identity • Isolation from other sources of information • Directive, authoritative leadership These conditions lead to symptoms of groupthink: • Illusions of invulnerability • Illusions of unanimity • In-group favoritism • Little search for new information • Belief in morality of the group • Pressure on dissenters to conform to group norms Eventually it results in poor decision making.
[Return to Figure 10.9]10.4 Improving Group Performance and Decision Making Learning Objectives 1. Review the ways that people can work to make group performance and decision making more effective. 2.
Explore the role of motivating people to perform better due to self-interest. 3. Outline ways to improve communication and information sharing in groups.
4. Review research on setting effective group goals. 5.
Outline the benefits of challenges of diversity in regards to group performance and decision making. As we have seen, it makes sense to use groups to make decisions because people can create outcomes working together that any one individual could not hope to accomplish alone. In addition, once a group makes a decision, the group will normally find it easier to get other people to implement it because many people feel that decisions made by groups are fairer than those made by individuals.
And yet, as we have also seen, there are also many problems associated with groups that make it difficult for them to live up to their full potential. In this section, let’s consider this issue more fully: What approaches can we use to make best use of the groups that we belong to, helping them to achieve as best as is possible? Training groups to perform more effectively is possible, if appropriate techniques are used (Salas et al., 2008).
Perhaps the first thing we need to do is to remind our group members that groups are not as effective as they sometimes seem. Group members often think that their group is being more productive than it really is, and that their own groups are particularly productive. For instance, people who participate in brainstorming groups report that they have been more productive than those who work alone, even if the group has actually not done all that well (Paulus, Dzindolet, Poletes, & Camacho, 1993; Stroebe, Diehl, & Abakoumkin, 1992).
This tendency to overvalue the level of productivity of our ingroups is known as the illusion of group effectivity. A related phenomena is the not invented here bias, which occurs when group members overvalue their own group’s ideas and products over those of other groups (Katz & Allen, 1982). There are many reasons why these biases occur.
For one, the productivity of the group as a whole is highly accessible, and this productivity generally seems quite good, at least in comparison with the contributions of single individuals. The group members hear many ideas expressed by themselves and the other group members, and this gives the impression that the group is doing very well, even if objectively it is not. And on the affective side, group members receive a lot of positive social identity from their group memberships.
These positive feelings naturally lead them to believe that the group is 595596 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making strong and performing well. Thus the illusion of group effectivity poses a severe problem for group performance, and we must work to make sure that group members are aware of it.
Just because we are working in groups does not mean that we are making good decisions or performing a task particularly well—group members, and particularly the group leader, must always monitor group performance and attempt to motivate the group to work harder. Motivating Groups to Perform Better by Appealing to Self-Interest In addition to helping group members understand the nature of group performance, we must be aware of their self-interested goals. Group members, like all other people, act at least in part for themselves.
So anything we can do to reward them for their participation or to make them enjoy being in the group more will be helpful. Perhaps the most straightforward approach to getting people to work harder in groups is to provide rewards for performance. Corporations reward their employees with raises and bonuses if they perform well, and players on sports teams are paid according to their successes on the playing field.
However, although incentives may increase the effort of the individual group members and thus enhance group performance, they also have some potential disadvantages for group process. One potential problem is that the group members will compare their own rewards with those of others. It might be hoped that individuals would use their coworkers as positive role models (upward social comparison), which would inspire them to work harder.
For instance, when corporations set up “employee of the week” programs, which reward excellence on the part of individual group members, they are attempting to develop this type of positive comparison. On the other hand, if group members believe that others are being rewarded more than they are for what they perceive as the same work (downward social comparison), they may change their behavior to attempt to restore equity. Perhaps they will attempt to work harder in order to receive greater rewards for themselves.
But they may instead decide to reduce their effort to match what they perceive as a low level of reward (Platow, O’Connell, Shave, & Hanning, 1995). It has been found, for instance, that workers who perceive that their pay is lower than it should be are more likely to be absent from work (Baron & Pfefer, 1994; Geurts, Buunk, & Schaufeli, 1994). Taken together then, incentives can have some positive effects on group performance, but they may also create their own difficulties.
But incentives do not have to be so directly financial. As we saw in our earlier discussion of social loafing, people will also work harder in groups when they feel that they are contributing to the group and that their work is visible to and valued by the other group members (Karau & Williams, 1993; Kerr & Bruun, 1983). One study (Williams, Harkins, & Latané, 1981) found that when groups of individuals were asked to cheer as loudly as they could into a microphone placed in the center of the room, social loafing occurred.
However, when each individual was given his or her own personal microphone and thus believed that his or her own input could be measured, social loafing was virtually eliminated. Thus when our contributions to the group are identifiable as our own, and particularly when we receive credit for those contributions, we feel that our performance counts, and we are less likely to loaf. It turns out that the size of the group matters in this regard.
Although larger groups are more able than smaller ones to diversify into specialized roles and activities, and this is likely to make them efficient in10.4 Improving Group Performance and Decision Making 597 some ways (Bond & Keys, 1993; Miller & Davidson-Podgorny, 1987), larger groups are also more likely to suffer from coordination problems and social loafing. The problem is that individuals in larger groups are less likely to feel that their effort is going to make a difference to the output of the group as a whole or that their contribution will be noticed and appreciated by the other group members (Kerr & Bruun, 1981). In the end, because of the difficulties that accompany large groups, the most effective working groups are of relatively small size—about four or five members.
Research suggests that in addition to being more efficient, working in groups of about this size is also more enjoyable to the members, in comparison with being in larger groups (Mullen, Symons, Hu, & Salas, 1989). However, the optimal group size will be different for different types of tasks. Groups in which the members have high ability may benefit more from larger group size (Yetton & Bottger, 1983), and groups that have greater commitment or social identity may suffer less from motivational losses, even when they are large (Hardy & Latané, 1988).
Groups will also be more effective when they develop appropriate social norms. If the group develops a strong group identity and the group members care about the ability of the group to do a good job (e.g., a cohesive sports or military team), the amount of social loafing is reduced (Harkins & Petty, 1982; Latané, Williams, & Harkins, 1979). On the other hand, some groups develop norms that prohibit members from working up to their full potential and thus encourage loafing (Mullen & Baumeister, 1987).
It is also important for the group to fully define the roles that each group member should play in the group and help the individuals accomplish these roles. Cognitive Approaches: Improving Communication and Information Sharing Even if we are successful in encouraging the group members to work hard toward the group goals, groups may fail anyway because they do not gather and share information openly. However, the likelihood of poor information search and information sharing, such as that which occurs in groupthink, can be reduced by creating situations that foster open and full discussion of the issues.
One important method of creating adequate information sharing is to ensure that the group has plenty of time to make its decision and that it is not rushed in doing so. Of course, such a luxury is not always possible, but better decisions are likely to be made when there is sufficient time. Having plenty of time prevents the group from coming to premature consensus and making an unwise choice.
Time to consider the issues fully also allows the group to gain new knowledge by seeking information and analysis from outside experts. One approach to increasing full discussion of the issues is to have the group break up into smaller subgroups for discussion. This technique increases the amount of discussion overall and allows more group members to air more ideas.
In some decision-making groups, it is standard practice to set up several independent groups that consider the same questions, each carrying on its deliberations under a separate leader; the subgroups then meet together to make the final decision. Within the group itself, conversation can be encouraged through the use of a devil’s advocate—an individual who is given the job of expressing conflicting opinions and forcing the group (in a noncombative way) to fully discuss all the alternatives. Because the opinions of the devil’s advocate challenge the group consensus and thus may hinder quick group decision making and group identity,598 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making the individual who takes the job may not be particularly popular in the group. For this reason, the group leader should formally assign the person to the role and make it clear that this role is an essential part of group functioning. The job can profitably be given to one of the most qualified group members and may sometimes rotate from person to person.
In other cases, it may be useful to invite an expert or another qualified individual who is not a regular member of the group to the decision-making meetings to give his or her input. This person should be encouraged to challenge the views of the core group. The group leader is extremely important in fostering norms of open discussion in decision-making groups.
An effective leader makes sure that he or she does not state his or her opinions early but, rather, allows the other group members to express their ideas first and encourages the presentation of contrasting positions. This allows a fuller discussion of pros and cons and prevents simple agreement by conformity. Leaders also have the ability to solicit unshared information from the group members, and they must be sure to do so, for instance, by making it clear that each member has important and unique information to share and that it is important to do so.
Leaders may particularly need to solicit and support opinions from low-status or socially anxious group members. Some decision-making groups even have a “second-chance meeting” before a final decision is made. In this final meeting, the goal is to explicitly consider alternatives and allow any lingering doubts to be expressed by group members.
One difficulty with many working groups is that once they have developed a set of plans or strategies, these plans become established social norms, and it becomes very difficult for the group to later adopt new, alternative, and perhaps better, strategies. As a result, even when the group is having difficulty performing effectively, it may nevertheless stick with its original methods; developing or reformulating strategies is much less common. The development of specific strategies that allow groups to break out of their existing patterns may be useful in these cases.
Hackman and Morris (1975) suggest that it can be helpful to have outside observers who are experts in group process provide feedback about relevant norms and encourage the groups to discuss them. In some cases, the consultation may involve restructuring the group by changing the status hierarchy, the social norms, or the group roles, for instance. These changes may help reduce conflict and increase effective communication and coordination.
Setting Appropriate Goals One aspect of planning that has been found to be strongly related to positive group performance is the setting of goals that the group uses to guide its work (Latham & Locke, 1991; Weldon & Weingart, 1993). Groups that set specific, difficult, and yet attainable goals (e.g., “Improve sales by 10% over the next six months”) are much more effective than groups that are given goals that are not very clear (e.g., “Let’s sell as much as we can!”). In addition, groups that set clear goals produce better attendance.
Goals have been found to be even more important in determining performance than are other incentives, including rewards such as praise and money. Setting goals appears to be effective because it increases member effort and expectations of success, because it improves cooperation and communication among the members, and because it produces better planning and more accurate monitoring of the group’s work. Specific goals may also result in increased commitment to the group (Locke & Latham, 1990; Weldon, Jehn, & Pradhan, 1991), and when the goals are successfully attained, there is a resulting feeling of accomplishment, group identity and pride, a commitment to the task, and a motivation to set even higher goals.
Moreover, there is at10.4 Improving Group Performance and Decision Making 599 least some evidence that it is useful to let the group choose its own goals rather than assigning goals to the group (Haslam, Wegge, & Postmes, 2009). Groups tend to select more challenging goals, and because they have set them themselves, they do not need to be convinced to accept them as appropriate. However, even assigned goals are effective as long as they are seen as legitimate and attainable (Latham, Winters, & Locke, 1994).
One potential problem associated with setting goals is that the goals may turn out to be too difficult. If the goals that are set are too high to actually be reached, or if the group perceives that they are too high even if they are not, the group may become demoralized and reduce its effort (Hinsz, 1995). Groups that are characterized by a strong social identity and a sense of group efficacy—the belief that they can accomplish the tasks given to them—have been found to perform better (Little & Madigan, 1997; Silver & Bufanio, 1996, 1997).
Fortunately, over time, groups frequently adjust their goals to be attainable. Group Member Diversity: Costs and Benefits As we have seen, most groups tend to be made up of individuals who are similar to each other. This isn’t particularly surprising because groups frequently come together as a result of common interests, values, and beliefs.
Groups also tend to recruit new members who are similar to the current members, in the sense that they have personalities, beliefs, and goals that match those of the existing members (Graves & Powell, 1995). There are some potential advantages for groups in which the members share personalities, beliefs, and values. Similarity among group members will likely help the group reach consensus on the best approaches to performing a task and may lead it to make decisions more quickly and effectively.
Groups whose members are similar in terms of their personality characteristics work better and have less conflict, probably at least in part because the members are able to communicate well and to effectively coordinate their efforts (Bond & Shiu, 1997). In some cases, a group may even ostracize or expel members who are dissimilar, and this is particularly likely when it is important that the group make a decision or finish a task quickly and the dissimilarity prevents achieving these goals (Kruglanski & Webster, 1991). Although similarity among group members may be useful in some cases, groups that are characterized by diversity among members—for instance, in terms of personalities, experiences, and abilities—might have some potential advantages (Crisp & Turner, 2011; Jackson & Joshi, 2011; van Knippenberg & Schippers, 2007).
For one, assuming that people are willing to express them, diverse interests, opinions, and goals among the group members may reduce tendencies toward conformity and groupthink. Diverse groups may also be able to take advantage of the wider range of resources, ideas, and viewpoints that diversity provides, perhaps by increasing discussion of the issues and therefore improving creative thinking. Bantel and Jackson (1989) appraised the diversity of top management teams in 199 banks and found that the greater the diversity of the team in terms of age, education, and length of time on the team, the greater the number of administrative innovations.
Diversity has also been found to increase positive attitudes among the group members and may increase group performance and creativity (Gurin, Peng, Lopez, & Nagda, 1999; McLeod, Lobel, & Cox, 1996; Nemeth, Brown, & Rogers, 2001). Thinking about our chapter case study of gender diversity in corporate board performance and decision600 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making making, men and women can often bring different perspectives to the group, and this diversity may help group performance.
In a meta-analysis of gender diversity, Wendy Wood (1987) found that there was some evidence that groups composed of both men and women tended to outperform same-sex groups (either all males or all females) at least in part because they brought different, complementary skills to the group. However, she also found that groups made up only of men performed well on tasks that involved task-oriented activities, whereas groups of women did better on tasks that involved social interaction. Thus, and again supporting the importance of the person-by-situation interaction, the congruency of members and tasks seems more important than either member characteristics or group characteristics alone.
However, although gender and ethnic diversity may have at least some benefits for groups, there are also some potential costs to diversity. Tsui, Egan, and O’Reilly (1992) found that highly diverse groups had lower cohesion and lower social identity in comparison with groups that were more homogeneous. Furthermore, if there are differences in perceived status between the members of the different ethnic or gender groups, members of the group with lower perceived status may feel that they are being treated unfairly, particularly if they feel that they do not have equal opportunities for advancement, and this may produce intergroup conflict.
Problems may also result if the number of individuals from one group is particularly small. When there are only a few (perhaps viewed by majority members as token) members of one group, these individuals may be seen and treated stereotypically by the members of the larger group (Kanter, 1977). Extreme levels of diversity can also be problematic for group process.
One difficulty is that it may be harder for diverse groups to get past the formation stage and begin to work on the task, and once they get started, it may take more time for them to make a decision. More diverse groups may also show more turnover over time (Wagner, Pfeffer, & O’Reilly, 1984), and group diversity may produce increased conflict within the group (Kim, 1988). In sum, group diversity may produce either process losses or process gains, but it is difficult to predict which will occur in any given group.
Nevertheless, depending on the type and extent of the diversities in a group, the nature of the task, and on the skills of the group leaders and group members to embrace diversity as a strength, it can often promote greater tolerance and result in a range of positive performance and decision making outcomes (Crisp & Turner, 2011; Nishii & Mayer, 2009). Key Takeaways • A variety of approaches may be taken to help groups avoid group process losses and to increase the likelihood of process gains. • It is important to help group members avoid the illusion of group effectivity and to monitor group performance.
• Providing rewards for performance may increase the effort of the individual group members, but if the rewards are not perceived as equitable, they may also lead to upward social comparison and a reduction in effort by other members. • People will work harder in groups when they feel that they are contributing to the group and that10.4 Improving Group Performance and Decision Making 601 their work is visible to and valued by the other group members. This is particularly likely in smaller groups.
• Adequate information sharing is more likely when the group has plenty of time to make its decision and is not rushed in doing so. The group leader is extremely important in fostering norms of open discussion. • Groups that set specific, difficult, and yet attainable goals have been found to be more effective than groups that are given goals that are not very clear.
• Group diversity may produce either process losses or process gains, but it is difficult to predict which will occur in any given group. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Analyze each of the following in terms of the principles discussed in this chapter.
a. In 1986, the scientists at NASA launched the space shuttle Challenger in weather that was too cold, which led to an explosion on liftoff and the death of the seven astronauts aboard. Although the scientists had debated whether or not to launch the shuttle, analyses of the decision-making process in this case found that rather than obtaining unbiased information from all the relevant individuals, many of those in the know were pressured to give a yes response for the launch.
Furthermore, the decision to launch was made as the result of a yes vote from only four of the responsible decision-makers, while the opinions of the others were ignored. In January 2003, a very similar event occurred when the space shuttle Columbia burned and crashed on re-entry into Earth’s atmosphere. Analysis of the decision making leading to this decision suggests that the NASA team members again acted in isolation, again without fully considering the knowledge and opinions of all the team members, and again with disastrous consequences.
b. John, Sarah, Billy, and Warren were assigned to work on a group project for their psychology class. However, they never really made much progress on it.
It seemed as if each of them was waiting for the other person to call a meeting. They finally met a couple of days before the paper was due, but nobody seemed to do much work on it. In the end, they didn’t get a very good grade.
They realized that they might have done better if they had each worked alone on the project. 2. Think of a time when you were working on a group project that did not seem to be going very well.
Based on the research covered in this section, what techniques might you use to motivate the group to do better? 3. Consider a time when you experienced a process gain in a group.
To what extent do you think that the gain was real, versus an illusion of group effectivity and why? 4. What advantages and challenges have you noticed when working in diverse groups?
Based on the research outlined in this section, why do you think that some groups are better able to harness the benefits of diversity and to achieve higher performance?602 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making References Bantel, K. A., & Jackson, S.
E. (1989). Top management and innovations in banking: Does the composition of the top team make a difference?
Strategy Management Journal, 10(S1), 107–124. Baron, J., & Pfefer, J. (1994).
The social psychology of organizations and inequality. Social Psychology Quarterly, 57(3), 190–209. Bond, M.
A., & Keys, C. B. (1993).
Empowerment, diversity, and collaboration: Promoting synergy on community boards. American Journal of Community Psychology, 21, 37–57. Bond, M.
H., & Shiu, W. Y.-F. (1997).
The relationship between a group’s personality resources and the two dimensions of its group process. Small Group Research, 28(2), 194–217. Crisp, R.
J., & Turner, R. N. (2011).
Cognitive adaptation to the experience of social and cultural diversity. Psychological Bulletin, 137(2), 242–266. doi: 10.1037/a002184.
Geurts, S. A., Buunk, B. P., & Schaufeli, W.
B. (1994). Social comparisons and absenteeism: A structural modeling approach.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24(21), 1871–1890. Graves, L. M., & Powell, G.
M. (1995). The effect of sex similarity on recruiters’ evaluations of actual applicants: A test of the similarity-attraction paradigm.
Personnel Psychology, 48, 85–98. Gurin, P., Peng, T., Lopez, G., & Nagda, B. A.
(1999). Context, identity, and intergroup relations. In D.
A. Prentice & D. T.
Miller (Eds.), Cultural divides: Understanding and overcoming group conflict (pp. 133–170). New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hackman, J., & Morris, C. (1975). Group tasks, group interaction processes, and group performance effectiveness: A review and proposed integration.
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 8, pp.
45–99). New York, NY: Academic Press. Hardy, C.
J., & Latané, B. (1988). Social loafing in cheerleaders: Effects of team membership and competition.
Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 10(1), 109–114. Harkins, S. G., & Petty, R.
E. (1982). Effects of task difficulty and task uniqueness on social loafing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43(6), 1214–1229. Haslam, S. A., Wegge, J., & Postmes, T.
(2009). Are we on a learning curve or a treadmill? The benefits of participative group goal setting become apparent as tasks become increasingly challenging over time.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 39(3), 430–446. Hinsz, V. B.
(1995). Goal setting by groups performing an additive task: A comparison with individual goal setting. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 25(11), 965–990.
Jackson, S. E., & Joshi, A. (2011).
Work team diversity. In S. Zedeck (Ed.), APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology, Vol 1: Building and developing the organization.
(pp. 651–686). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Kanter, R. M. (1977).
Some effects of proportions on group life: Skewed sex ratios and responses to token women. American Journal of Sociology, 82, 965–990. Karau, S.
J., & Williams, K. D. (1993).
Social loafing: A meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(4), 681–706. Katz, R.
and T.J. Allen (1982). Investigating the Not-Invented-Here (NIH) Syndrome: A look at the10.4 Improving Group Performance and Decision Making 603 performance, tenure and communication patterns of 50 R&D project groups.
R&D Management, 12, 7-19. Kerr, N. L., & Bruun, S.
E. (1981). Ringelmann revisited: Alternative explanations for the social loafing effect.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7(2), 224–231. Kerr, N. L., & Bruun, S.
E. (1983). Dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses: Free-rider effects.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 78–94. Kim, Y. Y.
(1988). Communication and cross cultural adaptation: A stereotype challenging theory. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M.
(1991). Group members’ reactions to opinion deviates and conformists at varying degrees of proximity to decision deadline and of environmental noise. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 212–225.
Latané, B., Williams, K., & Harkins, S. (1979). Many hands make light the work: The causes and consequences of social loafing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(6), 822–832. Latham, G. P., & Locke, E.
A. (1991). Self-regulation through goal setting.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 212–247. Latham, G. P., Winters, D.
C., & Locke, E. A. (1994).
Cognitive and motivational effects of participation: A mediator study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15(1), 49–63. Little, B.
L., & Madigan, R. M. (1997).
The relationship between collective efficacy and performance in manufacturing work teams. Small Group Research, 28(4), 517–534. Locke, E., & Latham, G.
(1990). A theory of goal setting and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
McLeod, P. L., Lobel, S. A., & Cox, T.
H. (1996). Ethnic diversity and creativity in small groups.
Small Group Research, 27(2), 248–264. Miller, N., & Davidson-Podgorny, G. (1987).
Theoretical models of intergroup relations and the use of cooperative teams as an intervention for desegregated settings in Review of Personality and Social Psychology. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Mullen, B., & Baumeister, R.
F. (1987). Group effects on self-attention and performance: Social loafing, social facilitation, and social impairment.
In C. Hendrick (Ed.), Group processes and intergroup relations (pp. 189–206).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Mullen, B., Symons, C., Hu, L.-T., & Salas, E. (1989).
Group size, leadership behavior, and subordinate satisfaction. Journal of General Psychology, 116(2), 155–170. Nemeth, C., Brown, K., & Rogers, J.
(2001). Devil’s advocate versus authentic dissent: Stimulating quantity and quality. European Journal of Social Psychology, 31(6), 707–720.
doi: 10.1002/ejsp.58. Nishii, L. H., & Mayer, D.
M. (2009). Do inclusive leaders help to reduce turnover in diverse groups?
The moderating role of leader–member exchange in the diversity to turnover relationship. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(6), 1412–1426. doi: 10.1037/a0017190.
Paulus, P. B., Dzindolet, M. T., Poletes, G., & Camacho, L.
M. (1993). Perception of performance in group brainstorming: The illusion of group productivity.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19(1), 78–89. Platow, M. J., O’Connell, A., Shave, R., & Hanning, P.
(1995). Social evaluations of fair and unfair604 Chapter 10. Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making allocators in interpersonal and intergroup situations.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 34(4), 363–381. Salas, E., Diaz-Granados, D., Klein, C., Burke, C. S., Stagl, K.
C., Goodwin, G. F., & Halpin, S. M.
(2008). Does team training improve team performance? A meta-analysis.
Human Factors, 50(6), 903–933. Silver, W. S., & Bufanio, K.
M. (1996). The impact of group efficacy and group goals on group task performance.
Small Group Research, 27(3), 347–359. Silver, W. S., & Bufanio, K.
M. (1997). Reciprocal relationships, causal influences, and group efficacy: A reply to Kaplan.
Small Group Research, 28(4), 559–562. Stroebe, W., Diehl, M., & Abakoumkin, G. (1992).
The illusion of group effectivity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18(5), 643–650. Tsui, A.
S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. A.
(1992). Being different: Relational demography and organizational attachment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37(4), 549–579.
van Knippenberg, D., & Schippers, M. C. (2007).
Work group diversity. Annual Review of Psychology, 58(1), 515–541. Wagner, W., Pfeffer, J., & O’Reilly, C.
I. (1984). Organizational demography and turnover in top management groups.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 74–92. Weldon, E., & Weingart, L. R.
(1993). Group goals and group performance. British Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 307–334.
Weldon, E., Jehn, K. A., & Pradhan, P. (1991).
Processes that mediate the relationship between a group goal and improved group performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(4), 555–569. Williams, K., Harkins, S.
G., & Latané, B. (1981). Identifiability as a deterrant to social loafing: Two cheering experiments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40(2), 303–311. Wood, W. (1987).
Meta-analytic review of sex differences in group performance. Psychological Bulletin, 102(1), 53–71. doi: 10.1037/0033–2909.102.1.53.
Yetton, P., & Bottger, P. (1983). The relationships among group size, member ability, social decision schemes, and performance.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 32(2), 145–159.10.5 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Social Groups This chapter has looked at the ways in which small working groups come together to perform tasks and make decisions. In particular, we have taken a close look at some of the advantages and disadvantages of collective versus solo performance. Although groups can perform many tasks well, and although people like to use groups to make decisions, they also often come with their own problems.
Since you are likely to spend time working with others in small groups—almost everyone does—hopefully you can now see how groups can succeed and how they can fail. Will you use your new knowledge about social groups to help you be a more effective group member and to help the groups you work in become more effective? Because you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will realize that group performance and decision making are partly determined by the personalities of the members.
But you also know that this is not enough and that group productivity and decision making are also influenced by what happens in the group itself. For example, groups may become too sure of themselves, and too attached to the social identity the group brings, to the detriment of looking at others’ perspectives. They may also experience strong conformity pressures, making it difficult for them to hear their individual voices and differences.
Can you now see the many ways that you—either as a group member or as a group leader—can help prevent these negative outcomes? Your value as a group member will increase when you make use of your knowledge about groups. You now have many ideas about how to recognize phenomena like social loafing, groupthink, and group polarization when they occur and how to prevent them.
And you can now see how important group discussion is. When you are in a group, you must work to get the group to talk about the topics fully, even if the group members feel that they have already done enough. Groups think that they are doing better than they really are, and you must work to help them overcome this overconfidence.
60510.6 Chapter Summary We started out this chapter by looking at how groups are defined and perceived. One determinant of the perception of a group is a cognitive one—the perception of similarity. A group can only be a group to the extent that its members have something in common.
A group also has more entitativity when the group members have frequent interaction and communication with each other. Interaction is particularly important when it is accompanied by interdependence—the extent to which the group members are mutually dependent upon each other to reach a goal. A group that develops group structure is also more likely to be seen as a group.
The affect that we have toward the group we belong to—social identity—also helps to create an experience of a group. Most groups pass through a series of stages—forming, storming, norming and performing, and adjourning—during their time together. Because groups consist of many members, group performance is often better, and group decisions generally more accurate, than that of any individual acting alone.
On the other hand, there are also costs to working in groups—we call them process losses. A variety of research has found that the presence of others can create social facilitation—an increase in task performance—on many types of tasks. However, the presence of others sometimes creates poorer individual performance—social inhibition.
According to Robert Zajonc’s explanation for the difference, when we are with others, we experience more arousal than we do when we are alone, and this arousal increases the likelihood that we will perform the dominant response—the action that we are most likely to emit in any given situation. Although the arousal model proposed by Zajonc is perhaps the most elegant, other explanations have also been proposed to account for social facilitation and social inhibition. We can compare the potential productivity of the group—that is, what the group should be able to do, given its membership—with the actual productivity of the group by use of the following formula: actual productivity = potential productivity − process loss + process gain.
The actual productivity of a group is based in part on the member characteristics of the group—the relevant traits, skills, or abilities of the individual group members. But group performance is also influenced by situational variables, such as the type of task needed to be performed. Tasks vary in terms of whether they can be divided into smaller subtasks or not, whether the group performance on the task is dependent on the abilities of the best or the worst member of the group, what specific product the group is creating, and whether there is an objectively correct decision for the task.
Process losses are caused by events that occur within the group that make it difficult for the group to live up to its full potential. They occur in part as a result of coordination losses that occur when people work together and in part because people do not work as hard in a group as they do when they are alone—social loafing. In terms of decision making, we reviewed many reasons why groups can and often do make better choices than individuals, for example, due to their wider knowledge base, their superior collective and 607608 Chapter 10.
Working Groups: Performance and Decision Making transactive memories, and their greater ability to spot and correct mistakes. However, we also saw a number of phenomena illustrating when and how groups can make poorer decisions than individuals. One such group process that can lead to very poor group decisions is groupthink.
Groupthink occurs when a group, which is made up of members who may actually be very competent and thus quite capable of making excellent decisions, nevertheless ends up making a poor decision as a result of a flawed group process and strong conformity pressures. And process losses also occur because group members tend to the shared information bias, which is a tendency to discuss information that they all have access to while ignoring equally important information that is available to only a few of the members. One technique that is frequently used to produce creative decisions in working groups is brainstorming.
However, as a result of social loafing, evaluation apprehension, and production blocking, brainstorming also often creates a process loss in groups. Approaches to brainstorming that reduce production blocking, such as group support systems, can be successful. Group polarization occurs when the attitudes held by the individual group members become more extreme than they were before the group began discussing the topic.
Group polarization is the result of both cognitive and affective factors. Group members frequently overvalue the productivity of their group—the illusion of group effectivity. This occurs because the productivity of the group as a whole is highly accessible and because the group experiences high social identity.
Thus groups must be motivated to work harder and to realize that their positive feelings may lead them to overestimate their worth. Perhaps the most straightforward approach to getting people to work harder in groups is to provide rewards for performance. This approach is frequently, but not always, successful.
People also work harder in groups when they feel that they are contributing to the group and that their work is visible to and valued by the other group members. Groups are also more effective when they develop appropriate social norms—for instance, norms about sharing information. Information is more likely to be shared when the group has plenty of time to make its decision.
The group leader is extremely important in fostering norms of open discussion. One aspect of planning that has been found to be strongly related to positive group performance is the setting of goals that the group uses to guide its work. Groups that set specific, difficult, and yet attainable goals perform better.
In terms of group diversity, there are both pluses and minuses. Although diverse groups may have some advantages, the groups—and particularly the group leaders—must work to create a positive experience for the group members. Your new knowledge about working groups can help you in your everyday life.
When you find yourself in a working group, be sure to use this information to become a more effective group member and to make the groups you work in more productive.Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Social Categorization and Stereotyping ◦ Describe the fundamental process of social categorization and its influence on thoughts, feelings, and behavior.
◦ Define stereotypes and describe the ways that stereotypes are measured. ◦ Review the ways that stereotypes influence our behavior. 2.
Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice ◦ Review the causes and outcomes of ingroup favoritism. ◦ Summarize the results of Henri Tajfel’s research on minimal groups. ◦ Outline the personality and cultural variables that influence ingroup favoritism.
3. Reducing Discrimination ◦ Review the causes of discrimination and the ways that we can reduce it. ◦ Summarize the conditions under which intergroup contact does or does not reduce prejudice and discrimination.
609610 Dr. Hammond Tarry State-Sanctioned Homophobia Figure 11.1 LGBT activists are attacked during an action “Day of Kisses” against a homophobic bill in Moscow. In recent years, the Russian government has enacted a series of laws designed to target members of its LGBT (lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender) community.
These include forcing LGBT organizations to register as “foreign agents,” banning depictions of homosexuality (including carrying rainbow flags) in front of young people, and denying permission to LGBT groups wanting to organize gay pride parades. Unfortunately, homophobic attitudes and even violence are not uncommon in Russian society. For example, groups such as Occupy Gerontilyaj have been known to lure and then beat and torture gay teenagers.
In 2012, a video that surfaced online showed six members of another far-right-wing organization torturing a young man who later died, according to the Spectrum Human Rights Alliance (a group that advocated for LGBT rights in Eastern Europe). The tone of some of the Russian media reflects these attitudes. For instance, the LGBT community are portrayed as an “aggressive minority” whose children have venereal disease, and, in 2012, a well- known news anchor recommended on air that the hearts of victims of car accidents that happen to be homosexual “should be buried or burnt as unfit for prolonging anybody’s life.” In recent years, several commentators have drawn parallels between Russia’s persecution of its LGBT community and the treatment of the Jewish community by the Nazi regime in the years leading up to the Holocaust.
In 2014, public figures around the world called for a boycott (unsuccessfully) of the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi, arguing that the language of the Olympic Charter explicitly denounces all forms of discrimination. Ultimately, the Winter Olympic Games went ahead as planned, although athletes and Olympic tourists alike were warned against promoting “non-traditional sexual relations.”Principles of Social Psychology 611 Sources: Homophobia spreads in Russian media Homophobia in Russia Is Taking a Kafkaesque Turn Russia: the Next Third Reich? Contemporary increases in globalization and immigration are leading to more culturally diverse populations in many countries.
These changes will create many benefits for society and for the individuals within it. Gender, cultural, sexual orientation, and ethnic diversity can improve creativity and group performance, facilitate new ways of looking at problems, and allow multiple viewpoints on decisions (Cunningham, 2011; Mannix & Neale, 2005; van Knippenberg & Schippers, 2007). On the other hand, as we have seen in many places in this book, perceived similarity is an extremely important determinant of liking.
Members of culturally diverse groups may be less attracted to each other than are members of more homogeneous groups, may have more difficulty communicating with each other, and in some cases may actively dislike and even engage in aggressive behavior toward each other. The principles of social psychology, including the ABCs—affect, behavior, and cognition—apply to the study of stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination, and social psychologists have expended substantial research efforts studying these concepts (Figure 11.2). The cognitive component in our perceptions of group members is the stereotype—the positive or negative beliefs that we hold about the characteristics of social group.
We may decide that “French people are romantic,” that “old people are incompetent,” or that “college professors are absent minded.” And we may use those beliefs to guide our actions toward people from those groups. In addition to our stereotypes, we may also develop prejudice—an unjustifiable negative attitude toward an outgroup or toward the members of that outgroup. Prejudice can take the form of disliking, anger, fear, disgust, discomfort, and even hatred—the kind of affective states that can lead to behavior such as the gay bashing you just read about.
Our stereotypes and our prejudices are problematic because they may create discrimination—unjustified negative behaviors toward members of outgroups based on their group membership. Although violence against members of outgroups is fortunately rare, stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination nevertheless influence people’s lives in a variety of ways. Stereotypes influence our academic performance (Shapiro & Neuberg, 2007), the careers that we chose to follow (Zhang, Schmader, & Forbes, 2009), our experiences at work (Fiske & Lee, 2008), and the amount that we are paid for the work that we do (Jackson, 2011; Wood & Eagly, 2010).612 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Figure 11.2 Relationships among social groups are influenced by the ABCs of social psychology. Stereotypes and prejudice have a pervasive and often pernicious influence on our responses to others, and also in some cases on our own behaviors. To take one example, social psychological research has found that our stereotypes may in some cases lead to stereotype threat—performance decrements that are caused by the knowledge of cultural stereotypes.
Spencer, Steele, and Quinn (1999) found that when women were reminded of the (untrue) stereotype that “women are poor at math,” they performed more poorly on math tests than when they were not reminded of the stereotype, and other research has found stereotype threat in many other domains as well. We’ll consider the role of stereotype threat in more detail later in this chapter. In one particularly disturbing line of research about the influence of prejudice on behaviors, Joshua Correll and his colleagues had White participants participate in an experiment in which they viewed photographs of White and Black people on a computer screen.
Across the experiment, the photographs showed the people holding either a gun or something harmless such as a cell phone. The participants were asked to decide as quickly as possible to press a button to “shoot” if the target held a weapon but to “not shoot” if the person did not hold a weapon. Overall, the White participants tended to shoot more often when the person holding the object was Black than when the person holding the object was White, and this occurred even when there was no weapon present (Correll, Park, Judd, & Wittenbrink, 2007; Correll et al., 2007).Principles of Social Psychology 613 Discrimination is a major societal problem because it is so pervasive, takes so many forms, and has such negative effects on so many people.
Even people who are paid to be unbiased may discriminate. Price and Wolfers (2007) found that White players in National Basketball Association games received fewer fouls when more of the referees present in the game were White, and Black players received fewer fouls when more of the referees present in the game where Black. The implication is—whether they know it or not—the referees were discriminating on the basis of race.
You may have had some experiences where you found yourself responding to another person on the basis of a stereotype or a prejudice, and perhaps the fact that you did surprised you. Perhaps you then tried to get past these beliefs and to react to the person more on the basis of his or her individual characteristics. We like some people and we dislike others—this is natural—but we should not let a person’s skin color, gender, age, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnic background make these determinations for us.
And yet, despite our best intentions, we may end up making friends only with people who are similar to us and perhaps even avoiding people whom we see as different. In this chapter, we will study the processes by which we develop, maintain, and make use of our stereotypes and our prejudices. We will consider the negative outcomes of those beliefs on the targets of our perceptions, and we will consider ways that we might be able to change those beliefs, or at least help us stop acting upon them.
Let’s begin by considering the cognitive side of our group beliefs—focusing primarily on stereotypes—before turning to the important role of feelings in prejudice.614 Dr. Hammond Tarry Figure 11.3 Do you have stereotypes about any of these people?Principles of Social Psychology 615 References Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C. M., & Wittenbrink, B.
(2007). The influence of stereotypes on decisions to shoot. European Journal of Social Psychology, 37(6), 1102–1117.
Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C. M., Wittenbrink, B., Sadler, M. S., & Keesee, T.
(2007). Across the thin blue line: Police officers and racial bias in the decision to shoot. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1006–1023.
Cunningham, G. B. (2011).
The LGBT advantage: Examining the relationship among sexual orientation diversity, diversity strategy, and performance. Sport Management Review, 14(4), 453-461. Fiske, S.
T., & Lee, T. L. (2008).
Stereotypes and prejudice create workplace discrimination. In A. P.
Brief (Ed.), Diversity at work (pp. 13–52).Jackson, L. M.
(2011). The psychology of prejudice: From attitudes to social action. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Jackson, L. M. (2011).
The psychology of prejudice: From attitudes to social action. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Mannix, E., & Neale, M. A.
(2005). What differences make a difference? The promise and reality of diverse teams in organizations.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 6(2), 31–55. Price, J., & Wolfers, J. (2007).
Racial discrimination among NBA referees. NBER Working Paper #13206. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Shapiro, J. R., & Neuberg, S. L.
(2007). From stereotype threat to stereotype threats: Implications of a multi-threat framework for causes, moderators, mediators, consequences, and interventions. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11(2), 107–130.
doi: 10.1177/ 1088868306294790. Spencer, S. J., Steele, C.
M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999).
Stereotype threat and women’s math performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 4–28. van Knippenberg, D., & Schippers, M.
C. (2007). Work group diversity.
Annual Review of Psychology, 58(1), 515–541. Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H.
(2010). Gender. In S.
T. Fiske, D. T.
Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp.
629–667). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Zhang, S., Schmader, T., & Forbes, C.
(2009). The effects of gender stereotypes on women’s career choice: Opening the glass door. In M.
Barreto, M. K. Ryan, & M.
T. Schmitt (Eds.), The glass ceiling in the 21st century: Understanding barriers to gender equality (pp. 125–150).
Media Attributions • “LGBT activists were attacked during an action “Day of Kisses” against a homophobic bill in Moscow” by Roma Yandolin is licensed under a CC BY-SA 2.0 licence. • “Women with baby – Sanaa_H8O9429-33” by Francesco Veronesi is licensed under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 licence.616 Dr. Hammond Tarry • “Body art” by kk+ is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “Ashs-students-studying” by Mosborne01 is licensed under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence. • “Wheel Chair” by christine.gleason is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 licence.11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping Learning Objectives 1. Describe the fundamental process of social categorization and its influence on thoughts, feelings, and behavior.
2. Define stereotypes and describe the ways that stereotypes are measured. 3.
Review the ways that stereotypes influence our behavior. Thinking about others in terms of their group memberships is known as social categorization—the natural cognitive process by which we place individuals into social groups. Social categorization occurs when we think of someone as a man (versus a woman), an old person (versus a young person), a Black person (versus an Asian or White person), and so on (Allport, 1954/1979).
Just as we categorize objects into different types, so do we categorize people according to their social group memberships. Once we do so, we begin to respond to those people more as members of a social group than as individuals. Imagine for a moment that two college students, Farhad and Sarah, are talking at a table in the student union at your college or university.
At this point, we would probably not consider them to be acting as group members, but rather as two individuals. Farhad is expressing his opinions, and Sarah is expressing hers. Imagine, however, that as the conversation continues, Sarah brings up an assignment that she is completing for her women’s studies class.
It turns out that Farhad does not think there should be a women’s studies program at the college, and he tells Sarah so. He argues that if there is a women’s studies program, then there should be a men’s studies program too. Furthermore, he argues that women are getting too many breaks in job hiring and that qualified men are the targets of discrimination.
Sarah feels quite the contrary—arguing that women have been the targets of sexism for many, many years and even now do not have the same access to high-paying jobs that men do. You can see that an interaction that began at individual level, as two individuals conversing, has now turned to the group level, in which Farhad has begun to consider himself as a man, and Sarah has begun to consider herself as a woman. In short, Sarah is now arguing her points not so much for herself as she is as a representative of one of her ingroups—namely, women—and Farhad is acting as a representative of one of his ingroups—namely, men.
Sarah feels that her positions are correct, and she believes they are true not only for her but for women in general. And the same is true of Farhad. You can see that these social categorizations may create some potential for misperception, and perhaps even hostility.
And Farhad and Sarah may even change their opinions about each other, forgetting that they really like each other as individuals, because they are now responding more as group members with opposing views. 617618 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Imagine now that while Farhad and Sarah are still talking, some students from another college, each wearing the hats and jackets of that school, show up in the student union.
The presence of these outsiders might change the direction of social categorization entirely, leading both Farhad and Sarah to think of themselves as students at their own college. And this social categorization might lead them to become more aware of the positive characteristics of their college (the excellent rugby team, lovely campus, and intelligent students) in comparison with the characteristics of the other school. Now, rather than perceiving themselves as members of two different groups (men versus women), Farhad and Sarah might suddenly perceive themselves as members of the same social category (students at their college).
Perhaps this example will help you see the flexibility of social categorization. We sometimes think of our relationships with others at the individual level and sometimes at the group level. And which groups we use in social categorization can change over time and in different situations.
You are more likely to categorize yourself as a member of your college or university when your rugby or football team has just won a really important game, or at your graduation ceremony, than you would on a normal evening out with your family. In these cases, your membership as a university student is simply more salient and important than it is every day, and you are more likely to categorize yourself accordingly. Spontaneous Social Categorization Social categorization occurs spontaneously, without much thought on our part (Crisp & Hewstone, 2007).
Shelley Taylor and her colleagues (Taylor, Fiske, Etcoff, & Ruderman, 1978) showed their research participants a slide and tape presentation of three male and three female college students who had supposedly participated in a discussion group. During the presentation, each member of the discussion group made a suggestion about how to advertise a college play. The statements were controlled so that across all the research participants, the statements made by the men and the women were of equal length and quality.
Furthermore, one half of the participants were told that when the presentation was over, they would be asked to remember which person had made which suggestion, whereas the other half of the participants were told merely to observe the interaction without attending to anything in particular. After they had viewed all the statements made by the individuals in the discussion group, the research participants were given a memory test (this was entirely unexpected for the participants who had not been given memory instructions). The participants were shown the list of all the statements that had been made, along with the pictures of each of the discussion group members, and were asked to indicate who had made each of the statements.
The research participants were not very good at this task, and yet when they made mistakes, these errors were very systematic. As you can see in Table 11.1, “Name Confusions,” the mistakes were such that the statements that had actually been made by a man were more frequently wrongly attributed to another man in the group than to another woman, and the statements actually made by a woman were more frequently attributed to other women in the group than to a man. The participants evidently categorized the speakers by their gender, leading them to make more within-gender than across-gender confusions.
Interestingly, and suggesting that categorization is occurring all the time, the instructions that the participants had been given made absolutely no difference. There was just as much categorization for11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 619 those who were not given any instructions as for those who were told to remember who said what. Other research using this technique has found that we spontaneously categorize each other on the basis of many other group memberships, including race, academic status (student versus teacher), social roles, and other social categories (Fiske, Haslam, & Fiske, 1991; Stangor, Lynch, Duan, & Glass, 1992).
Table 11.1 Name Confusions Instructions Within race errors Between race errors Memory 5.78 4.29 No memory 6.57 4.36 Taylor, Fiske, Etcoff, and Ruderman (1978)Taylor, S. E., Fiske, S. T., Etcoff, N.
L., & Ruderman, A. J. (1978).
Categorical and contextual bases of person memory and stereotyping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(7), 778–793. demonstrated that people categorized others spontaneously.
Even without any instructions to categorize, people nevertheless confused others by their sex. The conclusion is simple, if perhaps obvious: Social categorization is occurring all around us all the time. Indeed, social categorization occurs so quickly that people may have difficulty not thinking about others in terms of their group memberships (see Figure 11.4).
Figure 11.4 If you are like most people, you will have a strong desire to categorize this person as either male or female. The Benefits of Social Categorization The tendency to categorize others is often quite useful. In some cases, we categorize because doing so620 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination provides us with information about the characteristics of people who belong to certain social groups (Lee, Jussim, & McCauley, 1995). If you found yourself lost in a city, you might look for a police officer or a taxi driver to help you find your way. In this case, social categorization would probably be useful because a police officer or a taxi driver might be particularly likely to know the layout of the city streets.
Of course, using social categories will only be informative to the extent that the stereotypes held by the individual about that category are accurate. If police officers were actually not that knowledgeable about the city layout, then using this categorization heuristic would not be informative. The description of social categorization as a heuristic is also true in another sense: we sometimes categorize others not because it seems to provide more information about them but because we may not have the time (or the motivation) to do anything more thorough.
Using our stereotypes to size up another person might simply make our life easier (Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 1994). According to this approach, thinking about other people in terms of their social category memberships is a functional way of dealing with the world—things are complicated, and we reduce complexity by relying on our stereotypes. The Negative Outcomes of Social Categorization Although thinking about others in terms of their social category memberships has some potential benefits for the person who does the categorizing, categorizing others, rather than treating them as unique individuals with their own unique characteristics, has a wide variety of negative, and often very unfair, outcomes for those who are categorized.
One problem is that social categorization distorts our perceptions such that we tend to exaggerate the differences between people from different social groups while at the same time perceiving members of groups (and particularly outgroups) as more similar to each other than they actually are. This overgeneralization makes it more likely that we will think about and treat all members of a group the same way. Tajfel and Wilkes (1963) performed a simple experiment that provided a picture of the potential outcomes of categorization.
As you can see in Figure 11.5, “Perceptual Accentuation,” the experiment involved having research participants judge the length of six lines. In one of the experimental conditions, participants simply saw six lines, whereas in the other condition, the lines were systematically categorized into two groups—one comprising the three shorter lines and one comprising the three longer lines.11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 621 Figure 11.5 Perceptual Accentuation Lines C and D were seen as the same length in the noncategorized condition, but line C was perceived as longer than line D when the lines were categorized into two groups. From Tajfel (1970).
Tajfel found that the lines were perceived differently when they were categorized, such that the differences between the groups and the similarities within the groups were emphasized. Specifically, he found that although lines C and D (which are actually the same length) were perceived as equal in length when the lines were not categorized, line D was perceived as being significantly longer than line C in the condition in which the lines were categorized. In this case, categorization into two groups—the “short lines group” and the “long lines group”—produced a perceptual bias such that the two groups of lines were seen as more different than they really were.
Similar effects occur when we categorize other people. We tend to see people who belong to the same social group as more similar than they actually are, and we tend to judge people from different social622 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination groups as more different than they actually are.
The tendency to see members of social groups as similar to each other is particularly strong for members of outgroups, resulting in outgroup homogeneity—the tendency to view members of outgroups as more similar to each other than we see members of ingroups (Linville, Salovey, & Fischer, 1986; Ostrom & Sedikides, 1992; Meissner & Brigham, 2001). Perhaps you have had this experience yourself when you found yourself thinking or saying, “Oh, them, they’re all the same!” Patricia Linville and Edward Jones (1980) gave research participants a list of trait terms and asked them to think about either members of their own group (e.g., Blacks) or members of another group (e.g., Whites) and to place the trait terms into piles that represented different types of people in the group. The results of these studies, as well as other studies like them, were clear: people perceive outgroups as more homogeneous than their ingroup.
Just as White people used fewer piles of traits to describe Blacks than Whites, young people used fewer piles of traits to describe elderly people than they did young people, and students used fewer piles for members of other universities than they did for members of their own university. Outgroup homogeneity occurs in part because we don’t have as much contact with outgroup members as we do with ingroup members, and the quality of interaction with outgroup members is often more superficial. This prevents us from really learning about the outgroup members as individuals, and as a result, we tend to be unaware of the differences among the group members.
In addition to learning less about them because we see and interact with them less, we routinely categorize outgroup members, thus making them appear more cognitively similar (Haslam, Oakes, & Turner, 1996). Once we begin to see the members of outgroups as more similar to each other than they actually are, it then becomes very easy to apply our stereotypes to the members of the groups without having to consider whether the characteristic is actually true of the particular individual. If men think that women are all alike, then they may also think that they all have the same positive and negative characteristics (e.g., they’re nurturing, emotional).
And women may have similarly simplified beliefs about men (e.g., they’re strong, unwilling to commit). The outcome is that the stereotypes become linked to the group itself in a set of mental representations (Figure 11.6). The stereotypes are “pictures in our heads” of the social groups (Lippman, 1922).
These beliefs just seem right and natural, even though they are frequently distorted overgeneralizations (Hirschfeld, 1996; Yzerbyt, Schadron, Leyens, & Rocher, 1994).11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 623 Figure 11.6 Stereotypes. Stereotypes are the beliefs associated with social categories. The figure shows links between the social category of college professors and its stereotypes as a type of neural network or schema.
The representation also includes one image (or exemplar) of a particular college professor whom the student knows. Image courtesy of Dan Gilbert. Our stereotypes and prejudices are learned through many different processes.
This multiplicity of causes is unfortunate because it makes stereotypes and prejudices even more likely to form and harder to change. For one, we learn our stereotypes in part through our communications with parents and peers (Aboud & Doyle, 1996) and from the behaviors we see portrayed in the media (Brown, 1995). Even five-year-old children have learned cultural norms about the appropriate activities and behaviors for boys and girls and also have developed stereotypes about age, race, and physical attractiveness (Bigler & Liben, 2006).
And there is often good agreement about the stereotypes of social categories among the individuals within a given culture. In one study assessing stereotypes, Stephanie Madon and her colleagues (Madon et al., 2001) presented U.S. college students with a list of 84 trait terms and asked them to indicate for which groups each trait seemed appropriate (Figure 11.7, “Current Stereotypes Held by College Students”).
The participants tended to agree about what traits were true of which groups, and this was true even for groups of which the respondents were likely to never have met a single member (Arabs and Russians). Even today, there is good agreement about the stereotypes of members of many social groups, including men and women and a variety of ethnic groups.624 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Figure 11.7 Current Stereotypes Held by College Students, from Madon et al.
(2001). Americans Blacks Italians Germans Jews Chinese Materialistic Loyal to family Intelligent Very religious Intelligent Musical 27.6% 53.6% ties 62.7% 45.8% 52.5% 60.3% Pleasure loving Tradition loving Industrious Intelligent Loyal to family Lazy 30.4% 26% 47.5% 37.3% 49.2% ties 41.4% Individualistic Nationalistic Tradition loving Loud 20.7% Passionate 39% Reserved 36.2% 28.6% 30.5% 32.2% Pleasure loving Aggressive Scientifically Industrious Religious 37.3% Shrewd 30.5% 28% 15.5% minded 27.1% 32.8% Industrious Quick tempered Methodical Loyal to family Tradition loving Artistic 13.8% 23.2% 35.6% 20.3% ties 28.8% 31% Once they become established, stereotypes (like any other cognitive representation) tend to persevere. We begin to respond to members of stereotyped categories as if we already knew what they were like.
Yaacov Trope and Eric Thompson (1997) found that individuals addressed fewer questions to members of categories about which they had strong stereotypes (as if they already knew what these people were like) and that the questions they did ask were likely to confirm the stereotypes they already had. In other cases, stereotypes are maintained because information that confirms our stereotypes is better remembered than information that disconfirms them. When we see members of social groups perform behaviors, we tend to better remember information that confirms our stereotypes than we remember information that disconfirms our stereotypes (Fyock & Stangor, 1994).
If we believe that women are bad drivers and we see a woman driving poorly, then we tend to remember it, but when we see a woman who drives particularly well, we tend to forget it. This illusory correlation is another example of the general principle of assimilation—we tend to perceive the world in ways that make it fit our existing beliefs more easily than we change our beliefs to fit the reality around us. And stereotypes become difficult to change because they are so important to us—they become an integral and important part of our everyday lives in our culture.
Stereotypes are frequently expressed on TV, in movies, and in social media, and we learn a lot of our beliefs from these sources. Our friends also tend to hold beliefs similar to ours, and we talk about these beliefs when we get together with them (Schaller & Conway, 1999). In short, stereotypes and prejudice are powerful largely because they are important social norms that are part of our culture (Guimond, 2000).
Because they are so highly cognitively accessible, and because they seem so “right,” our stereotypes easily influence our judgments of and responses to those we have categorized. The social psychologist John Bargh once described stereotypes as “cognitive monsters” because their activation was so powerful and because the activated beliefs had such insidious influences on social judgment (Bargh, 1999). Making things even more difficult, stereotypes are strongest for the people who are in most need of change—the people who are most prejudiced (Lepore & Brown, 1997).
Because stereotypes and prejudice often operate out of our awareness, and also because people are frequently unwilling to admit that they hold them, social psychologists have developed methods for11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 625 assessing them indirectly. In the Research Focus box following, we will consider two of these approaches—the bogus pipeline procedure and the Implicit Association Test (IAT). Research Focus Measuring Stereotypes Indirectly One difficulty in measuring stereotypes and prejudice is that people may not tell the truth about their beliefs.
Most people do not want to admit—either to themselves or to others—that they hold stereotypes or that they are prejudiced toward some social groups. To get around this problem, social psychologists make use of a number of techniques that help them measure these beliefs more subtly and indirectly. One indirect approach to assessing prejudice is called the bogus pipeline procedure (Jones & Sigall, 1971).
In this procedure, the experimenter first convinces the participants that he or she has access to their “true” beliefs, for instance, by getting access to a questionnaire that they completed at a prior experimental session. Once the participants are convinced that the researcher is able to assess their “true” attitudes, it is expected that they will be more honest in answering the rest of the questions they are asked because they want to be sure that the researcher does not catch them lying. Interestingly, people express more prejudice when they are in the bogus pipeline than they do when they are asked the same questions more directly, which suggests that we may frequently mask our negative beliefs in public.
Other indirect measures of prejudice are also frequently used in social psychological research; for instance, assessing nonverbal behaviors such as speech errors or physical closeness. One common measure involves asking participants to take a seat on a chair near a person from a different racial or ethnic group and measuring how far away the person sits (Sechrist & Stangor, 2001; Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1974). People who sit farther away are assumed to be more prejudiced toward the members of the group.
Because our stereotypes are activated spontaneously when we think about members of different social groups, it is possible to use reaction-time measures to assess this activation and thus to learn about people’s stereotypes and prejudices. In these procedures, participants are asked to make a series of judgments about pictures or descriptions of social groups and then to answer questions as quickly as they can, but without making mistakes. The speed of these responses is used to determine an individual’s stereotypes or prejudice.
The most popular reaction-time implicit measure of prejudice—the Implicit Association Test (IAT)—is frequently used to assess stereotypes and prejudice (Nosek, Greenwald, & Banaji, 2007). In the IAT, participants are asked to classify stimuli that they view on a computer screen into one of two categories by pressing one of two computer keys, one with their left hand and one with their right hand. Furthermore, the categories are arranged so that the responses to be answered with the left and right buttons either “fit with” (match) the stereotype or do not “fit with” (mismatch) the stereotype.
For instance, in one version of the IAT, participants are shown pictures of men and women and are also shown words related to academic disciplines (e.g., History, French, or Linguistics for the Arts, or Chemistry, Physics, or Math for the Sciences). Then the participants categorize the photos (“Is this picture a picture of a man or a woman?”) and answer questions about the disciplines (“Is this discipline a science?) by pressing either the Yes button or the No button using either their left hand or their right hand.626 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination When the responses are arranged on the screen in a way that matches a stereotype, such that the male category and the “science” category are on the same side of the screen (e.g., on the right side), participants can do the task very quickly and they make few mistakes.
It’s just easier, because the stereotypes are matched or associated with the pictures in a way that makes sense or is familiar. But when the images are arranged such that the female category and the “science” category are on the same side, whereas the men and the weak categories are on the other side, most participants make more errors and respond more slowly. The basic assumption is that if two concepts are associated or linked, they will be responded to more quickly if they are classified using the same, rather than different, keys.
Implicit association procedures such as the IAT show that even participants who claim that they are not prejudiced do seem to hold cultural stereotypes about social groups. Even Black people themselves respond more quickly to positive words that are associated with White rather than Black faces on the IAT, suggesting that they have subtle racial prejudice toward their own racial group. Because they hold these beliefs, it is possible—although not guaranteed—that they may use them when responding to other people, creating a subtle and unconscious type of discrimination.
Although the meaning of the IAT has been debated (Tetlock & Mitchell, 2008), research using implicit measures does suggest that—whether we know it or not, and even though we may try to control them when we can—our stereotypes and prejudices are easily activated when we see members of different social categories (Barden, Maddux, Petty, & Brewer, 2004). Do you hold implicit prejudices? Try the IAT yourself, here: Project Implicit Although in some cases the stereotypes that are used to make judgments might actually be true of the individual being judged, in many other cases they are not.
Stereotyping is problematic when the stereotypes we hold about a social group are inaccurate overall, and particularly when they do not apply to the individual who is being judged (Stangor, 1995). Stereotyping others is simply unfair. Even if many women are more emotional than are most men, not all are, and it is not right to judge any one woman as if she is.
In the end, stereotypes become self-fulfilling prophecies, such that our expectations about the group members make the stereotypes come true (Snyder, Tanke, & Berscheid, 1977; Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1974). Once we believe that men make better leaders than women, we tend to behave toward men in ways that makes it easier for them to lead. And we behave toward women in ways that makes it more difficult for them to lead.
The result? Men find it easier to excel in leadership positions, whereas women have to work hard to overcome the false beliefs about their lack of leadership abilities (Phelan & Rudman, 2010). This is likely why female lawyers with masculine names are more likely to become judges (Coffey & McLaughlin, 2009) and masculine-looking applicants are more likely to be hired as leaders than feminine-looking applicants (von Stockhausen, Koeser, & Sczesny, 2013).
These self-fulfilling prophecies are ubiquitous—even teachers’ expectations about their students’ academic abilities can influence the students’ school performance (Jussim, Robustelli, & Cain, 2009). Of course, you may think that you personally do not behave in these ways, and you may not. But research has found that stereotypes are often used out of our awareness, which makes it very difficult for us to correct for them.
Even when we think we are being completely fair, we may nevertheless be11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 627 using our stereotypes to condone discrimination (Chen & Bargh, 1999). And when we are distracted or under time pressure, these tendencies become even more powerful (Stangor & Duan, 1991). Furthermore, attempting to prevent our stereotype from coloring our reactions to others takes effort.
We experience more negative affect (particularly anxiety) when we are with members of other groups than we do when we are with people from our own groups, and we need to use more cognitive resources to control our behavior because of our anxiety about revealing our stereotypes or prejudices (Butz & Plant, 2006; Richeson & Shelton, 2003). When we know that we need to control our expectations so that we do not unintentionally stereotype the other person, we may try to do so—but doing so takes effort and may frequently fail (Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 1994). Social Psychology in the Public Interest Stereotype Threat Our stereotypes influence not only our judgments of others but also our beliefs about ourselves, and even our own performance on important tasks.
In some cases, these beliefs may be positive, and they have the effect of making us feel more confident and thus better able to perform tasks. Because Asian students are aware of the stereotype that “Asians are good at math,” reminding them of this fact before they take a difficult math test can improve their performance on the test (Walton & Cohen, 2003). On the other hand, sometimes these beliefs are negative, and they create negative self-fulfilling prophecies such that we perform more poorly just because of our knowledge about the stereotypes.
One of the long-standing puzzles in the area of academic performance concerns why Black students in the United States perform more poorly on standardized tests, receive lower grades, and are less likely to remain in school in comparison with White students, even when other factors such as family income, parents’ education, and other relevant variables are controlled. Claude Steele and Joshua Aronson (1995) tested the hypothesis that these differences might be due to the activation of negative stereotypes. Because Black students are aware of the (inaccurate) stereotype that “Blacks are intellectually inferior to Whites,” this stereotype might create a negative expectation, which might interfere with their performance on intellectual tests through fear of confirming that stereotype.
In support of this hypothesis, Steele and Aronson’s research revealed that Black college students performed worse (in comparison with their prior test scores) on math questions taken from the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) when the test was described to them as being “diagnostic of their mathematical ability” (and thus when the stereotype was relevant) but that their performance was not influenced when the same questions were framed as “an exercise in problem solving.” And in another study, Steele and Aronson found that when Black students were asked to indicate their race before they took a math test (again activating the stereotype), they performed more poorly than they had on prior exams, whereas the scores of White students were not affected by first indicating their race. Steele and Aronson argued that thinking about negative stereotypes that are relevant to a task that one is performing creates stereotype threat—performance decrements that are caused by the knowledge of cultural stereotypes. That is, they argued that the negative impact of race on standardized tests may be caused, at least in part, by the performance situation itself.
Because the threat is “in the air,” Black students may be negatively influenced by it. Research has found that the experience of stereotype threat can help explain a wide variety of628 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination performance decrements among those who are targeted by negative stereotypes.
For instance, when a math task is described as diagnostic of intelligence, Latinos and particularly Latinas perform more poorly than do Whites (Gonzales, Blanton, & Williams, 2002). Similarly, when stereotypes are activated, children with low socioeconomic status perform more poorly in math than do those with high socioeconomic status, and psychology students perform more poorly than do natural science students (Brown, Croizet, Bohner, Fournet, & Payne, 2003). Even groups who typically enjoy advantaged social status can be made to experience stereotype threat.
White men performed more poorly on a math test when they were told that their performance would be compared with that of Asian men (Aronson, Lustina, Good, Keough, & Steele, 1999), and Whites performed more poorly than Blacks on a sport- related task when it was described to them as measuring their natural athletic ability (Stone, 2002). Stereotype threat is created in situations that pose a significant threat to self-concern, such that our perceptions of ourselves as important, valuable, and capable individuals are threatened. In these situations, there is a discrepancy between our positive concept of our skills and abilities and the negative stereotypes suggesting poor performance.
When our stereotypes lead us to be believe that we are likely to perform poorly on a task, we experience a feeling of unease and status threat. Research has found that stereotype threat is caused by both cognitive and affective factors. On the cognitive side, individuals who are experiencing stereotype threat show an impairment in cognitive processing that is caused by increased vigilance toward the environment and attempts to suppress their stereotypical thoughts.
On the affective side, stereotype threat creates stress as well as a variety of affective responses including anxiety (Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008). Stereotype threat is not, however, absolute—we can get past it if we try. What is important is to reduce the self-concern that is engaged when we consider the relevant negative stereotypes.
Manipulations that affirm positive characteristics about oneself or one’s group are successful at reducing stereotype threat (Alter, Aronson, Darley, Rodriguez, & Ruble, 2010; Greenberg et al., 2003; McIntyre, Paulson, & Lord, 2003). In fact, just knowing that stereotype threat exists and may influence performance can help alleviate its negative impact (Johns, Schmader, & Martens, 2005). Key Takeaways • Beliefs about the characteristics of the groups and the members of those groups are known as stereotypes.
• Prejudice refers to an unjustifiable negative attitude toward an outgroup. • Stereotypes and prejudice may create discrimination. • Stereotyping and prejudice begin from social categorization—the natural cognitive process by which we place individuals into social groups.
• Social categorization influences our perceptions of groups—for instance, the perception of outgroup homogeneity. • Once our stereotypes and prejudices become established, they are difficult to change and may lead to self-fulfilling prophecies, such that our expectations about the group members make the11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 629 stereotypes come true. • Stereotypes may influence our performance on important tasks through stereotype threat.
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Look again at the pictures in Figure 11.3, and consider your thoughts and feelings about each person. What are your stereotypes and prejudices about them?
Do you think your stereotypes are accurate? 2. Take one of the two interviews listed on Understanding Prejudice.
3. Think of a task that one of the social groups to which you belong is considered to be particularly good or poor at. Do you think the cultural stereotypes about your group have ever influenced your performance on a task?
References Aboud, F. E., & Doyle, A.-B. (1996).
Parental and peer influences on children’s racial attitudes. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 20, 371–383. Allport, G.
W. (1954/1979). The nature of prejudice.
New York, NY: Doubleday. Alter, A. L., Aronson, J., Darley, J.
M., Rodriguez, C., & Ruble, D. N. (2010).
Rising to the threat: Reducing stereotype threat by reframing the threat as a challenge. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46(1), 166–171. Aronson, J., Lustina, M.
J., Good, C., Keough, K., & Steele, C. M. (1999).
When White men can’t do math: Necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 29–24. Barden, J., Maddux, W.
W., Petty, R. E., & Brewer, M. B.
(2004). Contextual moderation of racial bias: The impact of social roles on controlled and automatically activated attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(1), 5–22.
Bargh, J. (Ed.). (1999).
The cognitive monster: The case against the controllability of automatic stereotype effects. New York, NY: Guilford Press. Bigler, R.
S., & Liben, L. S. (2006).
A developmental intergroup theory of social stereotypes and prejudice. In R. V.
Kail (Ed.), Advances in child development and behavior (Vol. 34, pp. 39–89).
San Diego, CA: Elsevier. Brown, R. (1995).
Prejudice: Its social psychology. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.630 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Brown, R., Croizet, J.-C., Bohner, G., Fournet, M., & Payne, A.
(2003). Automatic category activation and social behaviour: The moderating role of prejudiced beliefs. Social Cognition, 21(3), 167–193.
Butz, D. A., & Plant, E. A.
(2006). Perceiving outgroup members as unresponsive: Implications for approach-related emotions, intentions, and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(6), 1066–1079.
Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (1999).
Consequences of automatic evaluation: Immediate behavioral predispositions to approach or avoid the stimulus. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25(2), 215–224. Coffey, B., & McLaughlin, P.
A. (2009). Do masculine names help female lawyers become judges?
Evidence from South Carolina. American Law and Economics Review, 16(1), 112-133. Crisp, R.
J., & Hewstone, M. (Eds.). (2007).
Multiple social categorization. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. Fiske, A.
P., Haslam, N., & Fiske, S. T. (1991).
Confusing one person with another: What errors reveal about the elementary forms of social relations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(5), 656–674. Fyock, J., & Stangor, C.
(1994). The role of memory biases in stereotype maintenance. British Journal of Social Psychology, 33(3), 331–343.
Gonzales, P. M., Blanton, H., & Williams, K. J.
(2002). The effects of stereotype threat and double- minority status on the test performance of Latino women. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(5), 659–670.
Greenberg, J., Martens, A., Jonas, E., Eisenstadt, D., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S. (2003). Psychological defense in anticipation of anxiety: Eliminating the potential for anxiety eliminates the effect of mortality salience on worldview defense.
Psychological Science, 14(5), 516–519. Guimond, S. (2000).
Group socialization and prejudice: The social transmission of intergroup attitudes and beliefs. European Journal of Social Psychology, 30(3), 335–354. Haslam, S.
A., Oakes, P. J., & Turner, J. C.
(1996). Social identity, self-categorization, and the perceived homogeneity of ingroups and outgroups: The interaction between social motivation and cognition. In Handbook of motivation and cognition: The interpersonal context (Vol.
3, pp. 182–222). New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Hirschfeld, L. (1996). Race in the making: Cognition, culture and the child’s construction of human kinds.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Johns, M., Schmader, T., & Martens, A. (2005).
Knowing is half the battle: Teaching stereotype threat as a means of improving women’s math performance. Psychological Science, 16(3), 175–179. Jones, E.
E., & Sigall, H. (1971). The bogus pipeline: A new paradigm for measuring affect and attitude.
Psychological Bulletin, 76(5), 349–364. Jussim, L., Robustelli, S. L., & Cain, T.
R. (2009). Teacher expectations and self-fulfilling prophecies.
In K. R. Wenzel & A.
Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook of motivation at school (pp. 349–380). New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Lee, Y. T., Jussim, L. J., & McCauley, C.
R. (1995). Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group differences.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.11.1 Social Categorization and Stereotyping 631 Lepore, L., & Brown, R. (1997). Category and stereotype activation: Is prejudice inevitable?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72(2), 275–287. Linville, P. W., & Jones, E.
E. (1980). Polarized appraisals of out-group members.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 689–703. Linville, P. W., Salovey, P., & Fischer, G.
W. (1986). Stereotyping and perceived distributions of social characteristics: An application to ingroup-outgroup perception.
In J. F. Dovidio & S.
L. Gaertner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination and racism (pp. 165–208).
Orlando, FL: Academic Press. Lippman, W. (1922).
Public opinion. New York, NY: Harcourt & Brace. Macrae, C.
N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B., & Jetten, J.
(1994). Out of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(5), 808–817.
Madon, S., Guyll, M., Aboufadel, K., Montiel, E., Smith, A., Palumbo, P., et al. (2001). Ethnic and national stereotypes: The Princeton trilogy revisited and revised.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27(8), 996–1010. McIntyre, R. B., Paulson, R.
M., & Lord, C. G. (2003).
Alleviating women’s mathematics stereotype threat through salience of group achievements. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39(1), 83–90. Meissner, C.
A., & Brigham, J. C. (2001).
Thirty years of investigating the own-race bias in memory for faces: A meta-analytic review. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7, 3–35. Nosek, B.
A., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R.
(Eds.). (2007). The Implicit Association Test at age 7: A methodological and conceptual review.
New York, NY: Psychology Press. Ostrom, T. M., & Sedikides, C.
(1992). Out-group homogeneity effects in natural and minimal groups. Psychological Bulletin, 112(3), 536–552.
Phelan, J. E., & Rudman, L. A.
(2010). Prejudice toward female leaders: Backlash effects and women’s impression management dilemma. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4(10), 807–820.
Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N.
(2003). When prejudice does not pay: Effects of interracial contact on executive function. Psychological Science, 14(3), 287–290.
Schaller, M., & Conway, G. (1999). Influence of impression-management goals on the emerging content of group stereotypes: Support for a social-evolutionary perspective.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 819–833. Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008).
An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115(2), 336–356. Sechrist, G.
B., & Stangor, C. (2001). Perceived consensus influences intergroup behavior and stereotype accessibility.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4), 645–654. Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E.
(1977). Social perception and interpersonal behavior: On the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 656–666.
Stangor, C. (1995). Content and application inaccuracy in social stereotyping.
In Y. T. Lee, L.
J. Jussim, & C. R.
McCauley (Eds.), Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group differences (pp. 275–292).632 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Stangor, C., & Duan, C.
(1991). Effects of multiple task demands upon memory for information about social groups. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27(4), 357–378.
Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B. (1992). Categorization of individuals on the basis of multiple social features.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62(2), 207–218. Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J.
(1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual performance of African Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 797–811.
Stone, J. (2002). Battling doubt by avoiding practice: The effects of stereotype threat on self- handicapping in White athletes.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(12), 1667–1678. Tajfel, H. (1970).
Experiments in intergroup discrimination. Scientific American, 223, 96–102. Tajfel, H., & Wilkes, A.
L. (1963). Classification and quantitative judgment.
British Journal of Psychology, 54, 101–114. Taylor, S. E., Fiske, S.
T., Etcoff, N. L., & Ruderman, A. J.
(1978). Categorical and contextual bases of person memory and stereotyping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36(7), 778–793.
Tetlock, P. E., & Mitchell, G. (2008).
Calibrating prejudice in milliseconds. Social Psychology Quarterly, 71(1), 12–16. Trope, Y., & Thompson, E.
(1997). Looking for truth in all the wrong places? Asymmetric search of individuating information about stereotyped group members.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(2), 229–241. von Stockhausen, L, Koeser, S., & Sczesny, S. (2013).
The gender typicality of faces and its impact on visual processing and on hiring decisions. Experimental Psychology, 60(6), 444-452. Walton, G.
M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003).
Stereotype lift. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39(5), 456–467. Word, C.
O., Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. (1974).
The nonverbal mediation of self-fulfilling prophecies in interracial interaction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10(2), 109–120. Yzerbyt, V., Schadron, G., Leyens, J., & Rocher, S.
(1994). Social judgeability: The impact of meta- informational cues on the use of stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 48–55.
Media Attributions • “CHILLIN” by sabrina’s stash is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.11.2 Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice Learning Objectives 1. Review the causes and outcomes of ingroup favoritism. 2.
Summarize the results of Henri Tajfel’s research on minimal groups. 3. Outline the personality and cultural variables that influence ingroup favoritism.
We have now seen that social categorization occurs whenever we think about others in terms of their category memberships rather than on the basis of other, more personal information about the individual. And we have seen that social categorization can have a variety of negative consequences for the people who are the targets of our stereotypes. But social categorization becomes even more important, and has even more powerful effects on our reactions to others, when the categorization becomes more emotionally involving, and particularly when the categorization involves categorization into liked ingroups and potentially disliked outgroups (Amodio & Devine, 2006).
Because our ancestors lived in small social groups that were frequently in conflict with other groups, it was evolutionarily functional for them to view members of other groups as different and potentially dangerous (Brewer & Caporael, 2006; Navarrete, Kurzban, Fessler, & Kirkpatrick, 2004). Differentiating between “us” and “them” probably helped keep us safe and free from disease, and as a result, the human brain became very efficient in making these distinctions (Mahajan et al., 2011; Phelps et al., 2000; Van Vugt & Schaller, 2008; Zaraté, Stoever, MacLin, & Arms-Chavez, 2008). The problem is that these naturally occurring tendencies may lead us to prefer people who are like us, and in some cases even to unfairly reject people from outgroups.
Liking “Us” More Than “Them”: Ingroup Favoritism In his important research on group perceptions, Henri Tajfel and his colleagues (Tajfel, Billig, Bundy, & Flament, 1971) demonstrated how incredibly powerful the role of self-concern is in group perceptions. He found that just dividing people into arbitrary groups produces ingroup favoritism—the tendency to respond more positively to people from our ingroups than we do to people from outgroups. In Tajfel’s research, small groups of high school students came to his laboratory for a study supposedly concerning “artistic tastes.” The students were first shown a series of paintings by two contemporary artists, Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky.
Supposedly on the basis of their preferences for each painting, the students were divided into two groups (they were called the X group and the Y group). 633634 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Each boy was told which group he had been assigned to and that different boys were assigned to different groups.
But none of them were told the group memberships of any of the other boys. The boys were then given a chance to allocate points to other boys in their own group and to boys in the other group (but never to themselves) using a series of payoff matrices, such as those shown in Figure 11.8. The charts divided a given number of rewards between two boys, and the boys thought that the rewards would be used to determine how much each boy would be paid for his participation.
In some cases, the division was between two boys in the boy’s own group (the ingroup); in other cases, the division was between two boys who had been assigned to the other group (the outgroup); and in still other cases, the division was between a boy in the ingroup and a boy in the outgroup. Tajfel then examined the goals that the boys used when they divided up the points. Figure 11.8 Examples of Matrices Used in the Minimal Intergroup Studies of Tajfel and His Colleagues.
From Tajfel (1970). A comparison of the boys’ choices in the different matrices showed that they allocated points between two boys in the ingroup or between two boys in the outgroup in an essentially fair way, so that each boy got the same amount. However, fairness was not the predominant approach when dividing points between ingroup and outgroup.
In this case, rather than exhibiting fairness, the boys displayed ingroup favoritism, such that they gave more points to other members of their own group in relationship to boys in the other group. For instance, the boys might assign 8 points to the ingroup boy and only 3 points to the outgroup boy, even though the matrix also contained a choice in which they could give the ingroup and the outgroup boys 13 points each. In short, the boys preferred to maximize the gains of the other boys in their own group in comparison with the boys in the outgroup, even if doing so meant giving their own group members fewer points than they could otherwise have received.
Perhaps the most striking part of Tajfel’s results is that ingroup favoritism was found to occur on the basis of such arbitrary and unimportant groupings. In fact, ingroup favoritism occurs even when the assignment to groups is on such trivial things as whether people “overestimate” or “underestimate” the number of dots shown on a display, or on the basis of a completely random coin toss (Billig & Tajfel, 1973; Locksley, Ortiz, & Hepburn, 1980). Tajfel’s research, as well other research demonstrating ingroup favoritism, provides a powerful demonstration of a very important social psychological process: groups exist simply because individuals perceive those groups as existing.
Even in a case11.2 Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice 635 where there really is no group (at least no meaningful group in any real sense), we still perceive groups and still demonstrate ingroup favoritism. The Outcomes of Ingroup Favoritism The tendency to favor their ingroup develops quickly in young children, increasing up to about six years of age, and almost immediately begins to influence their behavior (Aboud, 2003; Aboud & Amato, 2001). Young children show greater liking for peers of their own sex and race and typically play with same-sex others after the age of three.
And there is a norm that we should favor our ingroups: people like people who express ingroup favoritism better than those who are more egalitarian (Castelli & Carraro, 2010). Amazingly, even infants as young as nine months old prefer those who treat similar others well and dissimilar others poorly (Hamlin, Mahajan, Liberman, & Wynn, 2013). Ingroup favoritism is found for many different types of social groups, in many different settings, on many different dimensions, and in many different cultures (Bennett et al., 2004; Pinter & Greenwald, 2011).
Ingroup favoritism also occurs on trait ratings, such that ingroup members are rated as having more positive characteristics than are outgroup members (Hewstone, 1990). People also take credit for the successes of other ingroup members, remember more positive than negative information about ingroups, are more critical of the performance of outgroup than of ingroup members, and believe that their own groups are less prejudiced than are outgroups (Shelton & Richeson, 2005). People also talk differently about their ingroups than their outgroups, such that they describe the ingroup and its members as having broad positive traits (“We are generous and friendly”) but describe negative ingroup behaviors in terms of the specific behaviors of single group members (“Our group member, Bill, hit someone”) (Maass & Arcuri, 1996; Maass, Ceccarielli, & Rudin, 1996; von Hippel, Sekaquaptewa, & Vargas, 1997).
These actions allow us to spread positive characteristics to all members of our ingroup but reserve negative aspects for individual group members, thereby protecting the group’s image. People also make trait attributions in ways that benefit their ingroups, just as they make trait attributions that benefit themselves. As we saw in Chapter 5, this general tendency, known as the group-serving bias (or ultimate attribution error), results in the tendency for each of the competing groups to perceive the other group extremely and unrealistically negatively (Hewstone, 1990).
When an ingroup member engages in a positive behavior, we tend to see it as a stable internal characteristic of the group as a whole. Similarly, negative behaviors on the part of the outgroup are seen as caused by stable negative group characteristics. On the other hand, negative behaviors from the ingroup and positive behaviors from the outgroup are more likely to be seen as caused by temporary situational variables or by behaviors of specific individuals and are less likely to be attributed to the group.
Ingroup Favoritism Has Many Causes Ingroup favoritism has a number of causes. For one, it is a natural part of social categorization; we categorize into ingroups and outgroups because it helps us simplify and structure our environment. It is easy, and perhaps even natural, to believe in the simple idea that “we are better than they are.” People who report that they have strong needs for simplifying their environments also show more ingroup favoritism (Stangor & Leary, 2006).636 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Ingroup favoritism also occurs at least in part because we belong to the ingroup and not the outgroup (Cadinu & Rothbart, 1996). We like people who are similar to ourselves, and we perceive other ingroup members as similar to us. This also leads us to favor other members of our ingroup, particularly when we can clearly differentiate them from members of outgroups.
We may also prefer ingroups because they are more familiar to us (Zebrowitz, Bronstad, & Lee, 2007). But the most important determinant of ingroup favoritism is simple self-enhancement. We want to feel good about ourselves, and seeing our ingroups positively helps us do so (Brewer, 1979).
Being a member of a group that has positive characteristics provides us with the feelings of social identity—the positive self-esteem that we get from our group memberships. When we can identify ourselves as a member of a meaningful social group (even if it is a relatively trivial one), we can feel better about ourselves. We are particularly likely to show ingroup favoritism when we are threatened or otherwise worried about our self-concept (Maner et al., 2005; Solomon, Greenberg, & Pyszczynski, 2000).
And people express higher self-esteem after they have been given the opportunity to derogate outgroups, suggesting that ingroup favoritism does make us feel good (Lemyre & Smith, 1985; Rubin & Hewstone, 1998). Furthermore, when individuals feel that the value of their ingroup is being threatened, they respond as if they are trying to regain their own self-worth—by expressing more positive attitudes toward ingroups and more negative attitudes toward outgroups (Branscombe, Wann, Noel, & Coleman, 1993; Spears, Doosje, & Ellemers, 1997). Fein and Spencer (1997) found that participants expressed less prejudice after they had been given the opportunity to affirm and make salient an important and positive part of their own self-concept.
In short, when our group seems to be good, we feel good; when our group seems to be bad, we feel bad. In some cases, we may be able to feel good about our group memberships even when our own individual outcomes are not so positive. Schmitt, Silvia, and Branscombe (2000) had groups of female college students perform a creativity task and then gave them feedback indicating that although they themselves had performed very poorly, another woman in their group had performed very well.
Furthermore, in some experimental conditions, the women were told that the research was comparing the scores of men and women (which was designed to increase categorization by gender). In these conditions, rather than being saddened by the upward comparison with the other woman, participants used the successful performance of the other woman to feel good about themselves, as women. When Ingroup Favoritism Does Not Occur Although people have a general tendency to show ingroup favoritism, there are least some cases in which it does not occur.
One situation in which ingroup favoritism is unlikely is when the members of the ingroup are clearly inferior to other groups on an important dimension. The players on a baseball team that has not won a single game all season are unlikely to be able to feel very good about themselves as a team and are pretty much forced to concede that the outgroups are better, at least as far as playing baseball is concerned. Members of low-status groups show less ingroup favoritism than do members of high-status groups and may even display outgroup favoritism, in which they admit that the other groups are better than they are (Clark & Clark, 1947).
Another case in which people judge other members of the ingroup very negatively occurs when a member of one’s own group behaves in a way that threatens the positive image of the ingroup. A11.2 Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice 637 student who behaves in a way unbecoming to university students, or a teammate who does not seem to value the importance of the team, is disparaged by the other group members, often more than the same behavior from an outgroup member would be. The strong devaluation of ingroup members who threaten the positive image and identity of the ingroup is known as the black sheep effect(Pinto, Marques, Levine, & Abrams, 2010).
Personality and Cultural Determinants of Ingroup Favoritism To this point, we have considered ingroup favoritism as a natural part of everyday life. Because the tendency to favor the ingroup is a normal byproduct of self-concern, most people do, by and large, prefer their ingroups over outgroups. And yet not everyone is equally ingroup-favoring in all situations.
There are a number of individual difference measures that predict prejudice, and these differences are particularly likely to show up under circumstances in which the desire to protect the self becomes important (Guimond, Dambrun, Michinov, & Duarte, 2003). Some people are more likely than others to show ingroup favoritism because they are particularly likely to rely on their group memberships to create a positive social identity. These differences in group identification can be measured through self-report measures such as the Collective Self-Esteem Scale (Luhtanen & Crocker, 1992).
The scale assesses the extent to which the individual values his or her memberships in groups in public and private ways, as well as the extent to which he or she gains social identity from those groups. People who score higher on the scale show more ingroup favoritism in comparison with those who score lower on it (Stangor & Thompson, 2002). The scale, from Luhtanen and Crocker (1992) is shown in Table 11.2.638 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Table 11.2 The Collective Self-Esteem Scale I am a worthy member of the social groups I belong to. I feel I don’t have much to offer to the social groups I belong to [R]. Membership I am a cooperative participant in the social groups I belong to.
I often feel I’m an unclean member of my social group [R]. I often regret that I belong to some of the social groups I do [R]. In general, I’m glad to be a member of the social groups I belong to.
Private Overall, I often feel that the social groups of which I am a member are not worthwhile [R]. I feel good about the social groups I belong to. Overall, my social groups are considered good by others.
Most people consider my social groups, on the average, to be more ineffective than other social groups [R]. Public In general, others respect the social groups that I am a member of. In general, others think that the social groups I am a member of are unworthy [R].
Overall, my group memberships have very little to do with how I feel about myself [R]. The social groups I belong to are an important reflection of who I am. Identity The social groups I belong to are unimportant in my sense of what kind of a person I am [R].
In general, belonging to social groups is an important part of my self-image. [R] = Item is reversed before scoring. Another personality dimension that relates to the desires to protect and enhance the self and the ingroup and thus also relates to greater ingroup favoritism, and in some cases prejudice toward outgroups, is the personality dimension of authoritarianism (Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Levinson, & Sanford, 1950; Altemeyer, 1988).
Authoritarianism is a personality dimension that characterizes people who prefer things to be simple rather than complex and who tend to hold traditional and conventional values. Authoritarians are ingroup-favoring in part because they have a need to self-enhance and in part because they prefer simplicity and thus find it easy to think simply: “We are all good and they are all less good.” Political conservatives tend to show more ingroup favoritism than do political liberals, perhaps because the former are more concerned with protecting the ingroup from threats posed by others (Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, & Sulloway, 2003; Stangor & Leary, 2006). People with strong goals toward other-concern display less ingroup favoritism and less prejudice.
People who view it as particularly important to connect with and respect other people—those who are more focused on tolerance and fairness toward others—are less ingroup-favoring and more positive toward the members of groups other than their own. The desire to be fair and to accept others can be assessed by individual difference measures such as desire to control one’s prejudice (Plant & Devine, 1998) and humanism (Katz & Hass, 1988).11.2 Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice 639 Social dominance orientation (SDO) is a personality variable that refers to the tendency to see and to accept inequality among different groups (Pratto, Sidanius, Stallworth, & Malle, 1995). People who score high on measures of SDO believe that there are and should be status differences among social groups, and they do not see these as wrong.
High SDO individuals agree with statements such as “Some groups of people are simply inferior to other groups,” “In getting what you want, it is sometimes necessary to use force against other groups,” and “It’s OK if some groups have more of a chance in life than others.” Those who are low on SDO, on the other hand, believe that all groups are relatively equal in status and tend to disagree with these statements. People who score higher on SDO also show greater ingroup favoritism. Stereotyping and prejudice also varies across cultures.
Spencer-Rodgers, Williams, Hamilton, Peng, and Wang (2007) tested the hypothesis that Chinese participants, because of their collectivistic orientation, would find social groups more important than would Americans (who are more individualistic) and that as a result, they would be more likely to infer personality traits on the basis of group membership—that is, to stereotype. Supporting the hypothesis, they found that Chinese participants made stronger stereotypical trait inferences than Americans did on the basis of a target’s membership in a fictitious group. Key Takeaways • Ingroup favoritism is a fundamental and evolutionarily functional aspect of human perception, and it occurs even in groups that are not particularly meaningful.
• Ingroup favoritism is caused by a variety of variables, but particularly important is self-concern: we experience positive social identity as a result of our membership in valued social groups. • Ingroup favoritism develops early in children and influences our behavior toward ingroup and outgroup members in a variety of ways. • Personality dimensions that relate to ingroup favoritism include authoritarianism and social dominance orientation—dimensions that relate to less ingroup favoritism include a desire to control one’s prejudice and humanism.
• There are at least some cultural differences in the tendency to show ingroup favoritism and to stereotype others. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Complete one of Harvard’s Take a test.
Then write a brief reflection on your results. 2. Describe a time when the members of one of your important social groups behaved in a way that increased group identity (e.g., showing the black sheep effect).
What was the outcome of the actions?640 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination References Aboud, F. E.
(2003). The formation of in-group favoritism and out-group prejudice in young children: Are they distinct attitudes? Developmental Psychology, 39(1), 48–60.
Aboud, F. E., & Amato, M. (2001).
Developmental and socialization influences on intergroup bias. In R. Brown & S.
Gaertner (Eds.), Blackwell handbook in social psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 65–85).
New York, NY: Blackwell. Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D.
J., & Sanford, R. N. (1950).
The authoritarian personality. New York, NY: Harper. Altemeyer, B.
(1988). Enemies of freedom: Understanding right-wing authoritarianism. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Amodio, D. M., & Devine, P. G.
(2006). Stereotyping and evaluation in implicit race bias: Evidence for independent constructs and unique effects on behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 652–661.
Bennett, M., Barrett, M., Karakozov, R., Kipiani, G., Lyons, E., Pavlenko, V.…Riazanova., T. (2004). Young children’s evaluations of the ingroup and of outgroups: A multi-national study.
Social Development, 13(1), 124–141. Billig, M., & Tajfel, H. (1973).
Social categorization and similarity in intergroup behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology, 3, 27–52. Branscombe, N.
R., Wann, D. L., Noel, J. G., & Coleman, J.
(1993). In-group or out-group extremity: Importance of the threatened social identity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 381–388.
Brewer, M. B. (1979).
In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: A cognitive-motivational analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 307–324. Brewer, M.
B., & Caporael, L. R. (2006).
An evolutionary perspective on social identity: Revisiting groups. In M. Schaller, J.
A. Simpson, & D. T.
Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and social psychology (pp. 143–161). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Cadinu, M. R., & Rothbart, M. (1996).
Self-anchoring and differentiation processes in the minimal group setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(4), 661–677. Castelli, L., & Carraro, L.
(2010). Striving for difference: On the spontaneous preference for ingroup members who maximize ingroup positive distinctiveness. European Journal of Social Psychology, 40(6), 881–890.
Clark, K., & Clark, M. (1947). Racial identification and preference in Negro children.
In E. Maccoby, T. Newcomb, & E.
Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology (pp. 602–611). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Fein, S., & Spencer, S. J. (1997).
Prejudice as self-image maintenance: Affirming the self through derogating others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 31–44. Guimond, S., Dambrun, M., Michinov, N., & Duarte, S.
(2003). Does social dominance generate prejudice? Integrating individual and contextual determinants of intergroup cognitions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(4), 697–721.11.2 Ingroup Favoritism and Prejudice 641 Hamlin, J. K., Mahajan, N., Liberman, Z., & Wynn, K. (2013).
Not like me = bad: Infants prefer those who harm dissimilar others. Psychological Science, 24(4), 589-594. Hewstone, M.
(1990). The “ultimate attribution error”? A review of the literature on intergroup causal attribution.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 20(4), 311–335. Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A.
W., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003).
Political conservatism as motivated social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 129(3), 339–375. Katz, I., & Hass, R.
G. (1988). Racial ambivalence and American value conflict: Correlational and priming studies of dual cognitive structures.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 893–905. Lemyre, L., & Smith, P. M.
(1985). Intergroup discrimination and self-esteem in the minimal group paradigm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 660–670.
Locksley, A., Ortiz, V., & Hepburn, C. (1980). Social categorization and discriminatory behavior: Extinguishing the minimal intergroup discrimination effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(5), 773–783. Luhtanen, R., & Crocker, J. (1992).
A collective self-esteem scale: Self-evaluation of one’s social identity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 302–318. Maass, A., & Arcuri, L.
(1996). Language and stereotyping. In C.
N. Macrae, C. Stangor, & M.
Hewstone (Eds.), Stereotypes and stereotyping (pp. 193–226). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Maass, A., Ceccarielli, R., & Rudin, S. (1996). Linguistic intergroup bias: Evidence for in-group- protective motivation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71(3), 512–526. Mahajan, N., Martinez, M. A., Gutierrez, N.
L., Diesendruck, G., Banaji, M. R., & Santos, L. R.
(2011). The evolution of intergroup bias: Perceptions and attitudes in rhesus macaques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100(3), 387–405.
Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D.
V., Robertson, T. E., Hofer, B., Neuberg, S. L., & Schaller, M.
(2005). Functional projection: How fundamentally social motives can bias interpersonal perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 63–75.
Navarrete, C. D., Kurzban, R., Fessler, D. M.
T., & Kirkpatrick, L. A. (2004).
Anxiety and intergroup bias: Terror management or coalitional psychology? Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 7(4), 370–397. Phelps, E.
A., O’Connor, K. J., Cunningham, W. A., Funayama, E.
S., Gatenby, J. C., Gore, J. C Banaji, M.
R. (2000). Performance on indirect measures of race evaluation predicts amygdala activation.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(5), 729–738. Pinter, B., & Greenwald, A. G.
(2011). A comparison of minimal group induction procedures. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 14(1), 81–98.
Pinto, I. R., Marques, J. M., Levine, J.
M., & Abrams, D. (2010). Membership status and subjective group dynamics: Who triggers the black sheep effect?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99(1), 107–119. Plant, E. A., & Devine, P.
G. (1998). Internal and external motivation to respond without prejudice.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(3), 811–832. Pratto, F., Sidanius, J., Stallworth, L. M., & Malle, B.
F. (1995). Social dominance orientation: A642 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination personality variable predicting social and political attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 741–763. Rubin, M., & Hewstone, M.
(1998). Social identity theory’s self-esteem hypothesis: A review and some suggestions for clarification. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 40–62.
Schmitt, M. T., Silvia, P. J., & Branscombe, N.
R. (2000). The intersection of self-evaluation maintenance and social identity theories: Intragroup judgment in interpersonal and intergroup contexts.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(12), 1598–1606. Shelton, J. N., & Richeson, J.
A. (2005). Intergroup contact and pluralistic ignorance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(1), 91–107. Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (2000).
Pride and prejudice: Fear of death and social behavior. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9(6), 200–204. Spears, R., Doosje, B., & Ellemers, N.
(1997). Self-stereotyping in the face of threats to group status and distinctiveness: The role of group identification. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 538–553.
Spencer-Rodgers, J., Williams, M. J., Hamilton, D. L., Peng, K., & Wang, L.
(2007). Culture and group perception: Dispositional and stereotypic inferences about novel and national groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93(4), 525–543.
Stangor, C., & Leary, S. (2006). Intergroup beliefs: Investigations from the social side.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 243–283. Stangor, C., & Thompson, E. P.
(2002). Needs for cognitive economy and self-enhancement as unique predictors of intergroup attitudes. European Journal of Social Psychology, 32(4), 563–575.
Tajfel, H. (1970). Experiments in intergroup discrimination.
Scientific American, 223, 96–102. Tajfel, H., Billig, M., Bundy, R., & Flament, C. (1971).
Social categorization and intergroup behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology, 1, 149–178. Van Vugt, M., & Schaller, M.
(2008). Evolutionary approaches to group dynamics: An introduction. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 12(1), 1–6.
von Hippel, W., Sekaquaptewa, D., & Vargas, P. (1997). The linguistic intergroup bias as an implicit indicator of prejudice.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33(5), 490–509. Zaraté, M. A., Stoever, C.
J., MacLin, M. K., & Arms-Chavez, C. J.
(2008). Neurocognitive underpinnings of face perception: Further evidence of distinct person and group perception processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(1), 108–115.
Zebrowitz, L. A., Bronstad, P. M., & Lee, H.
K. (2007). The contribution of face familiarity to ingroup favoritism and stereotyping.
Social Cognition, 25(2), 306–338.11.3 Reducing Discrimination Learning Objectives 1. Review the causes of discrimination and the ways that we can reduce it. 2.
Summarize the conditions under which intergroup contact does or does not reduce prejudice and discrimination. We have seen that social categorization is a basic part of human nature and one that helps us to simplify our social worlds, to draw quick (if potentially inaccurate) conclusions about others, and to feel good about ourselves. In many cases, our preferences for ingroups may be relatively harmless—we may prefer to socialize with people who share our race or ethnicity for instance, but without particularly disliking the others.
But categorizing others may also lead to prejudice and discrimination, and it may even do so without our awareness. Because prejudice and discrimination are so harmful to so many people, we must all work to get beyond them. Discrimination influences the daily life of its victims in areas such as employment, income, financial opportunities, housing and educational opportunities, and medical care.
Even with the same level of education and years of experience, ethnic minorities in Canada are 40% less likely to receive callbacks for an interview following a job application (Oreopolous, 2011). Blacks have higher mortality rates than Whites for eight of the 10 leading causes of death in the United States (Williams, 1999) and have less access to and receive poorer-quality health care, even controlling for other variables such as level of health insurance. Suicide rates among lesbians and gays are substantially higher than rates for the general population, and it has been argued that this in part due to the negative outcomes of prejudice, including negative attitudes and resulting social isolation (Halpert, 2002).
And in some rare cases, discrimination even takes the form of hate crimes such as gay bashing. More commonly, members of minority groups also face a variety of small hassles, such as bad service in restaurants, being stared at, and being the target of jokes (Swim, Hyers, Cohen, Fitzgerald, & Bylsma, 2003). But even these everyday “minor” forms of discrimination can be problematic because they may produce anger and anxiety among stigmatized group members and may lead to stress and other psychological problems (Klonoff, Landrine, & Campbell, 2000; Klonoff, Landrine, & Ullman, 1999).
Stigmatized individuals who report experiencing more exposure to discrimination or other forms of unfair treatment also report more depression, anger, and anxiety and lower levels of life satisfaction and happiness (Swim, Hyers, Cohen, & Ferguson, 2001). Of course, most of us do try to keep our stereotypes and our prejudices out of mind, and we work hard to avoid discriminating (Richeson & Shelton, 2007). But even when we work to keep our negative beliefs under control, this does not mean that they easily disappear.
Neil Macrae and his colleagues 643644 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination (Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, & Jetten, 1994) asked British college students to write a paragraph describing a skinhead (a member of a group that is negatively stereotyped in England). One half of the participants were asked to be sure to not use their stereotypes when they were judging him, whereas the other half simply wrote whatever came to mind.
Although the participants who were asked to suppress their thoughts were able to do it, this suppression didn’t last very long. After they had suppressed their stereotypes, these beliefs quickly popped back into mind, making it even more likely that they would be used immediately later. But stereotypes are not always and inevitably activated when we encounter people from other groups.
We can and we do get past them, although doing so may take some effort on our part (Blair, 2002). There are a number of techniques that we can use to try to improve our attitudes toward outgroups, and at least some of them have been found to be effective. Kawakami, Dovidio, Moll, Hermsen, and Russin (2000) found that students who practiced responding in nonstereotypical ways to members of other groups became better able to avoid activating their negative stereotypes on future occasions.
And a number of studies have found that we become less prejudiced when we are exposed to and think about group members who have particularly positive or nonstereotypical characteristics. For instance, Blair, Ma, and Lenton (2001) asked their participants to imagine a woman who was “strong” and found that doing so decreased stereotyping of women. Similarly, Bodenhausen, Schwarz, Bless, and Wanke (1995) found that when White American students thought about positive Black role models—such as Oprah Winfrey and Michael Jordan—they became less prejudiced toward Blacks.
Reducing Discrimination by Changing Social Norms One variable that makes us less prejudiced is education. People who are more educated express fewer stereotypes and prejudice in general. This is true for students who enroll in courses that are related to stereotypes and prejudice, such as a course on gender and ethnic diversity (Rudman, Ashmore, & Gary, 2001), and is also true more generally—education reduces prejudice, regardless of what particular courses you take (Sidanius, Sinclair, & Pratto, 2006).
The effects of education on reducing prejudice are probably due in large part to the new social norms that people are introduced to in school. Social norms define what is appropriate and inappropriate, and we can effectively change stereotypes and prejudice by changing the relevant norms about them. Jetten, Spears, and Manstead (1997) manipulated whether students thought that the other members of their university favored equal treatment of others or believed that others thought it was appropriate to favor the ingroup.
They found that perceptions of what the other group members believed had an important influence on the beliefs of the individuals themselves. The students were more likely to show ingroup favoritism when they believed that the norm of their ingroup was to do so, and this tendency was increased for students who had high social identification with the ingroup. Sechrist and Stangor (2001) selected White college students who were either high or low in prejudice toward Blacks and then provided them with information indicating that their prejudiced or unprejudiced beliefs were either shared or not shared by the other students at their university.
Then the students were asked to take a seat in a hallway to wait for the next part of the experiment. A Black confederate was sitting in one seat at the end of the row, and the dependent measure was how far away the students sat from her.11.3 Reducing Discrimination 645 As you can see in Figure 11.9, high prejudice students who learned that other students were also prejudiced sat farther away from the Black confederate in comparison with high prejudice individuals who were led to believe that their beliefs were not shared. On the other hand, students who were initially low in prejudice and who believed these views were shared sat closer to the Black confederate in comparison with low prejudice individuals who were led to believe that their beliefs were not shared.
These results demonstrate that our perceptions of relevant social norms can strengthen or weaken our tendencies to engage in discriminatory behaviors. Figure 11.9 The Role of Norms in Intergroup Behavior. White college students who were low in prejudice toward Blacks sat closer to the Black confederate when they had been told that their beliefs were shared with other group members at their university.
On the other hand, White college students who were high in prejudice sat farther away from the Black confederate when they had been told that their beliefs were shared with other group members at their university. Data are from Sechrist and Stangor (2001). The influence of social norms is powerful, and long-lasting changes in beliefs about outgroups will occur only if they are supported by changes in social norms.
Prejudice and discrimination thrive in environments in which they are perceived to be the norm, but they die when the existing social norms do not allow it. And because social norms are so important, the behavior of individuals can help create or reduce prejudice and discrimination. Discrimination, prejudice, and even hate crimes such as gay bashing will be more likely to continue if people do not respond to or confront them when they occur.
What this means is that if you believe that prejudice is wrong, you must confront it when you see it happening. Czopp, Monteith, and Mark (2006) had White participants participate in a task in which it was easy to unintentionally stereotype a Black person, and as a result, many of the participants did so. Then, confederates of the experimenter confronted the students about their stereotypes, saying things such as “Maybe it would be good to think about Blacks in other ways that are a little more fair?” or “It just seems that you sound like some kind of racist to me.
You know what I mean?” Although the participants who had been confronted experienced negative feelings about the confrontation and also expressed negative opinions about the person who confronted them, the confrontation did work. The students who had been confronted expressed less prejudice and fewer stereotypes on subsequent tasks than did the students who had not been confronted.646 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination As this study concluded, taking steps to reduce prejudice is everyone’s duty—having a little courage can go a long way in this regard.
Confronting prejudice can lead other people to think that we are complaining and therefore to dislike us (Kaiser & Miller, 2001; Shelton & Stewart, 2004), but confronting prejudice is not all negative for the person who confronts. Although it is embarrassing to do so, particularly if we are not completely sure that the behavior was in fact prejudice, when we fail to confront, we may frequently later feel guilty that we did not (Shelton, Richeson, Salvatore, & Hill, 2006). Reducing Prejudice through Intergroup Contact One of the reasons that people may hold stereotypes and prejudices is that they view the members of outgroups as different from them.
We may become concerned that our interactions with people from different racial groups will be unpleasant, and these anxieties may lead us to avoid interacting with people from those groups (Mallett, Wilson, & Gilbert, 2008). What this suggests is that a good way to reduce prejudice is to help people create closer connections with members of different groups. People will be more favorable toward others when they learn to see those other people as more similar to them, as closer to the self, and to be more concerned about them.
The idea that intergroup contact will reduce prejudice, known as the contact hypothesis, is simple: If children from different ethnic groups play together in school, their attitudes toward each other should improve. And if we encourage college students to travel abroad, they will meet people from other cultures and become more positive toward them. One important example of the use of intergroup contact to influence prejudice came about as a result of the important U.S.
Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education in 1954. In this case, the U.S.
Supreme Court agreed, based in large part on the testimony of psychologists, that busing Black children to schools attended primarily by White children, and vice versa, would produce positive outcomes on intergroup attitudes, not only because it would provide Black children with access to better schools, but also because the resulting intergroup contact would reduce prejudice between Black and White children. This strategy seemed particularly appropriate at the time it was implemented because most schools in the United States then were highly segregated by race. The strategy of busing was initiated after the Supreme Court decision, and it had a profound effect on schools in the United States.
For one, the policy was very effective in changing school makeup—the number of segregated schools decreased dramatically during the 1960s after the policy was begun. Busing also improved the educational and occupational achievement of Blacks and increased the desire of Blacks to interact with Whites; for instance, by forming cross-race friendships (Stephan, 1999). Overall, then, the case of desegregating schools in the United States supports the expectation that intergroup contact, at least in the long run, can be successful in changing attitudes.
Nevertheless, as a result of several subsequent U.S. Supreme Court decisions, the policy of desegregating schools via busing was not continued past the 1990s. Although student busing to achieve desegregated schools represents one prominent example of intergroup contact, such contact occurs in many other areas as well.
Taken together, there is substantial support for the effectiveness of intergroup contact in improving group attitudes in a wide variety of situations, including schools, work organizations, military forces, and public housing. Pettigrew and11.3 Reducing Discrimination 647 Tropp (2006) conducted a meta-analysis in which they reviewed over 500 studies that had investigated the effects of intergroup contact on group attitudes. They found that attitudes toward groups that were in contact became more positive over time.
Furthermore, positive effects of contact were found on both stereotypes and prejudice and for many different types of contacted groups. The positive effects of intergroup contact may be due in part to increases in other-concern. Galinsky and Moskowitz (2000) found that leading students to take the perspective of another group member—which increased empathy and closeness to the person—also reduced prejudice.
And the behavior of students on college campuses demonstrates the importance of connecting with others and the dangers of not doing so. Sidanius, Van Laar, Levin, and Sinclair (2004) found that students who joined exclusive campus groups, including fraternities, sororities, and minority ethnic organizations (such as the African Student Union), were more prejudiced to begin with and became even less connected and more intolerant of members of other social groups over the time that they remained in the organizations. It appears that memberships in these groups focused the students on themselves and other people who were very similar to them, leading them to become less tolerant of others who are different.
Although intergroup contact does work, it is not a panacea because the conditions necessary for it to be successful are frequently not met. Contact can be expected to work only in situations that create the appropriate opportunities for change. For one, contact will only be effective if it provides information demonstrating that the existing stereotypes held by the individuals are incorrect.
When we learn more about groups that we didn’t know much about before, we learn more of the truth about them, leading us to be less biased in our beliefs. But if our interactions with the group members do not allow us to learn new beliefs, then contact cannot work. When we first meet someone from another category, we are likely to rely almost exclusively on our stereotypes (Brodt & Ross, 1998).
However, when we get to know the individual well (e.g., as a student in a classroom learns to know the other students over a school year), we may get to the point where we ignore that individual’s group membership almost completely, responding to him or her entirely at the individual level (Madon et al., 1998). Thus contact is effective in part because it leads us to get past our perceptions of others as group members and to individuate them. When we get past group memberships and focus more on the individuals in the groups, we begin to see that there is a great deal of variability among the group members and that our global and undifferentiating group stereotypes are actually not that informative (Rothbart & John, 1985).
Successful intergroup contact tends to reduce the perception of outgroup homogeneity. Contact also helps us feel more positively about the members of the other group, and this positive affect makes us like them more. Intergroup contact is also more successful when the people involved in the contact are motivated to learn about the others.
One factor that increases this motivation is interdependence—a state in which the group members depend on each other for successful performance of the group goals (Neuberg & Fiske, 1987). The importance of interdependence can be seen in the success of cooperative learning techniques, such as the jigsaw classroom (Aronson, Blaney, Stephan, Sikes, & Snapp, 1978; Aronson, 2004). The jigsaw classroom is an approach to learning in which students from different racial or ethnic groups work together, in an interdependent way, to master material.
The class is divided into small648 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination learning groups, where each group is diverse in ethnic and gender composition. The assigned material to be learned is divided into as many parts as there are students in the group, and members of different groups who are assigned the same task meet together to help develop a strong report.
Each student then learns his or her own part of the material and presents this piece of the puzzle to the other members of his or her group. The students in each group are therefore interdependent in learning all the material. A wide variety of techniques, based on principles of the jigsaw classroom, are in use in many schools around the world, and research studying these approaches has found that cooperative, interdependent experiences among students from different social groups are effective in reducing negative stereotyping and prejudice (Stephan, 1999).
In sum, we can say that contact will be most effective when it is easier to get to know, and become more respectful of, the members of the other group and when the social norms of the situation promote equal, fair treatment of all groups. If the groups are treated unequally, for instance, by a teacher or leader who is prejudiced and who therefore treats the different groups differently, or if the groups are in competition rather than cooperation, there will be no benefit. In cases when these conditions are not met, contact may not be effective and may in fact increase prejudice, particularly when it confirms stereotypical expectations (Stangor, Jonas, Stroebe, & Hewstone, 1996).
Finally, it is important that enough time be allowed for the changes to take effect. In the case of busing in the United States, for instance, the positive effects of contact seemed to have been occurring, but they were not happening particularly fast. Let’s consider (in the following Research Focus) still another way that intergroup contact can reduce prejudice—the idea that prejudice can be reduced for people who have friends who are friends with members of the outgroup, known as the extended-contact hypothesis.
Research Focus The Extended-Contact Hypothesis Although the contact hypothesis proposes that direct contact between people from different social groups will produce more positive attitudes between them, recent evidence suggests that prejudice can also be reduced for people who have friends who are friends with members of the outgroup, even if the individual does not have direct contact with the outgroup members himself or herself. This hypothesis is known as the extended-contact hypothesis. Supporting this prediction, Wright, Aron, McLaughlin-Volpe, and Ropp (1997) found in two correlational studies that college students who reported that their own friends had friends who were from another ethnic group reported more positive attitudes toward that outgroup than did students who did not have any friends who had outgroup friends, even controlling for the participants’ own outgroup friendships.
Wright and his colleages (1997) also tested the extended-contact hypothesis experimentally. Participants were four groups of 14 students, and each group spent a whole day in the lab. On arrival, seven participants were assigned to the “green” group, and seven to the “blue” group, supposedly on the basis of similar interests.
To create strong ingroup identity and to produce competition between the groups, the group members wore blue and green T-shirts and engaged in a series of competitive tasks. Participants then expressed their initial thoughts and feelings about the outgroup and its members.11.3 Reducing Discrimination 649 Then, supposedly as part of an entirely different study, one participant was randomly selected from each group, and the two were taken to a separate room in which they engaged in a relationship- building task that has been shown to quickly create feelings of friendship between two strangers. Then the two members from each team were then reunited with their original groups, where they were encouraged to describe their experience with the other group member in the friendship-building task.
In the final phase, the groups then engaged in another competitive task, and participants rated their thoughts and feelings about the outgroup and its members again. As you can see in Figure 11.10, and supporting the extended-contact hypothesis, results showed that the participants (including those who did not participate in the closeness task themselves) were more positive toward the outgroup after than before the two team members had met. This study, as well as many other studies, supports the importance of cross-group friendships in promoting favorable outgroup attitudes (Page-Gould, Mendoza-Denton, & Tropp, 2008; Shook & Fazio, 2008).
Figure 11.10 The Extended-Contact Hypothesis. This figure shows how members of the two groups, which were in competition with each other, rated each other before and after the experimental manipulation of friendship. You can see that group relationships, which were becoming more negative, changed to being more positive after the intervention.
Data are from Wright, Aron, McLaughlin-Volpe, and Ropp (1997). Moving Others Closer to Us: The Benefits of Recategorization The research on intergroup contact suggests that although contact may improve prejudice, it may make it worse if it is not implemented correctly. Improvement is likely only when the contact moves the members of the groups to feel that they are closer to each other rather than further away from each other.
In short, groups are going to have better attitudes toward each other when they see themselves more similarly to each other—when they feel more like one large group than a set of smaller groups. This fact was demonstrated in a very convincing way in what is now a classic social psychological study. In the “Robbers’ Cave Experiment,” Sherif, Harvey, White, Hood, and Sherif (1961) studied the group behavior of 11-year-old boys at a summer camp.
Although the boys did not know it, the researchers carefully observed the behaviors of the children during the camp session, with the goal of learning about how group conflict developed and how it might be resolved among the children. During the first week of the camp, the boys were divided into two groups that camped at two different650 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination campsites.
During this time, friendly relationships developed among the boys within each of the two groups. Each group developed its own social norms and group structure and became quite cohesive, with a strong positive social identity. The two groups chose names for themselves (the Rattlers and the Eagles), and each made their own group flag and participated in separate camp activities.
At the end of this one-week baseline period, it was arranged that the two groups of boys would become aware of each other’s presence. Furthermore, the researchers worked to create conditions that led to increases in each group’s social identity and at the same time created negative perceptions of the other group. The researchers arranged baseball games, a tug-of-war, and a treasure hunt and offered prizes for the group that won the competitions.
Almost immediately, this competition created ingroup favoritism and prejudice, and discrimination quickly followed. By the end of the second week, the Eagles had sneaked up to the Rattlers’ cabin and stolen their flag. When the Rattlers discovered the theft, they in turn raided the Eagles’ cabin, stealing things.
There were food fights in the dining room, which was now shared by the groups, and the researchers documented a substantial increase in name- calling and stereotypes of the outgroup. Some fistfights even erupted between members of the different groups. The researchers then intervened by trying to move the groups closer to each other.
They began this third stage of the research by setting up a series of situations in which the boys had to work together to solve a problem. These situations were designed to create interdependence by presenting the boys with superordinate goals—goals that were both very important to them and yet that required the cooperative efforts and resources of both the Eagles and the Rattlers to attain. These goals involved such things as the need to pool money across both groups in order to rent a movie that all the campers wanted to view, or the need to pull together on ropes to get a food truck that had become stuck back onto the road.
As the children worked together to meet these goals, the negative perceptions of the group members gradually improved; there was a reduction of hostility between the groups and an emergence of more positive intergroup attitudes. This strategy was effective because it led the campers to perceive both the ingroup and the outgroup as one large group (“we”) rather than as two separate groups (“us” and “them”). As differentiation between the ingroup and the outgroup decreases, so should ingroup favoritism, prejudice, and conflict.
The differences between the original groups are still present, but they are potentially counteracted by perceived similarities in the second superordinate group. The attempt to reduce prejudice by creating a superordinate categorization is known as the goal of creating a common ingroup identity(Gaertner & Dovidio, 2008), and we can diagram the relationship as follows: interdependence and cooperation → common ingroup identity → favorable intergroup attitudes. A substantial amount of research has supported the predictions of the common ingroup identity model.
For instance, Samuel Gaertner and his colleagues (Gaertner, Mann, Murrell, & Dovidio, 1989) tested the hypothesis that interdependent cooperation in groups reduces negative beliefs about outgroup members because it leads people to see the others as part of the ingroup (by creating a common identity). In this research, college students were brought to a laboratory where they were each assigned to one of two teams of three members each, and each team was given a chance to create its own unique group identity by working together. Then, the two teams were brought into a single room to work on a problem.
In one condition, the two teams were told to work together as a larger, six-member team to solve the problem, whereas in the other condition, the two teams worked on the problem separately.11.3 Reducing Discrimination 651 Consistent with the expected positive results of creating a common group identity, the interdependence created in the condition where the teams worked together increased the tendency of the team members to see themselves as members of a single larger team, and this in turn reduced the tendency for each group to show ingroup favoritism. But the benefits of recategorization are not confined to laboratory settings—they also appear in our everyday interactions with other people. Jason Neir and his colleagues had Black and White interviewers approach White students who were attending a football game (Neir et al., 2001).
The dependent measure was whether or not they agreed to help the interviewer by completing a questionnaire. However, the interviewers also wore hats representing either one of the two universities who were playing in the game. As you can see in Figure 11.11, the data were analyzed both by whether the interviewer and the student were of the same race (either both White or one White and one Black) and also by whether they wore hats from the same or different universities.
As expected on the basis of recategorization and the common ingroup identity approach, the White students were significantly more likely to help the Black interviewers when they wore a hat of the same university as that worn by the interviewee. The hat evidently led the White students to recategorize the interviewer as part of the university ingroup, leading to more helping. However, whether the individuals shared university affiliation did not influence helping for the White participants, presumably because they already saw the interviewer as a member of the ingroup (the interviewer was also White).
Figure 11.11 Recategorization and Helping Behavior. In this field study, White and Black interviewers asked White students attending a football game to help them by completing a questionnaire. The data were analyzed both by whether the request was to a White (ingroup) or Black (outgroup) student and also by whether the individual whose help was sought wore the same hat that they did or a different hat.
Results supported the common ingroup identity model. Helping was much greater for outgroup members when hats were the same. Data are from Neir et al.
(2001). Again, the implications of these results are clear and powerful. If we want to improve attitudes among people, we must get them to see each other as more similar and less different.
And even relatively simple ways of doing so, such as wearing a hat that suggests an ingroup identification, can be successful.652 Chapter 11. Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Key Takeaways • Changing our stereotypes and prejudices is not easy, and attempting to suppress them may backfire. However, with appropriate effort, we can reduce our tendency to rely on our stereotypes and prejudices.
• One approach to changing stereotypes and prejudice is by changing social norms—for instance, through education and laws enforcing equality. • Prejudice will change faster when it is confronted by people who see it occurring. Confronting prejudice may be embarrassing, but it also can make us feel that we have done the right thing.
• Intergroup attitudes will be improved when we can lead people to focus more on their connections with others. Intergroup contact, extended contact with others who share friends with outgroup members, and a common ingroup identity are all examples of this process. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1.
Watch the program “A Class Divided.” Do you think Jane Elliott’s method of teaching people about prejudice is ethical? 2. Have you ever confronted or failed to confront a person who you thought was expressing prejudice or discriminating?
Why did you confront (or not confront) that person, and how did doing so make you feel? 3. Imagine you are a teacher in a classroom and you see that some children expressing prejudice or discrimination toward other children on the basis of their race.
What techniques would you use to attempt to reduce these negative behaviors? References Aronson, E. (2004).
Reducing hostility and building compassion: Lessons from the jigsaw classroom. In A. G.
Miller (Ed.), The social psychology of good and evil (pp. 469–488). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephan, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). The jig-saw classroom.
London, England: Sage. Blair, I. V.
(2002). The malleability of automatic stereotypes and prejudice. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(3), 242–261.11.3 Reducing Discrimination 653 Blair, I.
V., Ma, J. E., & Lenton, A. P.
(2001). Imagining stereotypes away: The moderation of implicit stereotypes through mental imagery. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 828–841.
Bodenhausen, G. V., Schwarz, N., Bless, H., & Wanke, M. (1995).
Effects of atypical exemplars on racial beliefs: Enlightened racism or generalized appraisals? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 31, 48–63. Brodt, S.
E., & Ross, L. D. (1998).
The role of stereotyping in overconfident social prediction. Social Cognition, 16, 225–252. Czopp, A.
M., Monteith, M. J., & Mark, A. Y.
(2006). Standing up for a change: Reducing bias through interpersonal confrontation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(5), 784–803.
Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F.
(Eds.). (2008). Addressing contemporary racism: The common ingroup identity model.
New York, NY: Springer Science + Business Media. Gaertner, S. L., Mann, J., Murrell, A., & Dovidio, J.
F. (1989). Reducing intergroup bias: The benefits of recategorization.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(2), 239–249. Galinsky, A. D., & Moskowitz, G.
B. (2000). Perspective-taking: Decreasing stereotype expression, stereotype accessibility, and in-group favoritism.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(4), 708–724. Halpert, S. C.
(2002). Suicidal behavior among gay male youth. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Psychotherapy, 6, 53–79.
Jetten, J., Spears, R., & Manstead, A. S. R.
(1997). Strength of identification and intergroup differentiation: The influence of group norms. European Journal of Social Psychology, 27(5), 603–609.
Kaiser, C. R., & Miller, C. T.
(2001). Stop complaining! The social costs of making attributions to discrimination.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 254–263. Kawakami, K., Dovidio, J. F., Moll, J., Hermsen, S., & Russin, A.
(2000). Just say no (to stereotyping): Effects of training in the negation of stereotypic associations on stereotype activation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,78 (5), 871–888.
Klonoff, E. A., Landrine, H., & Campbell, R. (2000).
Sexist discrimination may account for well- known gender differences in psychiatric symptoms. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 24, 93–99. Klonoff, E.
A., Landrine, H., & Ullman, J. B. (1999).
Racial discrimination and psychiatric symptoms among blacks. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 5(4), 329–339. Macrae, C.
N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B., & Jetten, J.
(1994). Out of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on the rebound. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(5), 808–817.
Madon, S., Jussim, L., Keiper, S., Eccles, J., Smith, A., & Palumbo, P. (1998). The accuracy and power of sex, social class, and ethnic stereotypes: A naturalistic study in person perception.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24(12), 1304–1318. Mallett, R. K., Wilson, T.
D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2008).
Expect the unexpected: Failure to anticipate similarities leads to an intergroup forecasting error. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(2), 265–277. doi: 10.1037/0022–3514.94.2.94.2.265 Neir, J.
A., Gaertner, S. L., Dovidio, J. F., Banker, B.
S., Ward, C. M., & Rust, C. R.
(2001). Changing interracial evaluations and behavior: The effects of a common group identity. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 4, 299–316.654 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Neuberg, S. L., & Fiske, S. T.
(1987). Motivational influences on impression formation: Outcome dependency, accuracy-driven attention, and individuating processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 431–444.
Oreopolous, P. (2011). Why do skilled immigrants struggle in the labor market?
A field experiment with six thousand résumés. American Economic Journal, 3(4), 148-171. Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L.
R. (2008). With a little help from my cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(5), 1080–1094. doi: 10.1037/0022–3514.95.5.1080. Pettigrew, T.
F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006).
A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(5), 751–783. Richeson, J.
A., & Shelton, J. N. (2007).
Negotiating interracial interactions: Costs, consequences, and possibilities. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16(6), 316–320. doi: 10.1111/ j.1467–8721.2007.00528.x Rothbart, M., & John, O.
P. (1985). Social categorization and behavioral episodes: A cognitive analysis of the effects of intergroup contact.
Journal of Social Issues, 41, 81–104. Rudman, L. A., Ashmore, R.
D., & Gary, M. L. (2001).
“Unlearning” automatic biases: The malleability of implicit prejudice and stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 856–868. Sechrist, G., & Stangor, C.
(2001). Perceived consensus influences intergroup behavior and stereotype accessibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4), 645–654.
Shelton, J. N., Richeson, J. A., Salvatore, J., & Hill, D.
M. (Eds.). (2006).
Silence is not golden: The intrapersonal consequences of not confronting prejudice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Shelton, N.
J., & Stewart, R. E. (2004).
Confronting perpetrators of prejudice: The inhibitory effects of social costs. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 28, 215–222. Sherif, M., Harvey, O.
J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., & Sherif, C.
(1961). Intergroup conflict and cooperation: The robbers’ cave experiment. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H.
(2008). Interracial roommate relationships: An experimental field test of the contact hypothesis. Psychological Science, 19(7), 717–723.
doi: 10.1111/ j.1467–9280.2008.02147.x Sidanius, J., Sinclair, S., & Pratto, F. (2006). Social dominance orientation, gender, and increasing educational exposure.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 36(7), 1640–1653. Sidanius, J., Van Laar, C., Levin, S., & Sinclair, S. (2004).
Ethnic enclaves and the dynamics of social identity on the college campus: The good, the bad, and the ugly. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(1), 96–110. Stangor, C., Jonas, K., Stroebe, W., & Hewstone, M.
(1996). Development and change of national stereotypes and attitudes. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 663–675.
Stephan, W. (1999). Reducing prejudice and stereotyping in schools.
New York, NY: Teacher’s College Press. Swim, J. K., Hyers, L.
L., Cohen, L. L., & Ferguson, M. J.
(2001). Everyday sexism: Evidence for its incidence, nature, and psychological impact from three daily diary studies. Journal of Social Issues, 57(1), 31–53.11.3 Reducing Discrimination 655 Swim, J.
K., Hyers, L. L., Cohen, L. L., Fitzgerald, D.
C., & Bylsma, W. H. (2003).
African American college students’ experiences with everyday racism: Characteristics of and responses to these incidents. Journal of Black Psychology, 29(1), 38–67. Williams, D.
R. (1999). Race, socioeconomics status, and health: The added effect of racism and discrimination.
In Adler, N. E., Boyce, T., Chesney, M. A., & Cohen, S.
(1994). Socioeconomic status and health: The challenge of the gradient. American Psychologist, 49, 15-24.
Wright, S. C., Aron, A., McLaughlin-Volpe, T., & Ropp, S. A.
(1997). The extended contact effect: Knowledge of cross-group friendships and prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(1), 73–90.11.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Stereotyping, Prejudice, and Discrimination This chapter has focused on the ways in which people from different social groups feel about, think about, and behave toward each other.
In most cases, we have positive thoughts and feelings about others, and our interactions with them are friendly and positive. And yet in other cases, there is a potential for negative interactions, and in rare cases, even hostility and violence. Look again at the pictures in Figure 11.3 and carefully consider your thoughts and feelings about each person.
Does the image bring some stereotypes to mind? What about prejudices? How do you think your impressions of the individuals might influence your behavior toward them?
Do you hold these beliefs yourself, or do you know people who do? Can you see how quickly you or other people might make judgments about these individuals, based on the culturally relevant stereotypes, and how those judgments might lead to discrimination? What might be the negative outcomes of the stereotypes on the person?
We hope that you can now see, perhaps more clearly than you did before, that social categorization is all around us. We think about other people in terms of their group memberships, and this is entirely natural. But perhaps you are now able to see the processes more fully.
We hope you can see that categorization has some benefits—it allows us to think about ourselves as members of valued groups, for instance—but it also has some potential negative outcomes, including overgeneralized stereotyping and ingroup favoritism. We hope that you are now more aware how easily we categorize others, how quickly we learn stereotypes, and how fast ingroup favoritism develops and that you can better see the impact these processes have on our judgments of others. You will now be able to see that prejudice, discrimination, and stereotypes reflect, respectively, the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition.
And because you are thinking like a social psychologist, you will realize that prejudice is not unusual—that it results in large part from self-concern. We like our own groups because we feel good about them and see them as similar. But we can improve our attitudes toward outgroups by focusing on other-concern—by being more inclusive and including more different people into our ingroups.
Perhaps the best thing we can do is to recategorize such that we see all people as human beings; we are all in the same ingroup, and we should treat everyone the way we would like them to treat us—with respect. We hope your new knowledge can help you in your own relationships with others. Is it possible that you have ingroup favoritism that you were not aware of?
Or perhaps you hold stereotypes about other groups that you would like to avoid holding? You should now be able to see how better to avoid being prejudiced yourself. And you are now perhaps more aware of the importance of social norms—we must work to prevent those norms from allowing prejudice.
To stop prejudice, you must be willing to interact with people from other groups, and you must confront prejudice when you see it occurring. These behaviors may be difficult, but in the end they will help you be a better citizen. 65711.5 Chapter Summary The social groups that are part of a given nation or society become essential parts of the culture itself.
We easily develop beliefs about the characteristics of the groups and the members of those groups (stereotypes) as well as prejudice (an unjustifiable negative attitude toward an outgroup). Our stereotypes and our prejudices are problematic because they may create discrimination—unjustified negative behaviors toward members of outgroups based on their group membership. Discrimination is a societal and health problem because it is so pervasive, takes so many forms, and has such negative effects on so many people.
Stereotyping and prejudice begin from social categorization—the natural cognitive process by which we place individuals into social groups. Social categorization is in many cases quite helpful and useful. In some cases, we might categorize others because doing so provides us with information about the characteristics of people who belong to certain social groups or categories.
And we may categorize others because we may not have time to do anything more thorough. A problem is that social categorization distorts our perceptions of others such that we tend to exaggerate the differences between social groups while at the same time perceiving members of groups (and particularly outgroups) as more similar to each other than they actually are. One particularly strong outcome of social categorization is outgroup homogeneity—the tendency to view members of outgroups as more similar to each other than we see members of ingroups.
Once we begin to categorize other people, and we start to see the members of those groups as more similar to each other than they actually are, it then becomes very easy to apply our stereotypes to the members of the groups, without having to consider whether the characteristic is actually true of the particular individual. If men think that women are all alike, then they may act toward all women in the same way, and doing so is unfair. Our stereotypes and prejudices are learned through both cognitive and affective processes.
Once they become established, stereotypes (like any other cognitive representation) tend to persevere—they are difficult to change. In the end, stereotypes become self-fulfilling prophecies, such that our expectations about the group members make the stereotypes come true. And our stereotypes also influence our performance on important tasks through stereotype threat.
Ingroup favoritism occurs on the basis of even arbitrary and unimportant groupings and is found for many different types of social groups, in many different settings, on many different dimensions, and in many different cultures. The most important determinant of ingroup favoritism is simple self-enhancement. We want to feel good about ourselves, and being a member of a group that has positive characteristics provides social identity—the positive self-esteem that we get from our group memberships.
In cases when our groups do not provide positive social identity, we must try to restore a positive self-worth. If we cannot leave the group, we may try to perceive the group as positively as possible, perhaps by focusing on dimensions on which the group does not compare so unfavorably. 659660 Chapter 11.
Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination Although it is assumed that most people gain at least some positive social identity through their group memberships, people differ in the extent to which they use their group memberships to create social identity. Personality dimensions related to prejudice include authoritarianism and social dominance orientation. And there is also at least some evidence that stereotyping varies across cultures.
Because social categorization is a basic human process that provides some benefits for us, stereotypes and prejudices are easy to develop but difficult to change. But stereotypes and prejudice are not inevitable. The positive effects of education on reducing prejudice are probably due in large part to the new social norms that people experience in school, which people who do not go to school do not learn.
True changes in beliefs will only occur if they are supported by changes in social norms. And because social norms are so important, the behavior of individuals can help create or reduce it. Prejudice will be more likely to continue if people allow it to by not responding to it or confronting it when it occurs.
Intergroup attitudes will be improved when we can lead people to focus relatively more on their concerns for others and relatively less on their desires to feel good about themselves. Intergroup contact is effective in this regard, although only under conditions that allow us to individuate others. And individuation is more successful when the people involved in the contact are interdependent, such as in cooperative educational contexts like the jigsaw classroom.
Prejudice can also be reduced for people who have friends who are friends with members of the outgroup—the extended-contact hypothesis. In the “Robbers’ Cave Experiment,” as well as in many other studies, it has been found that superordinate goals that help us see others as part of the same category as we are provide a common ingroup identity and are successful at improving intergroup attitudes. You can now see how important social categorization is but also that it has many potential negative outcomes.
You are now more aware how easily we categorize others, how quickly we learn stereotypes, and how fast ingroup favoritism develops, and you can better see the impact that these processes have on our judgments of others. You can use that new knowledge to help you avoid being prejudiced yourself and to help others from being prejudiced too. Doing so will be difficult, but in the end it will be useful.
But just because we have stereotypes or hold prejudices does not mean that we cannot change them or that we must act on them. If sports referees learn about their prejudices, they can work harder to overcome them, and they may well be successful. And when you learn about your own stereotypes and your own prejudices, and the effects of those beliefs on yourself and others, you may be able to change your own behavior and respond more appropriately to the stereotypes and prejudices expressed by others.Chapter 12.
Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Chapter Learning Objectives 1. Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness ◦ Review the situational variables that increase or decrease competition and conflict. ◦ Differentiate harm-based morality from social conventional morality, and explain how morality works to help people cooperate.
◦ Define distributive justice and procedural justice, and explain the influence of fairness norms on cooperation and competition. 2. How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas ◦ Explain the concepts of public goods and social dilemmas, and how these conflicts influence human interactions.
◦ Describe the principles of the prisoner’s dilemma game that make it an effective model for studying social dilemmas. ◦ Review the different laboratory games that have been used to study social dilemmas. ◦ Summarize the individual difference and cultural variables that relate to cooperation and competition.
3. Strategies for Producing Cooperation ◦ Outline the variables that increase and decrease competition. ◦ Summarize the principles of negotiation, mediation, and arbitration.
The Collapse of Atlantic Canada’s Cod Fishery “Why are you abusing me, I didn’t take the fish out of the goddamned water.” These famous words were uttered by John Crosbie, the federal minister of fisheries and oceans in Canada on July 1, 1992, when he met with a group of fishers who were upset about the alarming decline in the cod population. A day later (under police protection), Crosbie announced that a moratorium would 661662 Dr. Hammond Tarry be imposed on fishing North Atlantic cod, an action that effectively put 40,000 people out of work overnight.
More than 20 years later there is little sign of growth in the cod population and the moratorium is still in place. For generations of Atlantic fishers who had grown used to an ocean full of fish, this was an unfathomable outcome. Yet it was this very reputation of an ocean teeming with cod that had attracted giant fishing trawlers from distant countries to the waters off the coast of Newfoundland since the 1950s.
As the fish stocks dwindled, the trawlers began to use sonar, satellite navigation, and new techniques to dredge the ocean floor to collect entire schools of cod. As you can see in Figure 12.1, the annual cod catch fell dramatically, from a high of 800,000 tons in 1968 to less than 200,000 tons a decade later. Even as awareness of the problem grew in the 1980s, Canadian politicians were too afraid of the short-term impact of job losses in the fishing industry to reduce the quota of cod that fishers were permitted to catch.
Eventually, however, this short-term thinking lead to long-term catastrophe, as Atlantic Canada’s once-thriving fishing industry collapsed, a victim of overfishing and a case study in poor fisheries management. Figure 12.1 Collapse of Atlantic cod stocks off the East Coast of Newfoundland in 1992. Sources: Remembering the mighty cod fishery 20 years after moratoriumPrinciples of Social Psychology 663 The collapse of the Canadian Newfoundland cod fishery One of the most important themes of this book has been the extent to which the two human motives of self-concern and other-concern guide our everyday behavior.
We have seen that although these two underlying goals are in many ways in direct opposition to each other, they nevertheless work together to create successful human outcomes. Particularly important is the fact that we cannot protect and enhance ourselves and those we care about without the help of the people around us. We cannot live alone—we must cooperate, work with, trust, and even provide help to other people in order to survive.
The self-concern motive frequently leads us to desire to not do these things because they sometimes come at a cost to the self. And yet in the end, we must create an appropriate balance between self and other. In this chapter, we revisit this basic topic one more time by considering the roles of self-concern and other-concern in social relationships between people and the social groups they belong to, and among social groups themselves.
We will see, perhaps to a greater extent than ever before, how important our relationships with others are and how careful we must be to develop and use these connections. Most important, we will see again that helping others also helps us help ourselves. Furthermore, in this chapter, we will investigate the broadest level of analysis that we have so far considered—focusing on the cultural and societal level of analysis.
In so doing, we will consider how the goals of self-concern and other-concern apply even to large groups of individuals, such as nations, societies, and cultures, and influence how these large groups interact with each other. Most generally, we can say that when individuals or groups interact they may take either cooperative or competitive positions (De Dreu, 2010; Komorita & Parks, 1994). When we cooperate, the parties involved act in ways that they perceive will benefit both themselves and others.
Cooperation is behavior that occurs when we trust the people or groups with whom we are interacting and are willing to communicate and share with the others, expecting to profit ourselves through the increased benefits that can be provided through joint behavior. On the other hand, when we engage in competition we attempt to gain as many of the limited rewards as possible for ourselves, and at the same time we may work to reduce the likelihood of success for the other parties. Although competition is not always harmful, in some cases one or more of the parties may feel that their self-interest has not been adequately met and may attribute the cause of this outcome to another party (Miller, 2001).
In these cases of perceived inequity or unfairness, competition may lead to conflict, in which the parties involved engage in violence and hostility (De Dreu, 2010). Although competition is normal and will always be a part of human existence, cooperation and sharing are too. Although they may generally look out for their own interests, individuals do realize that there are both costs and benefits to always making selfish choices (Kelley & Thibaut, 1978).
Although we might prefer to use as much gasoline as we want, or to buy a new music album rather than contribute to the local food bank, at the same time we realize that doing so may have negative consequences for the group as a whole. People have simultaneous goals of cooperating and competing, and the individual must coordinate these goals in making a choice (De Dreu, 2010; Schelling, 1960/1980).664 Dr. Hammond Tarry We will also see that human beings, as members of cultures and societies, internalize social norms that promote other-concern, in the form of morality and social fairness norms, and that these norms guide the conduct that allows groups to effectively function and survive (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010).
As human beings, we want to do the right thing, and this includes accepting, cooperating, and working with others. And we will do so when we can. However, as in so many other cases, we will also see that the social situation frequently creates a powerful force that makes it difficult to cooperate and easy to compete.
A social dilemma is a situation in which the goals of the individual conflict with the goals of the group (Penner, Dovidio, Piliavin, & Schroeder, 2005; Suleiman, Budescu, Fischer, & Messick, 2004; Van Lange, De Cremer, Van Dijk, & Van Vugt, 2007). Social dilemmas impact a variety of important social problems because the dilemma creates a type of trap: even though an individual or group may want to be cooperative, the situation leads to competitive behavior. For instance, the fishers we considered in the chapter opener found themselves in a social dilemma—they wanted to continue to catch as many cod as they could, and yet if they all did so, the supply would continue to fall, making the situation worse for everyone.
Although social dilemmas create the potential for conflict and even hostility, those outcomes are not inevitable. People usually think that situations of potential conflict are fixed-sum outcomes, meaning that a gain for one side necessarily means a loss for the other side or sides (Halevy, Chou, & Murnighan, 2011). But this is not always true.
In some cases, the outcomes are instead integrative outcomes, meaning that a solution can be found that benefits all the parties. In the last section of this chapter, we will consider the ways that we can work to increase cooperation and to reduce competition, discussing some of the contributions that social psychologists have made to help solve some important social dilemmas (Oskamp, 2000a, 2000b). References De Dreu, C.
K. W. (2010).
Social conflict: The emergence and consequences of struggle and negotiation. In S. T.
Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 983–1023).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Haidt, J., & Kesebir, S. (2010).
Morality. In S. T.
Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 797–832).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Halevy, N., Chou, E. Y., & Murnighan, J.
K. (2011). Mind games: The mental representation of conflict.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Retrieved from http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=psyh&AN=2011-20586-001&site=ehost- live Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J.
W. (1978). Interpersonal relations: A theory of interdependence.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. Komorita, S. S., & Parks, C.
D. (1994). Social dilemmas.
Dubuque, IA: Brown & Benchmark Miller, D. T. (2001).
Disrespect and the experience of injustice. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 527–553.Principles of Social Psychology 665 Oskamp, S. (2000a).
Psychological contributions to achieving an ecologically sustainable future for humanity. Journal of Social Issues, 56(3), 373–390. Oskamp, S.
(2000b). A sustainable future for humanity? How can psychology help?
American Psychologist, 55(5), 496–508. Penner, L. A., Dovidio, J.
F., Piliavin, J. A., & Schroeder, D. A.
(2005). Prosocial behavior: Multilevel perspectives. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 365–392.
Schelling, T. (1960/1980). The strategy of conflict.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Suleiman, R., Budescu, D. V., Fischer, I., & Messick, D.
M. (Eds.). (2004).
Contemporary psychological research on social dilemmas. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Van Lange, P.
A. M., De Cremer, D., Van Dijk, E., & Van Vugt, M. (Eds.).
(2007). Self-interest and beyond: Basic principles of social interaction. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Media Attributions • “Surexploitation morue surpêcheEn” by Lamiot is licensed under a GNU Free Documentation License.12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness Learning Objectives 1. Review the situational variables that increase or decrease competition and conflict. 2.
Differentiate harm-based morality from social conventional morality, and explain how morality works to help people cooperate. 3. Define distributive justice and procedural justice, and explain the influence of fairness norms on cooperation and competition.
Whether we cooperate or compete is determined, as are most human behaviors, in part by the characteristics of the individuals who are involved in the relationship and in part by the social situation that surrounds them. Let’s begin by considering first the situational determinants of competition and conflict. Competition and Conflict Conflict between individuals, between groups, and even between individuals and the social groups they belong to is a common part of our social worlds.
We compete with other students to get better grades, and nations fight wars to gain territory and advantage. Businesses engage in competitive practices, sometimes in a very assertive manner, to gain market share. The behaviors of the parties that are in conflict are not necessarily designed to harm the others but rather are the result of the goals of self- enhancement and self-preservation.
We compete to gain rewards for ourselves and for those with whom we are connected, and doing so sometimes involves trying to prevent the other parties from being able to gain the limited rewards for themselves. 667668 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Figure 12.2 Successful businessmen: Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerburg.
Successful businessmen, as seen in Figure 12.2, help their corporations compete against others to gain market share. Although competition does not necessarily create overt hostility, competition does sow the seeds for potential problems, and thus hostility may not be far off. One problem is that negative feelings tend to escalate when parties are in competition.
In these cases, and particularly when the competition is intense, negative behavior on the part of one person or group may be responded to with even more hostile responses on the part of the competing person or group. In his summer camp studies, Muzafer Sherif and his colleagues (Sherif, Harvey, White, Hood, & Sherif, 1961) created intergroup competition between the boys in the Rattlers club and the boys in the Eagles club. When the Eagles began by stealing the flag from the Rattlers’ cabin, the Rattlers did not respond merely by stealing a flag in return but, rather, replied with even more hostile and negative behaviors.
It was as if “getting even” was not enough—an even greater retaliation was called for. Similar escalation happened during the Cold War when the United States and the Soviet Union continued to increase their nuclear arsenals, engaging in more and more aggressive and provocative behaviors, each trying to outdo the other. The magnitude of negative behaviors between the parties has a tendency to increase over time.
As the conflict continues, each group perceives the other group more negatively, and these perceptions make it more difficult for the escalating conflict to be reversed. This escalation in negative perceptions between groups that are in conflict occurs in part because conflict leads the groups to develop increasingly strong social identities. These increases in identity are accompanied by the development of even more hostile group norms, which are supported by the group members and their leaders and which sanction or encourage even more negative behaviors toward the outgroup.
Conflict also leads to negative stereotypes of the outgroup, increases perceptions of the other groups as homogenous, and potentially even produces deindividuation and dehumanization of the outgroup (Staub, 2011). The conflict also reduces the amount of interaction among members of the competing groups, which makes it more difficult to change the negative perceptions. The unfortunate outcome of such events is that initially small conflicts may become increasingly hostile until they get out of control.
World wars have begun with relatively small encroachments, and duels to the death have been fought over small insults. Conflict is sometimes realistic, in the sense that the goals of the interacting parties really are12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 669 incompatible and fixed-sum. At a tennis match, for instance, only one player can win.
And in a business world, there is a limited market share for a product. If one business does better by gaining more customers, then the other competing businesses may well do worse because there are fewer customers left for them. Realistic group conflict occurs when groups are in competition for objectively scarce resources, such as when two sports teams are vying for a championship or when the members of different ethnic groups are attempting to find employment in the same factory in a city (Brewer & Campbell, 1976; Jackson, 1993).
Conflict results in these conditions because it is easy (and accurate) to blame the difficulties of one’s own group on the competition produced by the other group or groups. Although many situations do create real conflict, some conflicts are more perceived than realistic because (although they may have a core of realistic conflict) they are based on misperceptions of the intentions of others or the nature of the potential rewards. In some cases, although the situation is perceived as conflicting, the benefits gained for one party do not necessarily mean a loss for the other party (the outcomes are actually integrative).
For instance, when different supply businesses are working together on a project, each may prefer to supply more, rather than less, of the needed materials. However, the project may be so large that none of the businesses can alone meet the demands. In a case such as this, a compromise is perhaps possible such that the businesses may be able to work together, with each company supplying the products on which it makes a larger profit, therefore satisfying the needs of all the businesses.
In this case, the parties may be better off working together than working on their own. Although intergroup relationships that involve hostility or violence are obviously to be avoided, it must be remembered that competition or conflict is not always negative or problematic (Coser, 1956; Rispens & Jehn, 2011). The Darwinian idea of “survival of the fittest” proposes that evolutionary progress occurs precisely because of the continued conflict among individuals within species and between different species as competing social groups.
Over time, this competition, rather than being entirely harmful, increases diversity and the ability to adapt to changing environments. Competition between social groups may also provide social comparison information, which can lead both groups to set higher standards and motivate them to greater achievement. And conflict produces increased social identity within each of the competing groups.
For instance, in the summer camp study, Sherif noted that the boys in the Rattlers and the Eagles developed greater liking for the other members of their own group as well as a greater group identity as the competition between the two groups increased. In situations in which one nation is facing the threat of war with another nation, the resulting identity can be useful in combating the threat, for instance, by mobilizing the citizens to work together effectively and to make sacrifices for the country. Cooperation: Social Norms That Lead Us to Be Good to Others Although competition is always a possibility, our concern for others leads most relationships among individuals and among groups to be more benign and favorable.
Most people get along with others and generally work together in ways that promote liking, sharing, and cooperation. In these situations, the interacting parties perceive that the gains made by others also improve their own chances of gaining rewards and that their goals are compatible. The parties perceive the situation as integrative and desire to cooperate.
The players on a football team, for instance, may cooperate with each other—the better any one of them does, the better the team as a whole does. And in cooperative situations, it may in670 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds some cases even be beneficial to accept some personal costs (such as passing the football to a teammate with a better shot at the goal, even though it means less glory for the self) in order to further the goals of the group.
Because cooperation is evolutionarily useful for human beings, social norms that help us cooperate have become part of human nature. These norms include principles of morality and social fairness. Morality As we have seen in many places in this book, helping others is part of our human nature.
And cooperation and helping are found in other animals as well as in humans. For instance, it has been observed that the highest-status chimpanzees in a group do not act selfishly all the time—rather, they typically share food with others and help those who seem to be in need (de Waal, 1996). As humans, our desires to cooperate are guided in part by a set of social norms about morality that forms a basic and important part of our culture.
All cultures have morality beliefs—the set of social norms that describe the principles and ideals, as well as the duties and obligations, that we view as appropriate and that we use to judge the actions of others and to guide our own behavior (Darley & Shultz, 1990; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). Researchers have identified two fundamental types of morality: social conventional morality and harm- based morality (Turiel, Killen, & Helwig, 1987). Social conventional morality refers to norms that are seen as appropriate within a culture but that do not involve behaviors that relate to doing good or doing harm toward others.
There is a great deal of cultural variation in social conventional morality, and these norms relate to a wide variety of behaviors. Some cultures approve of polygamy and homosexuality, whereas others do not. In some cultures, it is appropriate for men and women to be held to different standards, whereas in other cultures, this is seen as wrong.
Even things that seem completely normal to us in the West, such as dancing, eating beef, and allowing men to cook meals for women, are seen in some other cultures as immoral. If these conventions, as well as the fact that they are part of the moral code in these cultures, seem strange to you, rest assured that some of your own conventional beliefs probably seem just as strange to other cultures. Social conventions are in large part arbitrary and are determined by cultures themselves.
Furthermore, social conventions change over time. Until 1947, Canadians of Asian descent did not have the right to vote in federal elections, and yet that convention has now changed for the better. And today many countries have legalized gay marriages, a policy that seemed like wishful thinking even a few years ago.
On the other hand, some of the most important and fundamental moral principles seem to be universally held by all people in all cultures and do not change over time. It has been found that starting at about age 10, children in most cultures come to a belief about harm-based morality—that harming others, either physically or by violating their rights, is wrong (Helwig & Turiel, 2002). These fundamental and universal principles of morality involve rights, freedom, equality, and cooperation, and virtually all cultures have a form of the golden rule, which prescribes how we should treat other people (as we would have them treat us).
Morals are held and agreed to by all members of the culture. In most cases, morals are upheld through12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 671 rules, laws, and other types of sanctions for their transgression. We give rewards to people who express our preferred morality, for instance, in the form of prizes, honors, and awards, and we punish those who violate our moral standards.
Morality has both a cognitive and an emotional component. Some judgments just feel wrong, even if we cannot put our finger on exactly why that is. For instance, you’d probably agree that it is morally wrong to kiss your sister or brother on the lips, although at a cognitive level, it’s difficult to say exactly why it’s wrong.
Is it wrong to kill someone if doing so saves lives? Most people agree that they should flip the switch to kill the single individual in the following scenario: A runaway trolley is headed for five people who will all be killed. The only way to save them is to hit a switch that will turn the trolley onto a different track where it will kill one person instead of five.
And yet even when morality seems cognitive, our emotions come into play. Although most people agree that the decision to kill the one person is rational, they would have a hard time actually doing it—harm-based morality tells us we should not kill. Social Fairness An essential part of morality involves determining what is “right” or “fair” in social interaction.
We want things to be fair, we try to be fair ourselves, and we react negatively when we see things that are unfair. And we determine what is or is not fair by relying on another set of social norms, appropriately called social fairness norms, which are beliefs about how people should be treated fairly (Tyler & Lind, 2001; Tyler & Smith, 1998). The preference for fairness has been proposed to be a basic human impulse (Tyler & Blader, 2000), and when we perceive unfairness, we also experience negative emotional responses in brain regions associated with reward and punishment (Tabibnia, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2008).
The experience of unfairness is associated with negative emotions, including anger and contempt, whereas fairness is associated with positive emotions. One type of social fairness, known as distributive fairness, refers to our judgments about whether or not a party is receiving a fair share of the available rewards. Distributive fairness is based on our perceptions of equity—the belief that we should each receive for our work a share proportionate to our contributions.
If two people work equally hard on a project, they should get the same grade on it. But if one works harder than the other, then the more hardworking partner should get a better grade. Things seem fair and just when we see that these balances are occurring, but they seem unfair and unjust when they do not seem to be.
A second type of fairness doesn’t involve the outcomes of the work itself but rather our perceptions of the methods used to assign those outcomes. Procedural fairness refers to beliefs about the fairness (or unfairness) of the procedures used to distribute available rewards among parties (Schroeder, Steele, Woodell, & Bernbenek, 2003). Procedural fairness (Figure 12.3) is important because in some cases we may not know what the outcomes are, but we may nevertheless feel that things are fair because we believe that the process used to determine the outcomes is fair.
For instance, we may not know how672 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds much tax other people are paying, but we feel that the system itself is fair, and thus most of us endorse the idea of paying taxes. We do so not only out of respect for the laws that require us to but also because the procedure seems right and proper, part of the social structure of our society.
Figure 12.3 Procedural Fairness. People are happier at work, at school, and in other aspects of their everyday lives when they feel that they and others are treated fairly. We believe in the importance of fairness in part because if we did not, then we would be forced to accept the fact that life is unpredictable and that negative things can occur to us at any time.
Believing in fairness allows us to feel better because we can believe that we get what we deserve and deserve what we get. These beliefs allow us to maintain control over our worlds. To believe that those who work hard are not rewarded and that accidents happen to good people forces us to concede that we too are vulnerable.
Because we believe so strongly in fairness, and yet the world is not always just, we may distort our perceptions of the world to allow us to see it as more fair than it really is. One way to create a “just world” is to reinterpret behaviors and outcomes so that the events seem to be fair. Indeed Melvin Lerner and his colleagues (Lerner, 1980) found one way that people do this is by blaming the victim: interpreting the negative outcomes that occur to others internally so that it seems that they deserved them.
When we see that bad things have happened to other people, we tend to blame the people for them, even if they are not at fault. Thus we may believe that poor people deserve to be poor because they are lazy, that crime victims deserve to be victims because they were careless, and that people with AIDS deserve their illness. In fact, the more threatened we feel by an apparent unfairness, the greater is our need to protect ourselves from the dreadful implication that it could happen to us, and the more we disparage the victim.
Reactions to Unfairness Although everyone believes that things should be fair, doing so is a lot easier for those of us for whom things have worked out well. If we have high status, we will generally be content with our analysis of the situation because it indicates that we deserve what we got. We are likely to think, “I must have a good education, a good job, and plenty of money because I worked hard for it and deserve it.” In these cases, the reality supports our desires for self-concern, and there is no psychological dilemma posed.12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 673 On the other hand, people with low status must reconcile their low status with their perceptions of fairness.
Although they do not necessarily feel good about it, individuals who have low status may nevertheless accept the existing status hierarchy, deciding that they deserve what little they have. This is particularly likely if these low-status individuals accept the procedural fairness of the system. People who believe that the system is fair and that the members of higher-status groups are trustworthy and respectful frequently accept their position, even if it is one of low status (Tyler, Degoey, & Smith, 1996).
In all societies, some individuals have lower status than others, and the members of low-status groups may perceive that these differences because they are an essential part of the society, are acceptable. The acceptance of one’s own low status as part of the proper and normal functioning of society is known as false consciousness (Jost & Banaji, 1994; Major, 1994). In fact, people who have lower social status and who thus should be most likely to reject the existing status hierarchy are often the most accepting of it (Jost, Pelham, Sheldon, & Sullivan, 2003).
But what about people who have not succeeded, who have low social status, and yet who also do not accept the procedural fairness of the system? How do they respond to the situation that seems so unfair? One approach is to try to gain status, for instance, by leaving the low-status group to which they currently belong.
Individuals who attempt to improve their social status by moving to a new, higher- status group must give up their social identity with the original group and then increasingly direct their communication and behavior toward the higher-status groups in the hope of being able to join them. Although it represents the most direct method of change, leaving one group for another is not always desirable for the individual or effective if it is attempted. For one, if individuals are already highly identified with the low-status group, they may not wish to leave it despite the fact that it is low status.
Doing so would sacrifice an important social identity, and it may be difficult to generate a new one with the new group (Ellemers, Spears, & Doosje, 1997; Spears, Doosje, & Ellemers, 1997). In addition, an attempt to leave the group is a likely response to low status only if the person perceives that the change is possible. In some situations, group memberships are constrained by physical appearance (such as when the low status is a result of one’s race or ethnicity) or cultural norms (such as in a caste system in which change is not allowed by social custom).
And there may also be individual constraints on the possibility of mobility—if the individual feels that he or she does not have the skills or ability to make the move, he or she may be unlikely to attempt doing so. When it does not seem possible to leave one’s low-status group, the individual may decide instead to use a social creativity strategy. Social creativity refers to the use of strategies that allow members of low-status groups to perceive their group as better than other groups, at least on some dimensions, which allows them to gain some positive social identity (Derks, van Laar, & Ellemers, 2007).
In the United States, for example, Blacks, who are frequently the target of negative stereotypes, prejudices, and discrimination, may react to these negative outcomes by focusing on more positive aspects of their group membership. The idea is that their cultural background becomes a positive, rather than a negative, aspect of their personality—“Black is Beautiful!” is one example. Social creativity frequently takes the form of finding alternative characteristics that help the group excel.
For example, the students at a college that does not have a particularly good academic standing may look to the superior performance of their sports teams as a way of creating positive self- perceptions and social identity. Although the sports team performance may be a less important674 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds dimension than academic performance overall, it does provide at least some positive feelings.
Alternatively, the members of the low-status group might regain identity by perceiving their group as very cohesive or homogenous, emphasizing group strength as a positive characteristic. When individual mobility is not possible, group members may consider mobilizing their group using collective action. Collective action refers to the attempts on the part of one group to change the social status hierarchy by improving the status of their own group relative to others.
This might occur through peaceful methods, such as lobbying for new laws requiring more equal opportunity or for affirmative action programs, or it may involve resorts to violence, such as some of the recent uprisings in Middle Eastern countries (Ellemers & Barreto, 2009; Leonard, Moons, Mackie, & Smith, 2011; Levine, Taylor, & Best, 2011). Collective action is more likely to occur when there is a perception on the part of the group that their low status is undeserved and caused by the actions of the higher-status group, when communication among the people in the low-status group allows them to coordinate their efforts, and when there is strong leadership to help define an ideology, organize the group, and formulate a program for action. Taking part in collective action—for instance, by joining feminist, or civil rights, or the “occupy” movement in various countries—is a method of maintaining and increasing one’s group identity and attempting to change the current social structure.
Social Psychology in the Public Interest System Justification We have argued throughout this book that people have a strong desire to feel good about themselves and the people they care about, and we have seen much evidence to support this idea. Most people believe that they and their own groups are important, valued, competent, and generally “better than average.” And most people endorse social policies that favor themselves and the groups to which they belong (Bobo, 1983; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). If this is the case, then why do people who are of lower socioeconomic status so often support political policies that tax the poor more highly than they tax the rich and that support unequal income distributions that do not favor them?
In short, why do people engage in system justification, even when the current state of affairs does not benefit them personally? Social psychologists have provided a number of potential explanations for this puzzling phenomenon. One factor is that our perceptions of fairness or unfairness are not based on our objective position within the society but rather are more based on our comparison of our own status relative to the other people around us.
For instance, poor people may not perceive that they have lower status because they compare their current state of affairs not with rich people but with the people who they are most likely to see every day—other poor people. This explanation is supported by the fact that factors that increase the likelihood that lower-status individuals will compare themselves with higher-status people tend to reduce system justification beliefs, decrease life satisfaction, and lead to collective action. For instance, the civil rights riots of the 1960s occurred after Blacks had made many gains in the United States.
At this time, they may have tended to reject the existing status system because they began to compare themselves with higher-status12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 675 Whites rather than with other low-status Blacks, and this upward comparison made their relatively lower status seem more illegitimate and unfair (Gurr, 1970). A second explanation is based on the principles of procedural fairness. Our perceptions of fairness and our satisfaction with our own lives are determined in large part by the culture in which we live.
In North America, the culture provides a strong belief in fairness. Most people believe in the procedural fairness of the system itself and thus are willing to believe that systems and authorities are correct and proper and that inequality among groups and individuals is legitimate and even necessary. Furthermore, because believing otherwise would be highly threatening to the self-concept, poor people may be even more likely to believe in the correctness of these inequalities than are those of higher status (Jost, 2011; van der Toorn, Tyler, & Jost, 2011).
To test this hypothesis, John Jost and his colleagues (Jost, Pelham, Sheldon, & Sullivan, 2003) asked over 2,500 U.S. citizens the following question: Some people earn a lot of money while others do not earn very much at all. In order to get people to work hard, do you think large differences in pay are: • Absolutely necessary?
• Probably necessary? • Probably not necessary? • Definitely not necessary?
As predicted by the idea that to believe otherwise is to accept that the social situation is unfair, Jost and his colleagues found that poorer people were significantly more likely to think that large differences in pay were necessary and proper (responding “absolutely necessary” or “probably necessary”) than did wealthier people (Figure 12.4). You can see that social psychological principles—in this case, the idea of system justification—can be used to explain what otherwise would seem to be quite unexpected phenomena. Figure 12.4 Poorer respondents reported finding the income differential between rich and poor more acceptable than did richer participants.
Data are from Jost, Pelham, Sheldon, and Sullivan (2003).676 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Key Takeaways • The individual goals of self-concern and other-concern help explain tendencies to cooperate or compete with others. • Both competition and cooperation are common and useful reactions to social interaction dilemmas.
• The solutions to social dilemmas are more favorable when the outcomes are integrative rather than fixed-sum. • Conflict is sometimes realistic, in the sense that the goals of the interacting parties really are incompatible. But in many cases, conflicts are more perceived than realistic.
• Our reactions to conflict are influenced by harm-based morality beliefs and social fairness norms. • Individuals who have low status may nevertheless accept the existing status hierarchy, deciding that they deserve what little they have, a phenomenon known as false consciousness. Individuals with low status who to do not accept the procedural fairness of the system may use social creativity strategies or them may resort to collective action.
Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Do you think that you or people you know are victims of system justification? How would you know if you or they were?
2. Discuss an example of a person who is a member of a social group and who you believe has used social creativity strategies in an attempt to improve his or her self-image. What were the strategies, and were they successful?
References Bobo, L. (1983). Whites’ opposition to busing: Symbolic racism or realistic group conflict?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 1196–1210. Brewer, M. B., & Campbell, D.
T. (1976). Ethnocentrism and intergroup attitudes: East African evidence.
New York, NY: Sage. Coser, L. A.
(1956). The functions of social conflict. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 677 Darley, J.
M., & Shultz, T. R. (1990).
Moral rules: Their content and acquisition. Annual Review of Psychology, 41(4), 525–556. de Waal, F.
(1996). Good natured: The evolution of right and wrong in humans and other animals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Derks, B., van Laar, C., & Ellemers, N. (2007). Social creativity strikes back: Improving motivated performance of low status group members by valuing ingroup dimensions.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 37(3), 490–493. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.375 Ellemers, N., & Barreto, M. (2009).
Collective action in modern times: How modern expressions of prejudice prevent collective action. Journal of Social Issues, 65(4), 749–768. Ellemers, N., Spears, R., & Doosje, B.
(1997). Sticking together or falling apart: In-group identification as a psychological determinant of group commitment versus individual mobility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 617–626.
Gurr, T. (1970). Why men rebel.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Haidt, J., & Kesebir, S. (2010).
Morality. In S. T.
Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 797–832).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. Helwig, C. C., & Turiel, E.
(Eds.). (2002). Children’s social and moral reasoning.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. Jackson, J. W.
(1993). Realistic group conflict theory: A review and evaluation of the theoretical and empirical literature. The Psychological Record, 43(3), 395–413.
Jost, J. T. (2011).
System justification theory as compliment, complement, and corrective to theories of social identification and social dominance. In D. Dunning (Ed.), Social motivation (pp.
223–263). New York, NY: Psychology Press. Jost, J.
T., & Banaji, M. R. (1994).
The role of stereotyping in system-justification and the production of false consciousness. British Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 1–27; Major, B. (1994).
Jost, J. T., Pelham, B. W., Sheldon, O., & Sullivan, B.
N. (2003). Social inequality and the reduction of ideological dissonance on behalf of the system: Evidence of enhanced system justification among the disadvantaged.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 33(1), 13–36. Leonard, D. J., Moons, W.
G., Mackie, D. M., & Smith, E. R.
(2011). “We’re mad as hell and we’re not going to take it anymore”: Anger self-stereotyping and collective action. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 14(1), 99–111.
Lerner, M. J. (1980).
The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion. New York, NY: Plenum. Levine, M., Taylor, P.
J., & Best, R. (2011). Third parties, violence, and conflict resolution: The role of group size and collective action in the microregulation of violence.
Psychological Science, 22(3), 406–412. Major, B. (1994).
From social inequality to personal entitlement: The role of social comparisons, legitimacy appraisals, and group membership. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 26, 293–348. Rispens, S., & Jehn, K.
A. (2011). Conflict in workgroups: Constructive, destructive, and asymmetric conflict.
In D. De Cremer, R. van Dick, & J.
K. Murnighan (Eds.), Social psychology and organizations (pp. 185–209).
New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.678 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Schroeder, D. A., Steele, J.
E., Woodell, A. J., & Bernbenek, A. F.
(2003). Justice in social dilemmas. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7, 374–387.
Sherif, M., Harvey, O. J., White, B. J., Hood, W.
R., & Sherif, C. (1961). Intergroup conflict and cooperation: The robbers’ cave experiment.
Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999).
Social dominance: An intergroup theory of social hierarchy and oppression. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Spears, R., Doosje, B., & Ellemers, N.
(1997). Self-stereotyping in the face of threats to group status and distinctiveness: The role of group identification. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 538–553.
Staub, E. (2011). Overcoming evil: Genocide, violent conflict and terrorism.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M.
D. (2008). The sunny side of fairness: Preference for fairness activates reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness activates self-control circuitry).
Psychological Science, 19(4), 339–347. Turiel, E., Killen, M., & Helwig, C. (1987).
Morality: Its structure, functions and vagaries. In J. Kagan & S.
Lamb (Eds.), The emergence of morality in young children (pp. 55–243). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. (2000).
Cooperation in groups: Procedural justice, social identity, and behavioral engagement. New York, NY: Psychology Press. Tyler, T.
R., & Lind, E. A. (2001).
Procedural justice. In J. Sanders & V.
L. Hamilton (Eds.), Handbook of justice research in law (pp. 65–92).
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Tyler, T. R., & Smith, H.
J. (1998). Social justice and social movements.
In D. T. Gilbert, S.
T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vols.
1 and 2, pp. 595–629). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Tyler, T., Degoey, P., & Smith, H. (1996). Understanding why the justice of group procedures matters: A test of the psychological dynamics of the group-value model.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(5), 913–930. van der Toorn, J., Tyler, T. R., & Jost, J.
T. (2011). More than fair: Outcome dependence, system justification, and the perceived legitimacy of authority figures.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47(1), 127–138. Media Attributions • “Bill Gates at CES 2007 (350043329)” by Lori Tingey is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence. • “Mark Zuckerberg – South by Southwest 2008” by Jason McELweenie is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.
• “my son’s teacher is a supermodel” by woodleywonderworks is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.12.1 Conflict, Cooperation, Morality, and Fairness 679 • “Miles Ehrlich, judge” by maveric2003 is licensed under a CC BY 2.0 licence.12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas Learning Objectives 1. Explain the concepts of public goods and social dilemmas, and how these conflicts influence human interactions. 2.
Describe the principles of the prisoner’s dilemma game that make it an effective model for studying social dilemmas. 3. Review the different laboratory games that have been used to study social dilemmas.
4. Summarize the individual difference and cultural variables that relate to cooperation and competition. If human beings are well equipped to cooperate with each other, and if morality, social fairness, and other human features favor cooperation, why are so many social relationships still competitive?
If you guessed that the competition comes not so much from the people as it does from the nature of the social situation, then you would be correct. In short, competition is often caused by the social dilemma itself—the dilemma creates patterns whereby even when we want to be good, the situation nevertheless rewards us for being selfish. Ross and Ward (1995) found that participants played a game more competitively when it was described as a “Wall Street broker game” than when the same game was called a “community game.” And other studies have found that subliminal priming of money or business materials (e.g., boardroom tables and business suits) increases competition (Kay, Wheeler, Bargh, & Ross, 2004; Vohs, Meed, & Goode, 2006).
Social dilemmas occur when the members of a group, culture, or society are in potential conflict over the creation and use of shared public goods. Public goods are benefits that are shared by a community at large and that everyone in the group has access to, regardless of whether or not they have personally contributed to the creation of the goods (Abele, Stasser, & Chartier, 2010). In many cases, the public good involves the responsible use of a resource that if used wisely by the group as a whole will remain intact but if overused will be destroyed.
Examples include the cod off the coast of Newfoundland, water in local reservoirs, public beaches, and clean air. In other cases, the public good involves a service—such as public television or public radio—that is supported by the members of the community but that is used freely by everyone in the community. Let’s consider first a case in which a social dilemma leads people to overuse an existing public good—a type of social dilemma called a harvesting dilemma.
One example, called the commons dilemma, was proposed by Garrett Hardin (1968). Hardin noted that in many towns in Europe, there was at one time a centrally located pasture, known as the commons, which was shared by the 681682 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds inhabitants of the village to graze their livestock.
But the commons was not always used wisely. The problem was that each individual who owned livestock wanted to be able to use the commons to graze his or her own animals. However, when each group member took advantage of the commons by grazing many animals, the commons became overgrazed, the pasture died, and the commons was destroyed.
Although Hardin focused on the particular example of the commons, he noted that the basic dilemma of individual needs and desires versus the benefit of the group as whole could also be found in many contemporary public goods issues, including the use of limited natural resources and public land. In large cities, most people may prefer the convenience of driving their own car to work each day rather than taking public transportation. Yet this behavior uses up public goods (roads that are not clogged with traffic, and air that is free of pollution).
People are lured into the dilemma by short-term self- interest, seemingly without considering the potential long-term costs of the behavior, such as air pollution and the necessity of building even more highways. Social dilemmas such as the commons dilemma are arranged in a way that make it easy to be selfish because the personally beneficial choice (such as using water during a water shortage or driving to work alone in one’s own car) produces benefits for the individual, no matter what others do. Furthermore, social dilemmas tend to work on a type of “time delay.” Because the long-term negative outcome (the extinction of fish species or dramatic changes in the climate) is far away in the future, and yet the individual benefits are occurring right now, it is difficult to see how many costs there really are.
The paradox, of course, is that if everyone takes the personally selfish choice in an attempt to maximize his or her own rewards, the long-term result is poorer outcomes for every individual in the group. Each individual prefers to make use of the public goods for himself or herself, whereas the best outcome for the group as a whole is to use the resources more slowly and wisely. Another type of social dilemma—the contributions dilemma—occurs when the short-term costs of a behavior lead individuals to avoid performing it, and this may prevent the long-term benefits that would have occurred if the behaviors had been performed.
An example of a contributions dilemma occurs when individuals have to determine whether or not to donate to the local public radio or television station. If most people do not contribute, the TV station may have lower quality programming, or even go off the air entirely, thus producing a negative outcome for the group as a whole. However, if enough people already contribute, then it is not in anyone’s own best interest to do so, because the others will pay for the programming for them.
Contributions dilemmas thus encourage people to free ride, relying on other group members to contribute for them. H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: DRAG THE WORDS – COVID-19 SOCIAL DILEMMAS The following scenarios relevant to the COVID-19 pandemic are examples of either a commons or contributions dilemma. Read through each situation below, and decide which dilemma applies.
If you need to, look back at the key differences between these two types of social dilemma in this section of the chapter, and then drag your chosen option into each box. 1. The stockpiling of items like hand sanitizers and face masks in the early months of the12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 683 pandemic, to be sold on at large mark ups, and leaving many without access to these items.
2. Some people who chose not to get a COVID-19 vaccination to avoid any potential side effects, hoping that enough others will get it, so that some form of herd immunity is achieved anyway. 3.
A management team who decide not to comply with a mask mandate in their workplace, knowing that most companies will comply, which will in turn reduce transmission rates. 4. The bulk buying of items that were believed to be likely to become scarce, including rolls of bathroom tissue, which naturally then created the very scarcity people feared.
The Prisoner’s Dilemma One method of understanding how individuals and groups behave in social dilemmas is to create such situations in the laboratory and observe how people react to them. The best known of these laboratory simulations is called the prisoner’s dilemma game (Poundstone, 1992). The prisoner’s dilemma game is a laboratory simulation that models a social dilemma in which the goals of the individual compete with the goals of another individual (or sometimes with a group of other individuals).
Like all social dilemmas, the prisoner’s dilemma makes use of the assumptions of social learning approaches to behavior that assume that individuals will try to maximize their own outcomes in their interactions with others. In the prisoner’s dilemma, the participants are shown a payoff matrix in which numbers are used to express the potential outcomes for the each of the players in the game, given the decisions made by each player. The payoffs are chosen beforehand by the experimenter to create a situation that models some real-world outcome.
Furthermore, in the prisoner’s dilemma, the payoffs are normally arranged as they would be in a typical social dilemma, such that each individual is better off acting in his or her immediate self-interest, and yet if all individuals act according to their self-interest, then everyone will be worse off. In its original form, the prisoner’s dilemma involves a situation in which two prisoners (we’ll call them Frank and Malik) have been accused of committing a crime. The police have determined that the two worked together on the crime, but they have only been able to gather enough evidence to convict each of them of a more minor offense.
In an attempt to gain more evidence and thus to be able to convict the prisoners of the larger crime, each prisoner is interrogated individually, with the hope that he will confess to having been involved in the more major crime in return for a promise of a reduced sentence if he confesses first. Each prisoner can make either the cooperative choice (which is to not confess) or the competitive choice (which is to confess). The incentives for either confessing or not confessing are expressed in a payoff matrix such as the one shown in Figure 12.5.
The top of the matrix represents the two choices that Malik might make (either to confess that he did the crime or to not confess), and the side of the matrix represents the two choices684 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds that Frank might make (also to either confess or not confess). The payoffs that each prisoner receives, given the choices of each of the two prisoners, are shown in each of the four squares.
Figure 12.5 The Prisoner’s Dilemma In the prisoner’s dilemma, two suspected criminals are interrogated separately. The payoff matrix indicates the outcomes for each prisoner, measured as the number of years each is sentenced to prison, as a result of each combination of cooperative (don’t confess) and competitive (confess) decisions. Outcomes for Malik are in the darker color, and outcomes for Frank are in lighter color.
If both prisoners take the cooperative choice by not confessing (the situation represented in the upper left square of the matrix), there will be a trial, the limited available information will be used to convict each prisoner, and each will be sentenced to a relatively short prison term of three years. However, if either of the prisoners confesses, turning “state’s evidence” against the other prisoner, then there will be enough information to convict the other prisoner of the larger crime, and that prisoner will receive a sentence of 30 years, whereas the prisoner who confesses will get off free. These outcomes are represented in the lower left and upper right squares of the matrix.
Finally, it is possible that both players confess at the same time. In this case, there is no need for a trial, and in return, the prosecutors offer a somewhat reduced sentence (of 10 years) to each of the prisoners. Characteristics of the Prisoner’s Dilemma The prisoner’s dilemma has two interesting characteristics that make it a useful model of a social dilemma.
For one, the prisoner’s dilemma is arranged so that a positive outcome for one player does not necessarily mean a negative outcome for the other player (i.e., the prisoner’s dilemma is not a fixed-sum situation but an integrative one). If you consider again the matrix in Figure 12.5, you can see that if one player takes the cooperative choice (to not confess) and the other takes the competitive choice (to confess), then the prisoner who cooperates loses, whereas the other prisoner wins. However, if both prisoners make the cooperative choice, each remaining quiet, then neither gains more than the other, and both prisoners receive a relatively light sentence.
In this sense, both players can win at the same time.12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 685 Second, the prisoner’s dilemma matrix is arranged such that each individual player is motivated to take the competitive choice because this choice leads to a higher payoff regardless of what the other player does. Imagine for a moment that you are Malik, and you are trying to decide whether to cooperate (don’t confess) or to compete (confess). And imagine that you are not really sure what Frank is going to do.
Remember that the goal of the individual is to maximize rewards. The values in the matrix make it clear that if you think that Frank is going to confess, you should confess yourself (to get 10 rather than 30 years in prison). And it is also clear that if you think Frank is not going to confess, you should still confess (to get no years rather than three years in prison).
So the matrix is arranged so that the “best” alternative for each player, at least in the sense of pure self-interest, is to make the competitive choice, even though in the end both players would prefer the combination in which both players cooperate to the one in which they both compete. Although initially specified in terms of the two prisoners, similar payoff matrices can be used to predict behavior in many different types of dilemmas involving two or more parties and including choices between helping and not helping, working and loafing, and paying and not paying debts (Weber & Messick, 2004). For instance, we can use the prisoner’s dilemma to help us understand a contributions dilemma, such as why two roommates might not want to contribute to the housework.
Each of them would be better off if they relied on the other to clean the house. Yet if neither of them makes an effort to clean the house (the cooperative choice), the house becomes a mess and they will both be worse off. Variations on the Prisoner’s Dilemma In many cases, the prisoner’s dilemma game is played over a series of trials, in which players can modify their responses based on those given by their partners on previous trials.
For example, the ongoing arms race between neighbors and rivals India and Pakistan can be seen as a social dilemma that occurs over time. Over a period of years, each country chooses whether to compete (by building nuclear weapons) or to cooperate (by not building nuclear weapons). And in each case, both countries feel that it is in their best interest to compete rather than cooperate.
The prisoner’s dilemma can also be expanded to be played by more than two players. The behavior of individuals leaving a crowed parking lot, as an example, represents a type of prisoner’s dilemma in which it is to each person’s individual benefit to try to be the first to leave. However, if each person rushes to the exit without regard for others, a traffic jam is more likely to result, which slows down the process for everyone.
If all individuals take the cooperative choice—waiting until their turn—everyone wins. Resource Dilemma Games In addition to the prisoner’s dilemma, social dilemmas have been studied using games in which a group of individuals share a common pool of resources. In these resource dilemma games, the participants may extract or harvest resources from the pool, and it is to their individual advantage to do so.
Furthermore, as the resources are used, the pool can replenish itself through a fixed schedule, which will allow the individuals to continue to harvest over long periods of time. Optimal use of the resource involves keeping the pool level up and harvesting only as much as will be replenished in the given time686 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds period.
Overuse of the pool provides immediate gain for the individuals but has a long-term cost in the inability to make harvests at a later time. In one version of a resource dilemma game (Edney, 1979), the participants sit around a bowl of metal nuts, and the goal is to get as many nuts as one can. The experimenter adds nuts to the bowl so that the number of nuts in the bowl doubles every 10 seconds.
However, the individual players are also motivated to harvest nuts for themselves and are allowed to take out as many nuts as they like at any time. In Edney’s research, rather than cooperating and watching the pool grow, the participants almost immediately acted in their self-interest, grabbing the nuts from the bowl. In fact, Edney reported that 65% of the groups never got to the first 10-second replenishment!
Research Focus The Trucking Game Another example of a laboratory simulation that has been used to study conflict is the trucking game. In the original research (Deutsch & Krauss, 1960), pairs of women played the trucking game. Each woman was given $4 to begin with and was asked to imagine herself as the owner of one of two trucking companies (Acme or Bolt) that carried merchandise over the roads shown in Figure 12.6.
Each time either player’s truck reached the destination on the opposite side of the board, she earned 60 cents, minus operating costs (1 cent for each second taken by the trip). However, the game was also arranged to create the potential for conflict. Each participant wanted to travel on the main road in order to get to the destination faster, but this road was arranged to be so narrow that only one truck could pass at a time.
Whenever the two trucks met each other on this narrow road, one of them was eventually forced to back up. Thus there are two choices to getting to the destination. The players had to either take the long, winding roads, thus eliminating their profits (each player would lose 10 cents on each trip if they were forced to take the long road) or figure out a way to share the use of the one-lane road.12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 687 Figure 12.6 The Road Map from the Trucking Game.
From Deutsch (1973).Deutsch, M. (1973). The resolution of conflict.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Figure 12.7 Outcomes of a Trucking Game Study. Data are from Deutsch and Krauss (1960).
Deutsch and Krauss made the game even more interesting by creating experimental conditions in which either or both of the truck company owners had a gate that controlled access to the road. In the unilateral-threat condition, only Acme had a gate. Thus if Bolt attempted to use the main road, Acme could close the gate, forcing Bolt to back up and enabling Acme to reopen the gate and proceed quickly688 Chapter 12.
Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds to the destination. In the bilateral-threat condition, both sides had gates, whereas in the no-threat condition, there were no gates. As shown in Figure 12.7, participants without gates soon learned to share the one-lane road, and, on average, each made a profit.
However, threat in the form of a gate produced conflict and led to fewer profits, although in many cases the participants learned to deal with these problems over time and improved their payoffs as the game went on (Lawler, Ford, & Blegen, 1988; Shomer, Davis, & Kelley, 1966). Participants lost the most money in the bilateral-threat condition in which both sides were given gates that they could control. In this situation, conflict immediately developed, and there were standoffs on the middle road that wasted time and prevented either truck from moving.
Two results of this study are particularly surprising. First, in the unilateral threat condition, both players (including Acme, who had control of the gate) made less money than did those in the no-threat condition (although it is true that in this condition, Acme did lose less than Bolt). Thus being able to threaten the other was not successful for generating overall profits.
Second, in the conditions in which both individuals had gates, both individuals actually did worse than they did when only one individual had a gate. Thus when an opponent is able to threaten you, it may be to your benefit to not return with a threat of your own—the ability to counteract the threats of your partner may not always help you but rather may produce even more conflict and losses for both parties. Who Cooperates and Who Competes?
Although we have to this point focused on how situational variables, such as the nature of the payoffs in the matrix, increase the likelihood that we will compete rather than cooperate, not everyone is influenced the same way by the situation—the personality characteristics of the individuals also matter. In general, people who are more self-oriented are more likely to compete, whereas people who are more other-oriented are more likely to cooperate (Balliet, Parks, & Joireman, 2009; Sagiv, Sverdlik, & Schwarz, 2011). For instance, Campbell, Bush, Brunell, and Shelton (2005) found that students who were highly narcissistic (i.e., very highly self-focused) competed more in a resource dilemma and took more of the shared resource for themselves than did the other people playing the game.
Research Focus Self- and Other-Orientations in Social Dilemmas Paul Van Lange and his colleagues (Van Lange, 1999; Van Lange & Kuhlman, 1994) have focused on the person determinants of cooperation by characterizing individuals as one of two types—those who are “pro-social,” meaning that they are high on other-concern and value cooperation, and those who are “pro-self” and thus tend to behave in a manner that enhances their own outcomes by trying to gain advantage over others by making competitive choices. Sonja Utz (2004) tested how people who were primarily self-concerned would respond differently than those who were primarily other-concerned when the self-concept was activated. In her research, male and female college students first completed a measure designed to assess whether they were more pro- social or more pro-self in orientation.
On this measure, the participants had to make choices about whether to give points to themselves or to another person on a series of tasks. The students who tended12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 689 to favor themselves were classified as pro-self, whereas those who tended to favor others were classified as pro-social. Then all the students read a story describing a trip to a nearby city.
However, while reading the story, half of the students (the self-priming condition) were asked to circle all the pronouns occurring in the story. These pronouns were arranged to be self-relevant and thus to activate the self-concept—“I,” “we,” “my,” and so forth. The students in the control condition, however, were instructed to circle the prepositions, which were not self-relevant (e.g., “of” and “after”).
Finally, the students participated in a series of games in which they had to make a choice between two alternative distributions of points between themselves and another person. As you can see Figure 12.8, the self-manipulation influenced the pro-self students (who were primarily self-oriented already) in a way that they became even less cooperative and more self-serving. However, the students who were initially pro-social became even more cooperative when the self-concept was activated.
Figure 12.8. Priming Self-Concept. Priming the self-concept increased cooperation for those who were other-concerned but increased competition for those who were self-concerned.
Data are from Utz (2004). Although it is possible that people are either self-concerned or other-concerned, another possibility is that people vary on both of these dimensions simultaneously, such that some people may be high on both self-concern and other-concern. The dual-concern model of cooperation and competition (Pruitt & Rubin, 1986) is based on this approach, and the four resulting personality types are outlined in Figure 12.9.
The dual-concern model suggests that individuals will relate to social dilemmas, or other forms of conflict, in different ways, depending on their underlying personal orientations or as influenced by the characteristics of the situation that orient them toward a given concern. Individuals who are focused primarily on their own outcomes but who do not care about the goals of others are considered to be contending in orientation. These individuals are expected to try to take advantage of the other party, for instance, by withholding their contributions in social dilemmas.
Those who are focused primarily on the others’ outcomes, however, will be yielding and likely to make cooperative choices. Individuals who are not concerned about the interests of either the self or others are inactive and unlikely to care about the situation or to participate in solving it at all.690 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Figure 12.9 The Dual-Concern Model [Image description] The interesting prediction of the dual-concern model is that being concerned with one’s own outcomes is not necessarily harmful to the possibility of cooperation.
The individuals who are focused on maximizing their own outcomes but who are also concerned with the needs of the others (the problem solvers) are expected to be as likely to cooperate as are those who are yielding. In fact, the dual- concern model suggests that these individuals may be the best negotiators of all because they are likely to go beyond the trap posed by the dilemma itself, searching for ways to produce new and creative solutions through creative thinking and compromise. Gender and Cultural Differences in Cooperation and Competition You might be wondering whether men or women are more cooperative.
Because women are on average more concerned about maintaining positive relationships with others, whereas men are on average more12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 691 self-concerned, it might be expected that women might be more likely to cooperate than men. And some research has supported this idea. For instance, in terms of whether or not people accepted an initial offer that was made to them or demanded more, Babcock, Gelfand, Small, and Stayn (2006) found that about half of the men they sampled negotiated a salary when they took their first job offer, whereas only about one-eighth of the women reported doing so.
Not surprisingly, women received substantially lower average annual starting salaries than did the men, a fact that is likely to contribute to the wage gap between men and women. And Small, Gelfand, Babcock, and Gettman (2007) found that, overall, women were less likely than men to try to bargain for personal gain in an experimental task. Small and colleagues concluded that women felt that asking for things for themselves was socially inappropriate, perhaps because they perceive that they have less social power than do men.
But although some studies have found that there are gender differences, an interactionist approach to the situation is even more informative. It turns out that women compete less than men in some situations, but they compete about as much as men do in other situations. For example, Bowles, Babcock, and McGinn (2005) showed that the roles that are activated at the negotiation table (i.e., whether one is negotiating for oneself or on behalf of others) are important triggers for gender differences.
Women negotiated as well as men when they were negotiating for others, but they negotiated less strongly than men did for themselves. And Kray, Galinsky, and Thompson (2002) showed that gender differences in negotiation behavior are strongly affected by cognitive constructs that are accessible during negotiation. In general, gender differences in negotiation seem to occur in situations in which other-concern is highly accessible but are reduced or eliminated in situations in which other-concern is less accessible (Gelfand, Major, Raver, Nishii, & O’Brien, 2006).
A recent meta-analysis of 272 research studies (Baillet, Li, Macfarlan, & van Vugt, 2011) found that overall, men and women cooperated equally. But men cooperated more with other men than women cooperated with other women. In mixed-sex interactions, women were more cooperative than men.
And there are also cultural differences in cooperation, in a direction that would be expected. For instance, Gelfand et al. (2002) found that Japanese students—who are more interdependent and thus generally more other-concerned—were more likely to cooperate and achieved higher outcomes in a negotiation task than did students from the United States (who are more individualistic and self- oriented; Chen, Mannix, & Okumura, 2003).
Key Takeaways • The behavior of individuals in conflict situations is frequently studied using laboratory games such as the prisoner’s dilemma game. Other types of laboratory games include resource dilemma games and the trucking game. • Taken together, these games suggest that the most beneficial approach in social dilemmas is to maintain a balance between self-concern and other-concern.
• Individual differences in cooperation and competition, such as those proposed by the dual- concern model, show that individuals will relate to social dilemmas depending on their692 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds underlying personal orientations. • Although women do compete less than men in some situations, they compete about as much as men do in other situations.
There are cultural differences in cooperation. Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Consider a time when you were in a type of social dilemma, perhaps with friends or family.
How did your self-concern and other-concern lead you to resolve the dilemma? 2. Review and critique the laboratory games that have been used to assess responses in social dilemmas.
What are their strengths and the limitations? References Abele, S., Stasser, G., & Chartier, C. (2010).
Conflict and coordination in the provision of public goods: A conceptual analysis of continuous and step-level games. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 14(4), 385–401. doi: 10.1177/1088868310368535 Babcock, L., Gelfand, M., Small, D., & Stayn, H.
(Eds.). (2006). Gender differences in the propensity to initiate negotiations.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Balliet, C., Li, N. P., Macfarlan, S.
J., & Van Vugt, M. (2011). Sex differences in cooperation: A meta- analytic review of social dilemmas.
Psychological Bulletin, 137(6), 881-909. Balliet, D., Parks, C., & Joireman, J. (2009).
Social value orientation and cooperation in social dilemmas: A meta-analysis. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 12(4), 533–547. Bowles, H.
R., Babcock, L., & McGinn, K. L. (2005).
Constraints and triggers: Situational mechanics of gender in negotiation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(6), 951–965. Campbell, W.
K., Bush, C. P., Brunell, A. B., & Shelton, J.
(2005). Understanding the social costs of narcissism: The case of the tragedy of the commons. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(10), 1358–1368.
Chen, Y.-R., Mannix, E. A., & Okumura, T. (2003).
The importance of who you meet: Effects of self- versus other-concerns among negotiators in the United States, the People’s Republic of China, and Japan. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39(1), 1–15. Deutsch, M., & Krauss, R.
M. (1960). The effect of threat upon interpersonal bargaining.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 61, 181–189. Edney, J. J.
(1979). The nuts game: A concise commons dilemma analog. Environmental Psychology and Nonverbal Behavior, 3(4), 252–254.12.2 How the Social Situation Creates Conflict: The Role of Social Dilemmas 693 Gelfand, M.
J., Higgins, M., Nishii, L. H., Raver, J. L., Dominguez, A., Murakami, F.,…Toyama, M.
(2002). Culture and egocentric perceptions of fairness in conflict and negotiation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(5), 833–845.
Gelfand, M. J., Major, V. S., Raver, J.
L., Nishii, L. H., & O’Brien, K. (2006).
Negotiating relationally: The dynamics of the relational self in negotiations. Academy of Management Review, 31(2), 427–451. Hardin, G.
(1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science, 162(3859), 1243–1248.
Kay, A. C., Wheeler, S. C., Bargh, J.
A., & Ross, L. (2004). Material priming: The influence of mundane physical objects on situational construal and competitive behavioral choice.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 95(1), 83–96. doi: 10.1016/ j.obhdp.2004.06.003. Kray, L.
J., Galinsky, A. D., & Thompson, L. (2002).
Reversing the gender gap in negotiations: An exploration of stereotype regeneration. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 87(2), 386–409. Lawler, E.
J., Ford, R. S., & Blegen, M. A.
(1988). Coercive capability in conflict: A test of bilateral deterrence versus conflict spiral theory. Social Psychology Quarterly, 51(2), 93–107.
Poundstone, W. (1992). Prisoner’s dilemma.
New York, NY: Doubleday. Pruitt, D. G., & Rubin, J.
Z. (1986). Social conflict: Escalation, stalemate, and settlement.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Ross, L., & Ward, A. (1995).
Psychological barriers to dispute resolution. Advances in experimental social psychology, 27, 255–304. Retrieved from http://search.ebscohost.com/ login.aspx?direct=true&db=psyh&AN=2003-02325-006&site=ehost-live Sagiv, L., Sverdlik, N., & Schwarz, N.
(2011). To compete or to cooperate? Values’ impact on perception and action in social dilemma games.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 41(1), 64–77. Shomer, R. W., Davis, A.
H., & Kelley, H. H. (1966).
Threats and the development of coordination: Further studies of the Deutsch and Krauss trucking game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 119–126. Small, D.
A., Gelfand, M., Babcock, L., & Gettman, H. (2007). Who goes to the bargaining table?
The influence of gender and framing on the initiation of negotiation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93(4), 600–613. Utz, S.
(2004). Self-activation is a two-edged sword: The effects of I primes on cooperation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40(6), 769–776.
Van Lange, P. A. M.
(1999). The pursuit of joint outcomes and equality in outcomes: An integrative model of social value orientations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 337–349.
Van Lange, P. A. M., & Kuhlman, D.
M. (1994). Social value orientations and impressions of partner’s honesty and intelligence: A test of the might versus morality effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(1), 126–141. Vohs, K. D., Mead, N.
L., & Goode, M. R. (2006).
The psychological consequences of money. Science, 314(5802), 1154–1156. doi: 10.1126/science.1132491 Weber, J.
M., & Messick, D. M. (2004).
Conflicting interests in social life: Understanding social694 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds dilemma dynamics. In M.
J. Gelfand & J. M.
Brett (Eds.), The handbook of negotiation and culture (pp. 374–394). Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Image Descriptions Figure 12.9 The Dual-Concern Model The dual-concern model of cooperation and competition and the resulting personality types: • high concern about own outcomes, high concern about other’s outcomes: problem solving • low concern about own outcomes, high concern about other’s outcomes: yielding • high concern about own outcomes, low concern about other’s outcomes: contending • low concern about own outcomes, low concern about other’s outcomes: inactivity [Return to Figure 12.9]12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation Learning Objectives 1. Outline the variables that increase and decrease competition. 2.
Summarize the principles of negotiation, mediation, and arbitration. When we are faced with situations in which conflict is occurring or has the potential to develop, it will be useful if we are aware of the techniques that will help us best deal with it. We may want to help two roommates realize that they will be better off taking the cooperative choice—by contributing to the household chores—and we may desire to try to convince people to take public transportation rather than their own car because doing so is better for the environment and in the end better for everyone.
The problem, of course, is that although the parties involved may well realize the potential costs of continuing to behave selfishly or competitively, the social situation nevertheless provides a strong motivation to continue to take the selfish choice. It is important to attempt to determine appropriate ways to encourage more responsible use of social resources because individualistic consumption of these supplies will make them disappear faster and may have overall negative effects on human beings (Oskamp & Schultz, 2006). It should be kept in mind that although social dilemmas are arranged to make competition a likely outcome, they do not always end in collective disaster.
Historical evidence shows, for example, that most of the commons grounds in England and other countries were, in fact, managed very well by local communities and were usually not overgrazed. Many British commons exist to this day. And even the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, which inspired so much research into social dilemmas, had a peaceful end.
In addition, findings from experimental social dilemma research involving repeated interactions between strangers suggest that the vast majority of interactions result in mutual cooperation (De Cremer & Van Vugt, 1999). Although the solutions are not simple, by examining the many studies that have focused on cooperation and conflict in the real world and in the lab, we can draw some conclusions about the specific characteristics that determine when and whether people cooperate or compete. These factors include the type of task, such as its rules and regulations; our perceptions about the task; the norms that are operating in the current situation; and the type and amount of communication among the parties.
Furthermore, we can use approaches such as negotiation, arbitration, and mediation to help parties that are in competition come to agreement. 695696 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Task Characteristics and Perceptions One factor that determines whether individuals cooperate or compete is the nature of the situation itself.
The characteristics of some social dilemmas lead them to produce a lot of competitive responses, whereas others are arranged to elicit more cooperation. Thus one way to reduce conflict, when the approach is possible, is to change the rules of the task to reinforce more cooperation (Samuelson, Messick, Rutte, & Wilke, 1984). A class in which the instructor has decided ahead of time that only 10% of the students can get an A will be likely to produce a competitive orientation among the students.
On the other hand, if the instructor says that he or she would be quite happy to assign each student an A (assuming each individual deserves one!), a more cooperative orientation is likely to ensue. In general, cooperation will increase when it is more rewarded, and competition will increase when it is rewarded (Komorita & Parks, 1994). If societies really desire to maintain the public goods for their citizens, they will work to maintain them through incentives—for instance, by creating taxes requiring each person to contribute his or her fair share to support them.
A city may add a carpool lane to the roadways, making it more desirable to commute with others and thereby help keep the highways unclogged. Similarly, in terms of harvesting dilemmas, rules can be implemented that regulate the amount of the public good that can be taken by each individual member of the society. In a water crisis, rationing can be implemented in which individuals are allowed to use only a certain amount of water each month, thereby protecting the supply for all, or fishing limits can be imposed to maintain populations.
People form governments in part to make sure that all individuals in the community contribute to public goods and obey the rules of cooperation. Leaders may also be elected by the group to help convince the members of the society that it is important just to follow the rules, thereby increasing cooperation (Tyler & Lind, 1992). Privatization Another approach to increase the optimal use of resources is to privatize them—that is, to divide up the public good into smaller pieces so that each individual is responsible for a small share rather than trusting the good to the group as a whole.
In a study by Messick and McClelland (1983) using a resource game, individuals who were given their own private pool of resources to manage maintained them for an average of 31 trials of the game before they ran out. But individuals who were managing pools in groups maintained their pools for only about 10 trials and therefore gained much lower outcomes. In other experimental games, the outcomes are arranged such that the participants are either working for themselves or working for the joint outcomes of the group (Deutsch, 1949).
These studies have found that when individuals have control over their own outcomes rather than sharing the resources with others, they tend to use them more efficiently. In general, smaller groups are more cooperative than larger ones and also make better use of the resources that they have available to them (Gockel, Kerr, Seok, & Harris, 2008; Kerr & Bruun, 1983). One explanation for the difficulties of larger groups is that as the number of group members increases, each person’s behavior becomes less identifiable, which is likely to increase free riding.
When people are allowed to monitor their water or energy use, they will use less of the public good (Siero, Bakker, Dekker, & van den Burg, 1996). Furthermore, people feel that they can make less of a difference in the outcome of larger (versus smaller) groups, and so they are less likely to work toward the common12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation 697 group goals, even if their input is actually not less important or less likely to have an influence (Kerr, 1989). Larger groups also lead people to feel more deindividuated, which may prevent them from conforming to group norms of cooperation.
And in large groups, there is likely to be more difficulty coordinating the efforts of the individuals, and this may reduce cooperation. In a study by Kelley, Condry, Dahlke, and Hill (1965) in which participants had to coordinate their efforts in a type of crisis situation in which only one person could “escape” from a situation at a time, larger groups had more difficulty coordinating their activities and tended to perform more poorly. Again, the moral is straightforward: if possible, work in smaller rather than larger groups.
Decisions about whether to cooperate or compete are also influenced by expectations about the likely behavior of others. One factor that tends to produce conflict is that, overall, individuals expect others to take competitive, rather than cooperative, orientations (Sattler & Kerr, 1991), and once they see the behavior of others, they are likely to interpret that behavior as being competitive, even if it is not. In a study by Maki, Thorngate, and McClintock (1979), individuals viewed the decisions that had supposedly been made by other people who had participated in a prisoner’s dilemma task.
Their task was to predict the choice that the partner had supposedly made from the payoff matrix. However, the choices had actually been selected, on the basis of a computer program, to take either competitive or cooperative orientations. Overall, across all the decisions, the participants were more accurate at making their predictions for partners who made competitive choices than for those who made cooperative choices, indicating that they expected the partners to be competitive and as a result tended to interpret their behaviors as being competitive.
The tendency to think that others will act in a competitive manner is more likely to cause problems when we are not sure what others are going to do. When we have a good idea of what the others in the situation are doing, we will likely match our responses to those of others. So when we see that others are cooperating, we are likely to cooperate as well.
In other cases, for instance, when the group is very large, it is more difficult to be aware of or keep track of the behavior of others, and because there is less certainty about the behavior of others, taking the defensive (competitive) choice is more likely. Another determinant of cooperation or competition is the prior norms of the individuals in the group (Pruitt, 1998). If the norm in the situation favors cooperation, then cooperation is likely to ensue, but if the norm favors competition, then competition will probably result.
The group or society may attempt to create or uphold social norms through appeals to appropriate social values. Sattler and Kerr (1991) found that getting messages from others stressing the importance of cooperation increased cooperative behavior, particularly for individuals who were already motivated to be cooperative and when the partner actually played cooperatively. Group members may sometimes ostracize others who do not follow appropriate norms of group cooperation (Ouwerkerk, Kerr, Gallucci, & Van Lange, 2005).
And situations in which the parties in interaction are similar, friendly, or have a positive group identity have also been found to be more likely to cooperate (Brewer & Kramer, 1986; Karau & Williams, 1993). Thus we should try to encourage groups to work together to create positive feelings in order to increase cooperation. The Important Role of Communication When communication between the parties involved in a conflict is nonexistent, or when it is hostile or negative in tone, disagreements frequently result in escalation of negative feelings and lead to conflict.698 Chapter 12.
Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds In other cases, when communication is more open and positive, the parties in potential conflict are more likely to be able to deal with each other effectively, with a result that produces compromise and cooperation (Balliet, 2010). Communication has a number of benefits, each of which improves the likelihood of cooperation. For one, communication allows individuals to tell others how they are planning to behave and what they are currently contributing to the group effort, which helps the group learn about the motives and behaviors of the others and helps the group develop norms for cooperation.
Communication has a positive effect because it increases the expectation that the others will act cooperatively and also reduces the potential of being a “sucker” to the free riding of others. Thus communication allows the parties to develop a sense of trust (Messick & Brewer, 1983). Once cooperative norms are in place, they can improve the possibilities for long-term cooperation because they produce a public commitment on the part of the parties to cooperate as well as an internalized obligation to honor those commitments (Kerr, Garst, Lewandowski, & Harris, 1997).
In fact, Norbert Kerr and his colleagues (Kerr, Ganst, Lewandowski, & Harris, 1997; Kerr & Kaufman- Gilliland, 1994) have found that group discussion commits group members to act cooperatively to such an extent that it is not always necessary to monitor their behavior; once the group members have shared their intentions to cooperate, they will continue to do so because of a private, internalized commitment to it. Communication can also allow the people working together to plan what they should do and therefore can help them better coordinate their efforts. For instance, in a resource dilemma game, discussion allows the group to monitor their withdrawals from the public good so that the pool is not depleted (Liebrand, 1984).
And if only a certain number of individuals need to contribute in a contributions dilemma in order for the public good to be maintained, communication may allow the group members to set up a system that ensures that this many, but not more, contribute in any given session. Finally, communication may also help people realize the advantages, over the long term, of cooperating. If, as a result of communication, the individuals learn that the others are actually behaving cooperatively (something that might not have been apparent given prior misperceptions that make us overestimate the extent to which others are competing), this might increase the motivation to cooperate oneself.
Alternatively, learning that others are behaving competitively and thus threatening the resources may help make it clear to all the parties that increased cooperation is essential (Jorgenson & Papciak, 1981). Perhaps the most important benefit of communication is the potential of learning that the goals of the parties involved in the conflict are not always incompatible (Thompson & Hrebec, 1996; Thompson, 1991). A major barrier to increasing cooperation is that individuals expect both that situations are arranged such that they are fixed-sum and that others will act competitively to attempt to gain a greater share of the outcomes.
Neither of these assumptions is necessarily true, however, and thus one potential benefit of communication is that the parties come to see the situation more accurately. One example of a situation in which communication was successful is the meeting held at Camp David, Maryland, in 1978 between the delegates of Egypt and Israel. Both sides sat down together with then–U.S.
President Carter to attempt to reach an accord over the fate of the Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had occupied for many years. Initially, neither side would budge, and attempts to divide the land in half were opposed by both sides. It appeared that there was a fixed-sum situation in which land was12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation 699 the important factor, and neither wanted to give it up.
Over the course of discussion, communication prevailed. It became clear that what Egypt really wanted out of the deal was sovereignty over lands that were perceived as historically part of Egypt. On the other hand, what Israel valued the most was security.
The outcome of the discussion was that Israel eventually agreed to return the land to Egypt in exchange for a demilitarized zone and the establishment of new Israeli air bases. Despite the initial perceptions, the situation turned out to be integrative rather than fixed-sum, and both sides were able to get what they wanted. Laboratory studies have also demonstrated the benefits of communication.
Leigh Thompson (1991) found that groups in negotiation did not always effectively communicate, but those that did were more able to reach compromises that benefited both parties. Although the parties came to the situation expecting the game to be a fixed-sum situation, communication allowed them to learn that the situation was actually integrative—the parties had different needs that allowed them to achieve a mutually beneficial solution. Interestingly, Thompson found that it did not matter whether both parties involved in the dispute were instructed to communicate or if the communication came in the form of questions from only one of the two participants.
In both cases, the parties who communicated viewed the other’s perspectives more accurately, and the result was better outcomes. Communication will not improve cooperation, however, if it is based on communicating hostility rather than working toward cooperation. In studies in which individuals played the trucking game, for instance, the communication was generally in the form of threats and did not reduce conflict (McClintock, Stech, & Keil, 1983).
The Tit-for-Tat Strategy In social dilemma games that are run over a number of trials, various strategies can be used by the parties involved. But which is the best strategy to use in order to promote cooperation? One simple strategy that has been found to be effective in such situations is known as tit-for-tat.
The tit-for-tat strategy involves initially making a cooperative choice and then simply matching the previous move of the opponent (whether cooperation or competition). Computers have been used to simulate the behavior of individuals who use the tit-for-tat strategy over a series of interactions in comparison with other approaches for determining whether to cooperate or compete on each trial. The tit-for-tat strategy has been found to work better than outright cooperation or other types of strategies in producing cooperation from the parties (Axelrod, 2005; Fischer & Suleiman, 2004; Van Lange & Visser, 1999).
The tit-for-tat strategy seems to be so effective because, first, it is “nice” in the sense that the individual first cooperates and signals a willingness to cooperate. Second, the strategy seems to be successful because, as it is relatively simple and easy to understand, others can clearly see how the choices are being determined. Furthermore, the approach sends a clear message that competitive choices on the part of the other will not be tolerated and that cooperation will always be reciprocated.
It is quick to punish but it is equally quick to forgive. The other party cannot take advantage of a person who is using tit-for-tat on more than one trial because if they try to do so, the result will always be retaliation in the form of a competitive choice on the next trial. Indeed, it has been found that having people play against a partner who uses the tit-for-tat strategy can help them learn to be more cooperative, particularly once they become aware what the strategy is and how it is being used (Sheldon, 1999).
The tit-for-tat700 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds strategy seems particularly effective because it balances self-concerned and other-concerned responses in an easy-to-understand way. Despite the fact that it generally works better than most other strategies, tit-for-tat is not perfect.
One problem is that because people are more likely to behave competitively than cooperatively, tit-for-tat is more likely to lead opponents to match noncooperative responses than to follow cooperation with cooperation, and thus tit-for-tat may in some cases produce a spiral of conflict (Kelley & Stahelski, 1970). This is particularly likely if the opposing party never makes a cooperative choice, and thus the party using tit-for-tat never gets a chance to play cooperatively after the first round, or in cases in which there is some noise in the system and the responses given by the parties are not always perceived accurately. Variations of the tit-for-tat strategy in which the individual acts more cooperatively than demanded by the strategy (e.g., by giving some extra cooperative trials in the beginning or being extra cooperative on other trials) have been found to be helpful in this regard, although they do allow the opponent to exploit the side that is using tit-for-tat.
Formal Solutions to Conflict: Negotiation, Mediation, and Arbitration In some cases, conflict becomes so extreme that the groups feel that they need to work together to reach a compromise. Several methods are used in these cases, including negotiation, mediation, and arbitration. Negotiation is the process by which two or more parties formally work together to attempt to resolve a perceived divergence of interest in order to avoid or resolve social conflict (Thompson, Wang, & Gunia, 2010).
The parties involved are often social groups, such as businesses or nations, although the groups may rely on one or a few representatives who actually do the negotiating. When negotiating, the parties who are in disagreement develop a set of communication structures in which they discuss their respective positions and attempt to develop a compromise agreement. To reach this agreement, each side makes a series of offers, followed by counteroffers from the other side, each time moving closer to a position that they can each agree on.
Negotiation is successful if each of the parties finds that they have more to gain by remaining in the relationship or completing the transaction, even if they cannot get exactly what they want, than they would gain if they left the relationship entirely or continued the existing competitive state. In some cases, negotiation is a type of fixed-sum process in which each individual wants to get as much as he or she can of the same good or commodity. For instance, in the sale of a property, if the seller wants the highest price possible, and the buyer wants the lowest price possible, the compromise will involve some sacrifice for each, or else it will not occur at all if the two parties cannot find a price on which they can agree.
More often, the outcome of the negotiation is dependent upon the ability of the two parties to effectively communicate and to dispel negative misperceptions about the goals of the other party. When communication and trust are obtained in the situation, the parties may find that the situation is not completely fixed-sum but rather more integrative. The seller and buyer may be able to find an acceptable solution that is based on other aspects of the deal, such as the time that the deal is made or other costs and benefits involved.
In fact, negotiators that maintain the assumption that the conflict is fixed-sum end up with lower individual and joint gain in comparison with negotiators who change their perceptions to be more integrative.12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation 701 Negotiation works better when both sides have an open mind and do not commit themselves to positions. It has been argued that negotiation is most beneficial when you take a position and stick to it, no matter what, because if you begin to compromise at all, it will look like weakness or as if you do not really need all that you asked for. However, when negotiators do not allow any compromise, the negotiations are likely to break off without a solution.
Negotiation is often accompanied by conflict, including threats and harassment of the other party or parties. In general, individuals who are firm in their positions will achieve more positive outcomes as a result of negotiation, unless both sides are too firm and no compromise can be reached. However, positive and cooperative communication is an important factor in improving negotiation.
Individuals who truthfully represent their needs and goals with the other party will produce better outcomes for both parties, in part because they become more aware of each other’s needs and are better able to empathize with them. Parties that are in negotiation should therefore be encouraged to communicate. In some serious cases of disagreement, the parties involved in the negotiation decide that they must bring in outside help in the form of a “third” party, to help them reach an equitable solution or to prevent further conflict.
The third party may be called upon by the parties who are in disagreement, their use may be required by laws, or in some cases a third party may rather spontaneously appear (such as when a friend or coworker steps in to help solve a dispute). The goal of the third party is to help those who are in conflict to reach agreement without embarrassment to either party. In general, third-party intervention works better if it is implemented before the conflict is too great.
If the level of conflict is already high, the attempts to help may increase hostility, and the disputants may not consent to third-party intervention. Mediation involves helping to create compromise by using third-party negotiation (Wall & Lynn, 1993). A mediator is a third party who is knowledgeable about the dispute and skilled at resolving conflict.
During the mediation, the conflicting parties usually state the facts from their own perspective, which allows the mediator to determine each party’s interests and positions. Mediators have a number of potential tactics that they can use, and they choose which ones seem best depending on the current state of affairs. These tactics include attempting to help the parties have more trust in each other, conferring with each of the parties separately, and helping them to accept the necessity of compromise.
Through these tactics, the mediator may be able to reduce overt hostility and increase concern with understanding the others’ positions, which may lead to more integrative solutions. If necessary, the mediator may attempt to force the parties to make concessions, especially if there is little common ground to begin with. Mediation works best when both parties believe that a compromise is possible and think that third-party intervention can help reach it.
Mediators who have experience and training make better mediators (Deutsch, 1994). Finally, another option is arbitration, a type of third-party intervention that avoids negotiation as well as the necessity of any meetings between the parties in conflict. In the most common type of arbitration—binding arbitration—both sides agree ahead of time to abide by the decision of the third party (the arbitrator).
They then independently submit their offers or desires along with their basis for their claims, and the arbitrator chooses between them. Whichever offer is chosen becomes the outcome, and there is no negotiation (Farber, 2005; Wolkinson & Ormiston, 2006). Arbitration is particularly useful when there is a single decision to be made under time constraints, whereas negotiation may be better if the parties have a long-term possibility for conflict and future discussion is necessary.702 Chapter 12.
Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds H5P: TEST YOUR LEARNING: CHAPTER 12 DRAG THE WORDS – NEGOTIATION, MEDIATION, OR ARBITRATION? Review the definitions above of negotiation, mediation, and arbitration, and identify which method is being used in the first three situations below by dragging the correct term into each box. For the last three situations, decide which method might be most suitable to try, and drag that one into the correct box.
1. A professional hockey player in the NHL meets with the team’s General Manager, to discuss a pay raise, as he feels he is being undervalued. The GM refuses, citing the salary cap as his primary concern.
They end up agreeing to have their demands adjudicated by a third party. 2. A lawyer at a firm asks for a pay raise, which she thinks would better reflect her experience and expertise.
Her boss says that whilst she is open to a discussion, the salary budgets are constrained. They agree to meet up the following week for further dialogue. 3.
A couple who decide to separate are having difficulty resolving a custody arrangement for their children. They are reluctant to go through legal channels, so they agree to discuss the situation with someone who will facilitate their dialogue. 4.
Two students are in conflict about when they will have their respective portions of a group presentation ready so that they can rehearse before the due date. The first student wants to get the work done in a week, to allow enough time for revisions, whereas the second one says they need two weeks, and that there will still be time for any last-minute changes. 5.
A celebrity couple, who did not get a pre-nuptial agreement, are divorcing and cannot agree on a fair division of their assets. They would like some help facilitating more dialogue. 6.
The founding partners in a furniture business are in conflict about whether to sell their company to a larger competitor. They have had a lot of dialogue together around the issue and have been unable to agree on a course of action. Their formerly strong relationship is coming under increasing strain, and they are considering recruiting the help of a third party to decide the issues.
Key Takeaways • The social situation has an important influence on choices to cooperate or compete, and it is important to understand these influences. • Decisions about whether to cooperate or compete are also influenced by expectations about the likely behavior of others. • Communication has a number of benefits, each of which improves the likelihood of cooperation.
• Negotiation, mediation, and arbitration can be used to help settle disputes.12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation 703 Exercises and Critical Thinking 1. Choose a real-world dispute among individuals or groups and analyze it using the principles we have considered in this chapter. References Axelrod, R.
(2005). The success of tit-for-tat in computer tournaments. In M.
H. Bazerman (Ed.), Negotiation, decision making and conflict management (Vol. 1–3, pp.
39–68). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing. Balliet, D.
(2010). Communication and cooperation in social dilemmas: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 54(1), 39–57.
Brewer, M. B., & Kramer, R. M.
(1986). Choice behavior in social dilemmas: Effects of social identity, group size, and decision framing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 543–547.
De Cremer, D., & Van Vugt, M. (1999). Social identification effects in social dilemmas: A transformation of motives.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 29(7), 871–893. Deutsch, M. (1949).
An experimental study of the effects of cooperation and competition upon group processes. Human Relations, 2, 199–231. Deutsch, M.
(1994). Constuctive conflict resolution: Principles, traning,and research. Journal of Social Issues, 1, 13–32.
Farber, H. S. (2005).
Splitting-the-difference in interest arbitration. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing. Fischer, I., & Suleiman, R.
(2004). The emergence of tit-for-tat strategies. In R.
Suleiman, D. V. Budescu, I.
Fischer, & D. M. Messick (Eds.), Contemporary psychological research on social dilemmas (pp.
209–224). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Gockel, C., Kerr, N.
L., Seok, D.-H., & Harris, D. W. (2008).
Indispensability and group identification as sources of task motivation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44(5), 1316–1321. Jorgenson, D.
O., & Papciak, A. S. (1981).
The effects of communication, resource feedback, and identifiability on behavior in a simulated commons. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 373–385. Karau, S.
J., & Williams, K. D. (1993).
Social loafing: A meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(4), 681–706. Kelley, H.
H., & Stahelski, A. J. (1970).
Social interaction basis of cooperators’ and competitors’ beliefs about others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 66–91.704 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds Kelley, H.
H., Condry, J. C., Jr., Dahlke, A. E., & Hill, A.
H. (1965). Collective behavior in a simulated panic situation.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1, 19–54. Kerr, N. (1989).
Illusions of efficacy: The effects of group size on perceived efficacy in social dilemmas. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 287–313. Kerr, N.
L., & Bruun, S. E. (1983).
Dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses: Free-rider effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 78–94. Kerr, N.
L., & Kaufman-Gilliland, C. M. (1994).
Communication, commitment, and cooperation in social dilemma. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66(3), 513–529. Kerr, N.
L., Garst, J., Lewandowski, D. A., & Harris, S. E.
(1997). That still, small voice: Commitment to cooperate as an internalized versus a social norm. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(12), 1300–1311.
Komorita, S. S., & Parks, C. D.
(1994). Social dilemmas. Dubuque, IA: Brown & Benchmark.
Liebrand, W. B. (1984).
The effect of social motives, communication and group size on behaviour in an N-person multi-stage mixed-motive game. European Journal of Social Psychology, 14(3), 239–264. Maki, J.
E., Thorngate, W. B., & McClintock, C. G.
(1979). Prediction and perception of social motives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(2), 203–220.
McClintock, C. G., Stech, F. J., & Keil, L.
J. (1983). The influence of communication on bargaining.
In P. B. Paulus (Ed.), Basic group processes (pp.
205–233). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. Messick, D.
M., & Brewer, M. B. (1983).
Solving social dilemmas: A review. In L. Wheeler & P.
Shaver (Eds.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 11–44).
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Messick, D. M., & McClelland, C.
L. (1983). Social traps and temporal traps.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 105–110. Oskamp, S., & Schultz, P. W.
(2006). Using psychological science to achieve ecological sustainability. In S.
I. Donaldson, D. E.
Berger, & K. Pezdek (Eds.), Applied psychology: New frontiers and rewarding careers (pp. 81–106).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Ouwerkerk, J. W., Kerr, N.
L., Gallucci, M., & Van Lange, P. A. M.
(2005). Avoiding the social death penalty: Ostracism and cooperation in social dilemmas. In K.
D. Williams, J. P.
Forgas, & W. von Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp. 321–332).
New York, NY: Psychology Press. Pruitt, D. G.
(1998). Social conflict. In D.
T. Gilbert, S. T.
Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 1 and 2, pp.
470–503). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Samuelson, C.
D., Messick, D. M., Rutte, C. G., & Wilke, H.
(1984). Individual and structural solutions to resource dilemmas in two cultures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(1), 94–104.
Sattler, D. N., & Kerr, N. L.
(1991). Might versus morality explored: Motivational and cognitive bases for social motives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(5), 756–765.
Sheldon, K. M. (1999).
Learning the lessons of tit-for-tat: Even competitors can get the message. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 1245–1253.12.3 Strategies for Producing Cooperation 705 Siero, F. W., Bakker, A.
B., Dekker, G. B., & van den Burg, M. T.
C. (1996). Changing organizational energy consumption behaviour through comparative feedback.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 16(3), 235–246. Thompson, L. L.
(1991). Information exchange in negotiation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27, 161–179.
Thompson, L. L., Wang, J., & Gunia, B. C.
(2010). Negotiation. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 491–515.
Thompson, L., & Hrebec, D. (1996). Lose-lose agreements in interdependent decision making.
Psychological Bulletin, 120(3), 396–409. Tyler, T., & Lind, E. (1992).
A relational model of authority in groups. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 115–191. Van Lange, P.
A. M., & Visser, K. (1999).
Locomotion in social dilemmas: How people adapt to cooperative, tit-for-tat, and noncooperative partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(4), 762–773. doi: 10.1037/0022–3514.77.4.762 Wall, J.
A., & Lynn, A. (1993). Mediation: A current review.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 37(1), 160–194. Wolkinson, B. W., & Ormiston, R.
(2006). The arbitration of work and family conflicts. In M.
Pitt- Catsouphes, E. E. Kossek, & S.
Sweet (Eds.), The work and family handbook: Multi-disciplinary perspectives, methods, and approaches (pp. 685–703). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.12.4 Thinking Like a Social Psychologist about Cooperation and Competition Now that you are familiar with the factors that lead us to cooperate or compete, we hope you will use this information to be more aware of, and to guide, your own behaviors in situations of conflict.
Are you now more aware of how easy it is to assume that others will compete rather than cooperate and of how events that seem to be fixed-sum may in fact be integrative? Can you see that at least some conflict is more perceived than realistic and that cooperation is frequently more advantageous to both the self and others than is competition? Does this knowledge make you think differently about how you will want to react to situations of potential conflict?
You may want to keep in mind that solutions to conflict may frequently be integrative, allowing both you or your party and the other individuals involved in the conflict to come to a mutually beneficial solution. Taking a problem-solving approach in which you keep not only your needs but also the needs of others in mind will be helpful. You may find that you are now better able to use your social psychological knowledge to help reduce potentially dangerous situations of conflict.
Social norms about morality and fairness lead us frequently to cooperate with others, but these principles may be undermined in conflict situations. Perhaps you will use your new knowledge to advocate for more cooperative positions regarding important social dilemmas, such as global warming and natural resource use. You can use the many approaches that help people cooperate to help you in this endeavor.
H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 12 True or False Quiz Try this true or false quiz to check your understanding of some key theories and concepts from this chapter. You can retake it as many times as you want. Good luck!
1. Realistic group conflict theory states that intergroup conflict leads to competition over scarce resources. 2.
In social psychological research, the focus is always on intergroup, as opposed to interpersonal conflict. 3. Procedural fairness refers to our judgments about whether or not a party is receiving a fair share of the available rewards.
4. When individuals are considering whether or not to donate to a local public television station, this is an example of a contributions dilemma. 5.
In the dual-concern model of cooperation and competition, a yielding orientation is associated with a higher concern about other’s outcomes, and a lower concern about one’s own outcomes. 70712.5 Chapter Summary This chapter has examined how goals of self-concern and other-concern relate to our tendencies to cooperate or compete with others and how these individual goals can help us understand the behavior of large groups of people, such as nations, societies, and cultures. Most generally, we can say that when individuals or groups interact, they can take either cooperative or competitive positions.
Competition frequently leads to conflict, in which the parties involved engage in violence and hostility. Although competition is normal and will always be a part of human existence, cooperation is also built into the human repertoire. One type of situation in which the goals of the individual conflict with the goals of the group is known as a social dilemma.
Social dilemmas have an important impact on a variety of important social problems because the dilemma creates a type of trap in which even though the individual or group may want to be cooperative, the situation leads to competitive behaviors. Although social dilemmas create the potential for conflict and even hostility, such outcomes are not inevitable. The solutions to social dilemmas are more favorable when the outcomes are integrative rather than fixed-sum.
Conflict is sometimes realistic, in the sense that the goals of the interacting parties really are incompatible. However, although many situations do create real conflict, conflicts are often more perceived than realistic because they are based on misperceptions of the intentions of others or of the nature of the potential rewards. As humans, our desires to cooperate are guided in part by a set of social norms about morality—the set of social norms that describe the principles and ideals, as well as the duties and obligations, that we view as appropriate and that we use to judge the actions of others and to guide our own behavior.
Two types of morality are social conventional morality and harm-based morality. An essential part of morality involves determining what is “right” or “fair” in social interaction. We determine what is or is not fair by relying on another set of social norms, called social fairness norms, which are beliefs about how people should be treated fairly.
One type of social fairness, known as distributive fairness, refers to our judgments about whether or not we are receiving a fair share of the available rewards. Procedural fairness refers to beliefs about the fairness (or unfairness) of the procedures used to distribute available rewards among group members. Individuals who have low status may nevertheless accept the existing status hierarchy, deciding that they deserve what little they have, a phenomenon known as false consciousness.
Individuals with low status who do not accept the procedural fairness of the system may try to gain status, for instance, by leaving the low-status group to which they currently belong. Or they may use social creativity strategies that allow them to perceive their group as better than other groups, at least on some dimensions. Or they may resort to attempts at collective action to change the social status hierarchy by improving the status of their own group relative to others.
The behavior of individuals in conflict situations has frequently been studied using laboratory games in which conflict is simulated. In the prisoner’s dilemma game, the rewards to be gained for making a 709710 Chapter 12. Competition and Cooperation in Our Social Worlds cooperative or a competitive choice are displayed in a payoff matrix.
The matrix is arranged so that competition is most beneficial for each individual, and yet if the players each choose the cooperative choice, each of them will gain. Other types of laboratory games include resource dilemma games and the trucking game. There are individual differences in cooperation and competition, such that those who are more self- oriented are more likely to compete, whereas those who are more other-oriented are more likely to cooperate.
The dual-concern model suggests that individuals will relate to social dilemmas or other forms of conflict in different ways, depending on their underlying personal orientations. Although women do compete less than men in some situations, they compete about as much as men do in other situations. And there are also cultural differences in cooperation.
One factor that determines whether individuals cooperate or compete is the nature of the situation itself. If we can make the negative consequences of competition and the positive consequences of cooperation more salient, we will be likely to create more positive behaviors. Decisions about whether to cooperate or compete are also influenced by expectations about the likely behavior of others.
Smaller groups are more cooperative than larger ones and also make better use of the resources that they have available to them. Communication has a number of benefits, each of which improves the likelihood of cooperation. In some cases, conflict can become so extreme that the groups feel that they need to work together to reach a compromise.
Several methods are used in these cases, including negotiation, mediation, and arbitration. Learning about the nature of cooperation and competition may help you think more creatively about how to respond to conflict in your everyday life, make you more aware of the benefits of cooperating, and lead you to actively try to promote cooperative behaviors in your community. H5P: Test your Learning: Chapter 12 Multiple-Choice Quiz To check your understanding of some key material from our final chapter together, try this multiple- choice quiz.
Good luck! 1. Ben and Gerald are playing at recess and they decide to create a new game, soccer-tennis.
They work out the rules and invite some other children to help them set it up. These coordinated efforts are an example of _____. a.
cooperation b. altruism c. egoism d.
social facilitation 2. You are playing the prisoner’s dilemma game as part of a psychological study you are taking part in. Which scenario would lead to the largest joint negative outcome for both you and your partner?12.5 Chapter Summary 711 a.
you cooperate and your partner defects b. both you and your partner cooperate c. you defect but your partner cooperates d.
both you and your partner defect 3. An allotment garden has been used for many years for neighbors to grow vegetables together. All allotment users are allowed to take vegetables grown there when they are ripe.
Unfortunately, one year they take too many too early in the season, and now there are none left. In this scenario, the allotment is an example of a _________. a.
free riding asset b. common-pool resource c. community thinning asset d.
competitive resource 4. In the dual-concern model of cooperation and competition, which orientation reflects a combination of high concern about one’s own and other’s outcomes? a.
inactivity b. yielding c. contending d.
problem-solving 5. Howie, Shelton, and Bernie are working on a group project at university. Bernie is not contributing anything to the project.
If he gets a high grade regardless of this, which problem does that illustrate? a. free-rider b.
social languishing c. inefficiency d. procedural justiceAbout the Authors Rajiv Jhangiani Rajiv Jhangiani is a core faculty member at Kwantlen Polytechnic University, Vancouver, Canada, and an Open Learning Faculty Member at Thompson Rivers University, Kamloops, Canada, where he teaches a variety of courses including social psychology, personality psychology, conservation psychology, and the psychology of genocide.
He completed his PhD in Social and Personality Psychology from the University of British Columbia in 2008. Dr. Jhangiani’s research focuses on political violence, social cognition, and the scholarship of teaching and learning.
His research has been supported by agencies including the Social Sciences & Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research and the Society for the Study of Peace, Conflict, & Violence. Dr. Jhangiani is a Faculty Fellow with the BC Open Textbook Project, the Director of Research, Resources, and Special Initiatives on the Society for the Teaching of Psychology’s Early Career Psychologists Committee, a member of the Society for the Teaching of Psychology’s Task Force on Undergraduate Skills Assessment, and an Associate Editor of Psychology Learning & Teaching.
Among other honours, Dr. Jhangiani is the recipient of the Robert E. Knox Master Teacher Award from the University of British Columbia and the Roberta Sigel Award from the International Society of Political Psychology.
713714 Dr. Hammond Tarry Hammond Tarry Hammond Tarry is a faculty member at the Adler School of Professional Psychology, Vancouver, Canada, and at Capilano University, North Vancouver, Canada. Dr.
Tarry completed his doctoral research in psychology in 2001 at the University of Oxford, U.K. His thesis was entitled Delinquency, Moral Reasoning, and Social Control. He has published and supervised research on topics including sociomoral development, political orientation, attitudes toward institutional authority, and reputation management.
He teaches a wide range of courses, including social psychology, group dynamics, research methods, and introductory psychology. He has a particular interest in open textbooks from a social justice perspective.Principles of Social Psychology 715 Charles Stangor Charles Stangor is professor of psychology at the University of Maryland. He has also taught at the New School for Social Research, Michigan State University, and the University of Tübingen in Germany.
He received his BA from Beloit College in 1973 and his PhD from New York University in 1986. Dr. Stangor is the recipient of research grants from the National Institute of Mental Health and from the National Science Foundation.
He has published seven books and over seventy research articles and book chapters and has served as an associate editor of the European Journal of Social Psychology. He is a charter fellow of the American Psychological Society. He has served as the chair of the executive committee and is currently executive officer for the Society for Experimental Social Psychology.
Dr. Stangor’s research interests concern the development of stereotypes and prejudice and their influences upon individuals who are potential victims of discrimination. Dr.
Stangor regularly teaches social psychology, research methods, and, at the graduate level, Fundamentals of Social Psychology and Group Processes. Dr. Stangor is chair of the undergraduate committee in the psychology department and has won the distinguished teaching award from the University of Maryland.
Dr.
Stangor also serves as the chair of the psychology department’s human subjects committee.Glossary Accommodation When existing schemas change on the basis of new information Actor-observer bias or difference When we tend to make more personal attributions for the behavior of others than we do for ourselves and to make more situational attributions for our own behavior than for the behavior of others Additive task A task where the inputs of each group member are added together to create the group performance, and the expected performance of the group is the sum of group members’ individual inputs Adjourning stage When group members prepare for the group to end Affect heuristic The tendency to rely on automatically occurring affective responses to stimuli to guide our judgments of them Affect The feelings we experience as part of our everyday lives Affective forecasting Our attempts to predict how future events will make us feel Aggression Behavior that is intended to harm another individual who does not wish to be harmed Agreeableness A tendency to be good natured, cooperative, and trusting Altruism Any behavior that is designed to increase another person’s welfare, and particularly those actions that do not seem to provide a direct reward to the person who performs them Altruistic or prosocial personality An individual difference variable that relates to the likelihood of helping others across many different situations Anchoring and adjustment The tendency to weight initial information too heavily and thereby insufficiently move our judgment away from it Anxious/ambivalent attachment style When children become overly dependent on the parents and continually seek more affection from them than they can give Arbitration A type of third-party intervention that avoids negotiation as well as the necessity of any meetings between the parties in conflict Assimilation A process in which our existing knowledge influences new conflicting information to better fit with our existing knowledge, thus reducing the likelihood of schema change Associational learning When an object or event comes to be associated with a natural response, such as an automatic behavior or a positive or negative emotion 717718 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Attachment style Individual differences in how people relate to others in close relationships Attitude is a knowledge representation that includes primarily our liking or disliking of a person, thing, or group Attitude strength The importance of an attitude, as assessed by how quickly it comes to mind Attribution The process of assigning causes to behaviors Attributional style The type of attributions that we tend to make for events that occur to us.
Authoritarianism An individual difference variable characterized by a tendency to prefer things to be simple rather than complex and to hold traditional values Automatic cognition Thinking that occurs out of our awareness, quickly, and without taking much effort Autonomy-oriented help The belief that, given the appropriate tools, recipients can help themselves Availability heuristic The tendency to make judgments of the frequency of an event, or the likelihood that an event will occur, on the basis of the ease with which the event can be retrieved from memory Avoidant attachment style When children are unable to relate to the parents at all, becoming distant, fearful, and cold Bait-and-switch technique A persuasion attempt in which the target is offered one product at a very low price and yet the product at the low price is not actually available Base rates The likelihood that events occur across a large population Basking in the reflected glory When we use and advertise our ingroups’ positive achievements to boost our self-esteem Behavioral measures Measures designed to directly assess what people do Bias blind spot The tendency to believe that our own judgments are less susceptible to the influence of bias than those of others Black sheep effect The strong devaluation of ingroup members who threaten the positive image and identity of the ingroup Blaming the victim Interpreting the negative outcomes that occur to others internally so that it seems that they deserved them Bogus pipeline procedure A procedure, designed to elicit more honest responses, in which an experimenter first convinces participants that they have access to their “true” beliefs Catharsis The idea that engaging in less harmful aggressive actions will reduce the tendency to aggress later in a more harmful wayPrinciples of Social Psychology 719 Causal attribution The process of trying to determine the causes of people’s behavior Central traits Characteristics that have a very strong influence on our impressions of others Charismatic leaders Leaders who are enthusiastic, committed, and self-confident; who tend to talk about the importance of group goals at a broad level; and who make personal sacrifices for the group Coercive power The ability to dispense punishments Cognitive accessibility The extent to which a schema is activated in memory and thus likely to be used in information processing Cognitive dissonance The discomfort that occurs when we respond in ways that we see as inconsistent Cognitive heuristics Information-processing rules of thumb that enable us to think in ways that are quick and easy but that may sometimes lead to error Cognitive reappraisal Altering an emotional state by reinterpreting the meaning of the triggering situation or stimulus Collective action The attempts on the part of one group to change the social status hierarchy by improving the status of their own group relative to others Collectivism Cultural norms that indicate that people should be more fundamentally connected with others and thus are more oriented toward interdependence Commitment The feelings and actions that keep partners working together to maintain the relationship Common ingroup identity The experience of social identity that occurs when differences in social grouping at one level are reduced by perceived similarities on a second, superordinate category Communal relationships Close relationships in which partners suspend their need for equity and exchange, giving support to the partner in order to meet his or her needs, and without consideration of the costs to themselves Companionate love Love that is based on friendship, mutual attraction, common interests, mutual respect, and concern for each other’s welfare Compensatory (or averaging) task A task where the group input is combined such that the performance of the individuals is averaged rather than added Competition The attempt to gain as many of the limited rewards as possible for ourselves, while reducing the likelihood of success for the other parties Conceptual variables The characteristics that we are trying to measure Conditioning The ability to connect stimuli (things or events in the environment) with responses (behaviors or other actions)720 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Confirmation bias The tendency for people to seek out and favor information that confirms their expectations and beliefs Conflict When parties are involved in violence and hostility Conformity The change in beliefs, opinions, and behaviors as a result of our perceptions about what other people believe or do Conjunctive task When the group performance is determined by the ability of the group member who performs most poorly Conscientiousness A tendency to be responsible, orderly, and dependable Consensus information When a situation seems to be the cause of a behavior if the situation creates the same behavior in most people Consistency information When a situation seems to be the cause of a behavior if the situation always produces the behavior in the target Contact hypothesis The idea that intergroup contact will reduce prejudice Contingency model of leadership effectiveness A model of leadership effectiveness that focuses on both person variables and situational variables Contributions dilemma When the short-term costs of a behavior lead individuals to avoid performing it, and this may prevent the long-term benefits that would have occurred if the behaviors had been performed Controlled cognition When we deliberately size up and think about something; for instance, another person Cooperation Behavior that occurs when we trust the people or groups with whom we are interacting and are willing to communicate and share with the others Correlational research Research designed to search for and test hypotheses about the relationships between two or more variables Correspondence bias When we attribute behaviors to people’s internal characteristics, even in heavily constrained situations Counterfactual thinking The tendency to think about events according to what might have been Covariation principle When a given behavior is more likely to have been caused by the situation if that behavior covaries (or changes) across situations Cover story A false statement of what the research was really about Criterion task A task where the group can see that there is a clearly correct answer to the problem that is being posedPrinciples of Social Psychology 721 Culture A group of people, normally living within a given geographical region, who share a common set of social norms, including religious and family values and moral beliefs Culture of honor A social norm that condones and even encourages responding to insults with aggression Cyberbullying Aggression inflicted through the use of computers, cell phones, and other electronic devices Defensive attribution When we make attributions that defend ourselves from the notion that we could be the victim of an unfortunate outcome, and often also that we could be held responsible as the victim Deindividuation The loss of individual self-awareness and individual accountability in groups Dependency-oriented help When the recipient feels that the implication of the helping is that he or she is are unable to care for himself or herself Dependent variable The variable that is measured after the manipulations have occurred Depressive realism The tendency for people who are depressed to make social judgments about the future that are less positively skewed and often more accurate than those who do not have depression Desensitization The tendency to become used to, and thus less influenced by, a stimulus Devil’s advocate An individual who is given the job of expressing conflicting opinions and forcing the group (in a noncombative way) to fully discuss all the alternatives Diffusion of responsibility When we assume that others will take action and therefore we do not take action ourselves Discrimination Unjustified negative behaviors toward members of outgroups based on their group membership Disjunctive task When the group’s performance is determined by the best group member Disorganized attachment style A blend of anxious and avoidant attachment styles Displaced aggression When negative emotions caused by one person trigger aggression toward a different person Distinctiveness information When a situation seems to be the cause of a behavior if the behavior occurs when the situation is present but not when it is not present Distributive fairness Our judgments about whether or not a party is receiving a fair share of the available rewards Divisible task When each of the group members working on the job can do a separate part of the job at the same time Dominant response The action that we are most likely to emit in any given situation.722 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Door-in-the-face technique A persuasion tactic that involves making an unreasonably large request before making the (intended) smaller request Downward social comparison When we attempt to create a positive image of ourselves through favorable comparisons with others who are worse off than we are Dual-concern model of cooperation and competition A model of individuals relating to social dilemmas, or other forms of conflict, in different ways, depending on their underlying personal orientations or as influenced by the characteristics of the situation that orient them toward a given concern Electroencephalography (EEG) A technique that records the electrical activity produced by the brain’s neurons through the use of electrodes that are placed around the research participant’s head Emotional or impulsive aggression Aggression that occurs with only a small amount of forethought or intent and that is determined primarily by impulsive emotions Emotions Brief, but often intense, mental and physiological feeling states Empathy An affective response in which a person understands, and even feels, another person’s distress and experiences events the way the other person does Empirical Based on the collection and systematic analysis of observable data Entitativity The perception, either by the group members themselves or by others, that the people together are a group Entity theorists People who tend to believe that others’ traits are fundamentally stable and incapable of change Evolutionary adaptation The assumption that human nature, including much of our social behavior, is determined largely by our evolutionary past Exchange relationships Relationships in which each of the partners keeps track of his or her contributions to the partnership Experimental confederate A person who is actually part of the experimental team but who pretends to be another participant in the study Experimental research Research designs that include the manipulation of a given situation or experience for two or more groups of individuals who are initially created to be equivalent, followed by a measurement of the effect of that experience.
Expert power Power based on the possession of valid and accurate information and that leads to private acceptance in followers.
Extended-contact hypothesis The prediction that people who have friends from other social groups will be more accepting of all members of those groupsPrinciples of Social Psychology 723 External validity The extent to which relationships can be expected to hold up when they are tested again in different ways and for different people Factorial research designs Experimental designs that have two or more independent variables False consensus bias The tendency to overestimate the extent to which other people hold similar views to our own False consciousness The acceptance of one’s own low status as part of the proper and normal functioning of society Falsifiable When the outcome of the research can demonstrate empirically either that there is support for the hypothesis (i.e., the relationship between the variables was correctly specified) or that there is actually no relationship between the variables or that the actual relationship is not in the direction that was predicted Feelings of social identity The positive self-esteem that we get from our group memberships Field experiments Experimental research studies that are conducted in a natural environment Fitness The extent to which having a given characteristic helps the individual organism to survive and to reproduce at a higher rate than do other members of the species who do not have the characteristic Fixed-sum outcome When a gain for one side necessarily means a loss for the other side or sides Foot-in-the-door technique A persuasion attempt in which we first get the target to accept a rather minor request, and then ask for a larger request Forewarning Reminding an individual that an attempt to persuade may be forthcoming, with the expectation that the reminder will reduce persuasion Forming stage When the members of the group come together and begin their existence as a group Framing effects occur when people’s judgments about different options are affected by whether they are framed as resulting in gains or losses.
Frustration The emotion that results from feeling that we are not obtaining the important goals that we have set for ourselves Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) A neuroimaging technique that uses a magnetic field to create images of brain structure and function Fundamental attribution error When we tend to overestimate the role of person factors and overlook the impact of situations in explaining a behavior Global attributions Those attributions that we feel apply broadly Group attribution error The tendency to make attributional generalizations about entire outgroups based on a very small number of observations of individual members724 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Group polarization When, after discussion, the attitudes held by the individual group members become more extreme than they were before the group began discussing the topic Group process The events that occur while the group is working together on the task Group-serving bias (or ultimate attribution error) The tendency to make internal attributions about our ingroups’ successes, and external attributions about their setbacks, and to make the opposite pattern of attributions about our outgroups Groupthink When a group that is made up of members who may actually be very competent and thus quite capable of making excellent decisions nevertheless ends up making a poor one as a result of a flawed group process and strong conformity pressures Halo effect The influence of a global positive evaluation of a person on perceptions of their specific traits Harm-based morality The belief that harming others, either physically or by violating their rights, is wrong Harvesting dilemma A social dilemma that leads people to overuse an existing public good Hindsight bias The tendency to think that we could have predicted something that we probably would not have been able to predict Illusion of group effectivity The tendency to overvalue the level of productivity of our ingroups Implicit Association Test (IAT) A procedure designed to elicit implicit beliefs and attitudes Incremental theorists People who believe that personalities change a lot over time and who therefore are more likely to make situational attributions for events.
Independent variable The situation that is created by the experimenter through the experimental manipulations Individualism Cultural norms, common in Western societies, that focus primarily on self-enhancement and independence Informational social influence The change in opinions or behavior that occurs when we conform to people who we believe have accurate information Ingroup favoritism The tendency to respond more positively to people from our ingroups than we do to people from outgroups Ingroup Those we view as being similar and important to us and with whom we share close social connections Injunctive norms Rules that specify how group members are expected to behave.
Inoculation A mild attack on the attitude position designed to help the potential target createPrinciples of Social Psychology 725 counterarguments to the potential persuasive attempt, with the expectation that subsequent persuasion will be reduced Instrumental or cognitive aggression Aggression that is intentional and planned Insufficient justification The perception that a threat or reward that is in fact sufficient to get the person to engage in or avoid a behavior is not sufficient Integrative outcome When a solution can be found that benefits all the parties Intellective task A task that involves the ability of the group to make a decision or a judgment Interdependence A state in which the group members depend on each other for successful performance of the group goals Internal validity The extent to which changes in the dependent variable in an experiment can confidently be attributed to changes in the independent variable Internalized prejudice When individuals turn prejudice directed toward them by others onto themselves Interpersonal attraction The strength of our liking or loving for another person Jigsaw classroom An approach to learning in which students from different racial or ethnic groups work together, in an interdependent way, to master material Judgmental task A task for which there is no clearly correct answer to the problem Just world belief The belief that people get what they deserve in life Just world hypothesis The tendency to make attributions based on the belief that the world is fundamentally just Kin selection Strategies that favor the reproductive success of one’s relatives, sometimes even at a cost to the individual’s own survival Labeling bias When we are labeled, and others’ views and expectations of us are affected by that labeling Leadership The ability to direct or inspire others to achieve goals Learned helplessness The tendency to continually make external, stable, and global attributions for our behavior Learning The relatively permanent change in knowledge that is acquired through experience Legitimate power Authority that comes from a belief on the part of those being influenced that the person has a legitimate right to demand obedience726 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Looking-glass self When part of how we see ourselves comes from our perception of how others see us Lowball technique A persuasion attempt in which the persuader promises the target something desirable, with the intention of getting the target to imagine himself or herself engaging the desired behavior, before indicating that the desirable offer is actually not possible Macbeth effect The observation that people tend to want to cleanse themselves when they perceive that they have violated their own ethical standards Majority influence When the beliefs held by the larger number of individuals in the current social group prevail Maximizing task A task that involves performance that is measured by how rapidly the group works or how much of a product they are able to make Mediation Helping to create compromise by using third-party negotiation Mere exposure effect The tendency to prefer stimuli (including, but not limited to, people) that we have seen frequently Meta-analysis A statistical procedure in which the results of existing studies are combined to determine what conclusions can be drawn on the basis of all the studies considered together Mindguard Someone whose job it is to help quash dissent and to increase conformity to the leader’s opinions Minority influence When the beliefs held by the smaller number of individuals in the current social group prevail Misattribution of arousal When people incorrectly label the source of the arousal that they are experiencing Mood The positive or negative feelings that are in the background of our everyday experiences Mood congruence effects When we are more able to retrieve memories that match our current mood Mood-dependent memory The tendency to better remember information when our current mood matches the mood we were in when we encoded that information Moral reasoning The manner in which one makes ethical judgments Morality beliefs The set of social norms that describe the principles and ideals, as well as the duties and obligations, that we view as appropriate and that we use to judge the actions of others and to guide our own behavior Narcissism A personality trait characterized by overly high self-esteem, self-admiration, and self- centerednessPrinciples of Social Psychology 727 Need for cognition The tendency to think carefully and fully about our experiences, including the social situations we encounter Negative attributional style The tendency to explain negative events by referring to our own internal, stable, and global qualities Negotiation The process by which two or more parties formally work together to attempt to resolve a perceived divergence of interest in order to avoid or resolve social conflict Nonphysical aggression Aggression that does not involve physical harm Nonverbal behavior Any type of communication that does not involve speaking, including facial expressions, body language, touching, voice patterns, and interpersonal distance Normative social influence Conformity that occurs when we express opinions or behave in ways that help us to be accepted or that keep us from being isolated or rejected by others Norming stage When the appropriate norms and roles for the group are developed Not invented here bias When group members overvalue their own group’s ideas and products over those of other groups Observational learning When people learn by observing the behavior of others Observational research Research that involves making observations of behavior and recording those observations in an objective manner Operant learning The principle that experiences that are followed by positive emotions (reinforcements or rewards) are likely to be repeated, whereas experiences that are followed by negative emotions (punishments) are less likely to be repeated Operational definition The particular method that we use to measure a variable of interest Optimistic bias The tendency to believe that positive outcomes are more likely to happen than negative ones, particularly in relation to ourselves versus others Optimistic explanatory style A way of explaining current outcomes affecting the self in a way that leads to an expectation of positive future outcomes Other-concern The motivation to affiliate with, accept, and be accepted by others Outcome bias A tendency to look at the outcome too much when we evaluate decision making Outgroup homogeneity The tendency to view members of outgroups as more similar to each other than we see members of ingroups Overconfidence bias The tendency to be overconfident in our own skills, abilities, and judgments Overjustification The viewing of our behavior as caused by the situation, leading us to discount the extent to which our behavior was actually caused by our own interest in the activity728 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Passionate love The kind of love that we experience when we are first getting to know a romantic partner Pearson correlation coefficient A statistic used to summarize the association, or correlation, between two variables Performing stage When group members establish a routine and effectively work together Person perception The process of learning about other people Personal (or internal or dispositional) attribution When we decide that the behavior was caused primarily by the person Personal distress The negative emotions that we may experience when we view another person’s suffering Personality theories of leadership Explanations of leadership based on the idea that some people are simply “natural leaders” because they possess personality characteristics that make them effective Personality traits The specific and stable personality characteristics that describe an individual Physical aggression Aggression that involves harming others physically Planning fallacy The tendency to overestimate the amount that we can accomplish over a particular time frame Pluralistic ignorance When people think that others in their environment have information that they do not have and when they base their judgments on what they think the others are thinking Positive attributional style Ways of explaining events that are related to high self-esteem, including a tendency to explain negative events experienced by referring to external, unstable, and specific qualities Postdecisional dissonance The feeling of regret that may occur after we make an important decision Pre-giving technique A persuasion tactic that relies on the norm of reciprocity Prefrontal cortex The part of the brain that lies in front of the motor areas of the cortex and that helps us remember the characteristics and actions of other people, plan complex social behaviors, and coordinate our behaviors with those of others Prejudice An unjustifiable negative attitude toward an outgroup or toward the members of that outgroup Prescriptive norms Rules which tell the group members what to do Primacy effect The tendency for information that we learn first to be weighted more heavily than is information that we learn laterPrinciples of Social Psychology 729 Priming A technique in which information is temporarily brought into memory through exposure to situational events, which can then influence judgments entirely out of awareness Principle of attitude consistency A principle that states that for any given attitude object, the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition are normally in line with each other Prisoner’s dilemma game A laboratory simulation that models a social dilemma in which the goals of the individual compete with the goals of another individual (or sometimes with a group of other individuals) Private acceptance Real change in opinions on the part of the individual Private self-consciousness The tendency to introspect about our inner thoughts and feelings Procedural fairness Beliefs about the fairness (or unfairness) of the procedures used to distribute available rewards among parties Process gain When groups work better than we would expect, given the individuals who form them Process loss When groups perform more poorly than we would expect, given the characteristics of the members of the group Processing fluency The ease with which we can process information in our environments Production blocking When only one person can speak at a time, and this can cause people to forget their ideas because they are listening to others, or to miss what others are saying because they are thinking of their own ideas Projection bias The tendency to assume that others share our cognitive and affective states Proscriptive norms Rules which tell the group members what not to do Proximity-liking The tendency for people to become better acquainted with, and more fond of, each other when the social situation brings them into repeated contact Psychological reactance The strong emotional response that we experience when we feel that our freedom of choice is being taken away Public compliance A superficial change in behavior (including the public expression of opinions) that is not accompanied by an actual change in one’s private opinion Public goods Benefits that are shared by a community at large and that everyone in the group has access to, regardless of whether or not they have personally contributed to the creation of the goods Public self-consciousness The tendency to focus on our outer public image and to be particularly aware of the extent to which we are meeting the standards set by others Random assignment to conditions Determining separately for each participant which condition he or she will experience through a random process730 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Realistic group conflict When groups are in competition for objectively scarce resources Recency effect When information that comes later is given more weight Reciprocal altruism A mutual, and generally equitable, exchange of benefits Reciprocity norm A social norm reminding us that we should follow the principles of reciprocal altruism Reconstructive memory bias When we remember things that match our current beliefs better than those that don’t and reshape those memories to better align with our current beliefs Referent power Influence based on identification with, attraction to, or respect for the power-holder Relational or social aggression Intentionally harming another person’s social relationships Representativeness heuristic When we base our judgments on information that seems to represent, or match, what we expect will happen, while ignoring more informative base-rate information Reputation management A form of long-term self-presentation, where individuals seek to build and sustain specific reputations with important audiences Research hypothesis A specific prediction about the relationship between the variables of interest and about the specific direction of that relationship Reward power The ability to distribute positive or negative rewards Role stress When individuals experience incompatible demands and expectations within or between the roles that they occupy, which often negatively impacts their ability to be successful in those roles Schema A knowledge representation that includes information about a person, group, or situation Secure attachment style When children perceive their parents as safe, available, and responsive caregivers and are able to relate easily to them Self Our sense of personal identity and of who we are as individuals Self-affirmation theory When people try to reduce the threat to their self-concept posed by feelings of self-discrepancy by focusing on and affirming their worth in another domain, unrelated to the issue at hand Self-awareness The extent to which we are currently fixing our attention on our own self-concept Self-awareness theory When we focus our attention on ourselves, the tendency for us to compare our current behavior against our internal standards Self-complexity The extent to which individuals have many different and relatively independent ways of thinking about themselves Self concept A knowledge representation that contains knowledge about us, including our beliefs aboutPrinciples of Social Psychology 731 our personality traits, physical characteristics, abilities, values, goals, and roles, as well as the knowledge that we exist as individuals Self-concept clarity The extent to which one’s self-concept is clearly and consistently defined Self-concern The motivation to protect and enhance the self and the people who are psychologically close to us Self-consciousness When our self-concept becomes highly accessible because of our concerns about being observed and potentially judged by others Self-disclosure The tendency to communicate frequently, without fear of reprisal, and in an accepting and empathetic manner Self-discrepancy theory The tendency to experience distress when we perceive a discrepancy between our actual and ideal selves Self-efficacy The belief in our ability to carry out actions that produce desired outcomes Self-esteem The positive (high self-esteem) or negative (low self-esteem) feelings that we have about ourselves Self-evaluation maintenance theory When our self-esteem can be threatened when someone else outperforms us, particularly if that person is close to us and the performance domain is central to our self-concept Self-fulfilling prophecy A process that occurs when our expectations about others lead us to behave toward those others in ways that make our expectations come true Self-handicapping When we make statements or engage in behaviors that help us create a convenient external attribution for potential failure Self-labeling When we adopt others’ labels explicitly into our self-concept Self-monitoring The tendency to be both motivated and capable of regulating our behavior to meet the demands of social situations Self-perception The process of using our perceptions of our behavior to help us determine our attitudes toward an attitude object Self-presentation The tendency to present a positive self-image to others, with the goal of increasing our social status Self-reference effect When information that is processed in relationship to the self is particularly well remembered Self-regulation The process of setting goals and using our cognitive and affective capacities to reach those goals732 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Self-report measures Measures in which individuals are asked to respond to questions posed by an interviewer or on a questionnaire Self-schema A variety of different cognitive aspects of the self Self-serving attributions Attributions that help us meet our desire to see ourselves positively Self-serving bias The tendency to attribute our successes to ourselves, and our failures to others and the situation Self-verification theory The tendency for people to often seek confirmation of their self-concept, whether it is positive or negative Shared information bias When group members tend to discuss information that they all have access to while ignoring equally important information that is available to only a few of the members Situational attribution When we determine that a behavior was caused primarily by the situation Sleeper effect Attitude change that occurs over time when the content of a message is remembered but the source of the message is forgotten Social categorization The natural cognitive process of placing individuals into social groups according to their social categories Social cognition An understanding of how our knowledge about our social worlds develops through experience and the influence of these knowledge structures on memory, information processing, attitudes, and judgment.
Social comparison When we learn about our abilities and skills, about the appropriateness and validity of our opinions, and about our relative social status by comparing our own attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors with those of others Social conventional morality Norms that are seen as appropriate within a culture but that do not involve behaviors that relate to doing good or doing harm toward others Social creativity The use of strategies that allow members of low-status groups to perceive their group as better than other groups Social dilemma A situation in which the goals of the individual conflict with the goals of the group Social dominance orientation (SDO) A personality variable that refers to the tendency to see and to accept inequality among different groups Social exchange The idea that, if we help other people now, they will return the favor should we need their help in the future Social facilitation The tendency to perform tasks better or faster in the presence of others Social fairness norms Beliefs about how people should be treated fairlyPrinciples of Social Psychology 733 Social group A set of individuals with a shared purpose and who normally share a positive social identity Social identity The sense of our self that involves our memberships in social groups Social identity theory The tendency to draw part of our sense of identity and self-esteem from the social groups that we belong to Social impact The increase in the amount of conformity that is produced by adding new members to the majority group Social influence The process through which other people change our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and through which we change theirs Social inhibition The tendency to perform tasks more poorly or slower in the presence of others Social intelligence An ability to develop a clear perception of the situation using situational cues Social loafing A group process loss that occurs when people do not work as hard in a group as they do when they are alone Social neuroscience The study of how our social behavior both influences and is influenced by the activities of our brain Social norms The ways of thinking, feeling, or behaving that are shared by group members and perceived by them as appropriate Social power The ability of a person to create conformity even when the people being influenced may attempt to resist those changes Social psychology The scientific study of how we feel about, think about, and behave toward the people around us and how our feelings, thoughts, and behaviors are influenced by those people Social responsibility norm A social norm that we should try to help others who need assistance, even without any expectation of future paybacks Social support refers to the comfort that we receive from the people around us—for instance, our family, friends, classmates, and coworkers Specific attributions Those attributions that we see as more unique to particular events.
Spontaneous message processing When we focus on whatever is most obvious or enjoyable, without much attention to the message itself Stable attributions Those attributions that we think will be relatively permanent Stereotype The positive or negative beliefs that we hold about the characteristics of social group Stereotype threat Performance decrements that are caused by the knowledge of cultural stereotypes734 Dr.
Hammond Tarry Storming stage When group members may attempt to make their own views known, expressing their independence and attempting to persuade the group to accept their ideas Sunk costs bias When we choose to stay in situations largely because we feel we have put too much effort in to be able to leave them behind Superordinate goals Goals that are very important and require the cooperative efforts and resources of more than one group to attain Principle of attitude consistency For any given attitude object, the ABCs of affect, behavior, and cognition are normally in line with each other Third variables Variables that are not part of the research hypothesis but that cause both the predictor and the outcome variable and thus produce the observed correlation between them Thoughtful message processing The careful consideration of whether a persuasion attempt is valid or invalid Tit-for-tat strategy Initially making a cooperative choice and then simply matching the previous move of the opponent (whether cooperation or competition) Trait ascription bias A tendency for people to view their own personality, beliefs, and behaviors as more variable than those of others Transactional leaders Leaders who work with their subordinates to help them understand what is required of them and to get the job done Transformational leaders Leaders who have a vision of where the group is going and attempt to stimulate and inspire their workers to move beyond their present status and to create a new and better future Unitary task A task that has to be done all at once and cannot be divided up Unrealistic optimism The tendency to be overly positive about the likelihood that negative things will occur to us and that we will be able to effectively cope with them if they do Unstable attributions Those attributions that are expected to change over time Upward social comparison When we compare ourselves with others who are better off than we are Verbal aggression Yelling, screaming, swearing, and name calling Violence Aggression that has extreme physical harm, such as injury or death, as its goal What is beautiful is good stereotype The belief that external attractiveness signifies positive internal qualitiesVersioning History This page provides a record of edits and changes made to this book since its initial publication.
Whenever edits or updates are made, we make the required changes in the text and provide a record and description of those changes here. The files on our website always reflect the most recent version, including the Print on Demand copy. If you find an error in this book, please fill out the Report an Open Textbook Error form.
735736 Dr. Hammond Tarry Version Date Change Details October 3, Book added to the BC Open 1.01 2014 Textbook Collection Reformatted Table 7.1. January (Chapter 7 – Close The table had been formatted incorrectly to make the 1.02 25, 2017 Relationships: Liking and information misleading.
Loving over the Long Term) Error: People with anxious/ambivalent attachment styles feel good about themselves (the goal of self-concern is being met), but they do not have particularly good Factual error fixed in the relations with others. People with avoidant attachment second paragraph before styles are primarily other-concerned. February Table 7.1.
(Chapter 7 – 1.03 3, 2017 Close Relationships: Liking Correction: People with avoidant attachment styles feel and Loving over the Long good about themselves (the goal of self-concern is being Term) met), but they do not have particularly good relations with others. People with anxious/ambivalent attachment styles are primarily other-concerned. Error: We learn, in part, because we have been positively reinforced for engaging in the appropriate ones and Wording error fixed in the negatively reinforced for engaging in the inappropriate third paragraph under the September ones.
1.04 “Operant Learning” heading 12, 2018 in Chapter 2: Sources of Correction: We learn, in part, because we have been Social Knowledge. reinforced for engaging in the appropriate ones and punished for engaging in the inappropriate ones. Table 1.3 formatting error January fixed in Chapter 1: The original table had a number of operational 1.05 14, 2019 Conducting Research in definitions listed incorrectly as conceptual variables.
Social Psychology. June 5, The styles of this book have been updated, which may 1.06 Updated the book’s theme. 2019 affect the page numbers of the PDF and print copy.
Error: Although insufficient justification leads people to like something less because they (incorrectly) infer that Updated the book’s theme. they did not engage in a behavior due to internal reasons, it is also possible that the opposite may occur. Clarified wording in Chapter September 1.07 4 – Attitudes, Behavior, and 23, 2019 Correction: Although insufficient justification may lead Persuasion: Changing people to like something less because they (incorrectly) Attitudes by Changing infer that the reason they did not engage in a behavior Behavior.
was due to internal reasons, it is also possible that the opposite may occur. Error: Positive mood states increase helping, and Wording error in the Key negative affective states, particularly guilt, reduce it. August 6, Takeaways in The Role of 1.08 2021 Affect: Moods and Correction: Both positive mood states and negative Emotions.
affective states (particularly guilt) can increase helping.Principles of Social Psychology 737 Version Date Change Details • 25 interactive H5P quizzes have been inserted January First International H5P 2.01 throughout the text. 26, 2022 Edition published. • Front matter and book metadata updated.
Error in Drag the Words – • Answer to tug-of-war question changed from Classic Findings in Social false to true. August 2.02 Psychology H5P activity in 26, 2022 • Added missing numbering back to table 1.5. 1.3 Conducting Research in Social Psychology.
• Link added from H5P activity to table 1.5. • Inserted print alternatives for H5P activities. • Inserted pop-up glossary definitions in webbook.
• Revised alt text and image description for Remediated for accessibility. some images, revised table structure and October heading structure for accessibility, and 2.03 Added front matter. 28, 2022 provided descriptive link text for links.
Improved functionality. • Added Accessibility Statement, For Students: How to Access and Use this Textbook, About BCcampus Open Education. • Assigned new ISBN for the First International H5P Edition.
Made minor updates and changes to metadata, front January 4, Updates to metadata, front, 2.04 matter, and back matter, including removing original 2023 and back matter. author’s name (as was requested by original publisher).
TECHNIQUES OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE Every day we are asked to fulfil others’ requests, and we make regular requests of others too, seeking compliance with our desires, commands and suggestions. This accessible text provides a uniquely in-depth overview of the different social influence techniques people use in order to improve the chances of their requests being fulfilled. It both describes each of the techniques in question and explores the research behind them, considering questions such as: How do we know that they work?
Under what conditions are they more or less likely to be effective? How might individuals successfully resist attempts by others to influence them? The book groups social influence techniques according to a common charac- teristic: for instance, early chapters describe “sequential” techniques, and techniques involving egotistic mechanisms, such as using the name of one’s interlocutor.
Later chapters present techniques based on gestures and facial movements, and others based on the use of specific words, re-examining on the way whether “please” really is a magic word. In every case, author Dariusz Dolinski discusses the existing experimental studies exploring their effectiveness, and how that effectiveness is enhanced or reduced under certain conditions. The book draws on historical material as well as the most up-to-date research, and unpicks the methodological and theoretical controversies involved.
The ideal introduction for psychology graduates and undergraduates studying social influence and persuasion, Techniques of Social Influence will also appeal to scholars and students in neighbouring disciplines, as well as interested marketing professionals and practitioners in related fields. Dariusz Dolinski is Professor at the University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Wrocław Faculty in Poland, editor of the Polish Psychological Bulletin, president of the Polish Association of Social Psychology and past president of the Committee for Psychology of the Polish Academy of Sciences.TECHNIQUES OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE The psychology of gaining compliance Dariusz DolinskiFirst published 2016 by Routledge F27ir sCt hpuurbclihs hRedo a2d0, 1H6ove, East Sussex BN3 2FA by Routledge 2an7d C bhyu Rrcohu Rtleodagde, Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 and by Routledge 7R1o1u tTlehdigred i sA avne nimuep,r iNnte wof Ythoer Tka, yNloYr & 1 0F0ra1n7cis Group, an informa business R©o 2u0tl1ed6g eD ias rainu sizm Dproinlitn osfk tihe Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business ©Th 2e0 r1i6g hDt aorfi uDsza rDiuoszli nDskoilinski to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the TChoep yrrigighhtt ,o Df Desaigrinuss za nDdo Pliantseknit st oA bcte 1id9e8n8t.ified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the CAlol pryigrhigths tr,e Dseersviegdn.s N anod p Paartt eonft st hAisc tb 1o9o8k8 m.
ay be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other AmTlhel earn iOgs,h pnteso nwr eA skecnrcvoeeswds n.v N eororsi ohpnear reot afo fttfhe trihs i inbs vobeoonkot,e kad vm, aiinalyacb lbuleed iarnet gpw rpwinhwtoet.dota cyoolrop rryefirpnargno cdainus.dcce odm , orherac suo btriedlieisnneg dm, oianrd aienn a yav nafoyilr aimbnlf eoo rurm nbdyate iaron any Csetlroeercaattgriovee no iCrc , ormemtermicehovaannls i scAyastltt, eromibr u, owttihoitenhr-o Nuot n mpCeoerammnmiss, seniorocnwi ai lnk-N nwoorw iDtnin eogrri v frhaoteimrvee atsfh t4ee.r 0p i unlibvceleinnshtseeed.rs, .including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without pTerardmemisasirokn n ointi cwe: rPitriondgu fcrot mor tchoer ppourbaltiseh nearsm.es may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and Texrapdleamnaatriko nno wticiet:h Poruot diunctet notr tcoo irnpforirnagtee .names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and eBxriptilsahn aLtiibornar wy Cithaotaulot giunitnegn itn t oP uibnlfircaintigoen. Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data ALi bcraatrayl oogf uCeo rnegcreosrsd C foatra ltohgiisn bg oino kP uisb laivcaatiiloanb lDe afrtaom the British Library Dolinski, Dariusz. LTeibcrharnyi qouf eCs oonfg rseoscs iCal aitnafllougeinngc ien : Pthuebl ipcasyticohno Dloagtay of gaining compliance / DDoarliinusskz iD, Doalirniusksiz..
— 1st Edition. Tpaegcehsn ciqmues of social influence : the psychology of gaining compliance / DInacrluiudsezs Dbioblliinosgkria. p—hi c1aslt rEedfeitrieonnc.es and index.
p1.a gSeosc icaml influence. I. Title.
IHnMclu1d1e7s6 b.Dib6li5o g2r0a1p5hical references and index. 13.0 S2o′.c1i3a—l indfclu2e3nce. I.
Title. H20M1510107461.6D765 2015 302′.13—dc23 2015004167 ISBN: 978-1-138-81517-9 (hbk) ISBN: 978-1-138-81519-3 (pbk) IISSBBNN:: 997788--11--133185--8714561877--96 ((hebbkk)) ISBN: 978-1-138-81519-3 (pbk) ISBN: 978-1-315-74687-6 (ebk) Typeset in Bembo by Swales & Willis Ltd, Exeter, Devon, UK Typeset in Bembo by Swales & Willis Ltd, Exeter, Devon, UKCONTENTS List of illustrations vii 1 Introduction 1 2 Sequential techniques of social influence 8 Foot-in-the-door 8 Four walls and repeating “yes” 22 Door-in-the-face 25 Foot-in-the-face 32 Dump-and-chase 37 Low ball 39 Summary 44 3 Techniques involving egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 46 Using the name of one’s interlocutor 47 Incidental similarity 54 Induction of hypocrisy 58 A witness to an interaction 61 Summary 63 4 The role of wording the request 65 “Please” – is it always the magic word? 65 Even a penny will help 68 But you are free!
71 Labelling and asking questions 74 How are you feeling? 80vi Contents Dialogue involvement 87 The power of imagination 93 Summary 97 5 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 99 That’s not all 100 Disruption-then-reframe 107 The pique technique – requesting in an unusual manner 115 Gaze 118 Touch 123 Summary 131 6 Techniques of social influence using mood and emotion 133 Physiological arousal 134 The role of positive and negative mood 136 Fear and anxiety 142 The feeling of guilt and shame 145 Embarrassment 150 Emotional see-saw 152 Summary 157 7 A few more issues and final remarks 159 Academic researchers vs practitioners of social influence 159 Catalysts of social influence 163 Unethical social influence 165 How to study social influence techniques. A short guide for students and novice researchers 165 References 169 Index 185ILLUSTRATIONS Figures 3.1 Mean amount of money donated in Burger et al.
(2004) experiment 56 3.2 Percentage agreeing to the request in Burger et al. (2004) experiment 58 5.1 Eye (left) and control (right) images in situ in the supermarket 122 5.2 Percentage of compliance with the request to mail a letter in each of the experimental conditions. N = 40 in each condition.
F-F: Female asking female; F-M: Female asking male; M-F: Male asking female; M-M: Male asking male 130 6.1 Fear exposure and weight loss 144 7.1 A, X, B – experimenters 167 Tables 2.1 Percentage of subjects complying with the large request in Freedman and Fraser (1966) experiment 11 2.2 Percentage of compliance with the large request in Cialdini, Trost and Newsom (1995) experiment 21 2.3 Percentage of subjects complying with the smaller request in Cialdini et al. (1975) experiment 26 2.4 Decision tree of people who agreed to fulfil the second request in each condition in Dolinski (2011) experiment 36 2.5 Percentages of subjects complying with initial and second requests in Burger and Petty (1981) experiment 43 4.1 Frequencies of participants who complied with the request for money in Gueguen et al. (2013) experiment 72viii Contents 4.2 Compliance by group in Aune and Basil (1994) experiment 86 4.3 Proportion of persons complying with the experimenter’s requests, average amount of donation (in parentheses), and average duration of the interaction (in seconds) in each condition in Dolinski, Nawrat and Rudak (2001) experiment 89 4.4 Percentage of persons complying with the experimenter’s request to devote 15 minutes of their time to answer questions about the local press in Dolinski, Nawrat and Rudak (2001) experiment 92 5.1 Percentage of targets who complied in each condition in Davis and Knowles (1999) experiments 111 5.2 Money given and compliance percentage in Burger et al.
(2007) experiment 117 6.1 Means of the transformed compliance measure as a function of embarrassment and person making the request in Apsler (1975) experiment 152 6.2 Percentage of subjects who complied with a request in Dolinski and Nawrat (1998) experiment 153 6.3 Percentage of people who offered money, mean amounts of money given, and a tendency to seek additional information under each condition in Dolinski and Nawrat (1998) experiment 1551 INTRODUCTION As a rule, the introduction is where the author explains to the reader what the book is about. Before I do that, however, I will take the liberty of a brief digression of a personal nature. Whenever I’m at some sort of gathering and find I am acquainted only with the host, my interactions with other guests go off “without a hitch”.
I’m not a particularly shy person, so it’s rather easy for me to get to know others and to talk to them about more or less serious subjects. Problems begin when they ask me what I do for a living. My answer – that I am a psychologist – provokes a feeling of unease in my interlocutors.
“So you must be observing us and analyzing,” I hear. “What do you think about us?” My answer, that I’m not observing or analyzing anybody but, just like everybody else, having a beer, chatting about Almodóvar’s latest film, Kundera’s books, recent sports events or political happenings, isn’t taken at face value by others. It gets worse when the conversation turns to questions like “So what is it you do exactly?
Do you put people through psycho- therapy, or devise intelligence tests?” I respond that I’m not a therapist and that I’ve never created any intelligence test, and nothing would indicate that I ever will. I explain that for many years I have been engaged in the study of social influence techniques. When I give a few examples by way of explanation, opinions about me are uniformly devastating: I am a guy who sits in a lab and dreams up schemes for effectively manipulating people.
As it is, psychologists concerned with social influence techniques usually aren’t thinking up new tricks. Our approach to the subject is just the opposite. The metaphor of full-cycle social psychology, applied by Robert Cialdini (1980), would seem to be a good illustration of this.
The full cycle is a construction under which a social influence technique emerges in social life, and after it is “discovered”, investigated and described by scientists, it winds up back in that “real life”. So, a psychologist interested in these techniques observes the tricks applied by individuals whose professions or social roles involve them exerting influence on others.2 Introduction He thus watches the behaviour of a waiter with an interest in his client leaving a generous tip, a car salesman focused on getting people to buy automobiles from him, door-to-door salespeople determined to leave a set of knives in someone’s home and walk out with a fat wallet. Also of interest to the psychologist may be those working for charitable causes who are skilled in acquiring donations from sponsors, as well as politicians who quickly gain in popularity, which translates into votes from constituents.
Of equal interest may also be observing a married couple in which one partner is able to convince the other to agree to far-reaching concessions. Every social psychologist has a wealth of opportunities to observe practitioners of social influence techniques. I live and work in Wrocław, a city located in the centre of Europe – and more precisely in south-west Poland – with around 700,000 inhabitants.
Yesterday I got out of my car, which I had parked around 200 metres from the Market Square, where I had arranged to meet up with a friend. While exiting my car I was approached by a man showing me where I could find a place to park, waving at me while I helplessly drove along the kerb in search of a free spot. I hadn’t even got out of the car when he offered me “a deal” on some car air fresheners.
Why not? He was polite and pleasant, he had helped me and he also had one of my favourite scents, vanilla. A moment after this transaction and after I had closed my car door, a young boy who seemed around 12 years old ran up to me, bringing a bucket and an offer to wash my car.
I might have taken him up on it if it weren’t for the fact that the water in his bucket looked even dirtier than the exterior of my vehicle. Besides that, I was probably feeling a bit ‘had’ by the air freshener salesman, whose offer wasn’t really that cheap, so I decided I wouldn’t just agree to everything people offered me. I set out briskly for the Market Square.
Along the way I passed by two sellers of a newspaper I usually read (I wasn’t enticed, as I had already bought a copy earlier), one seller of another newspaper (I didn’t buy it because I don’t care for its politics) and one vagrant (I didn’t give him a cent). I did, however, take three flyers (two from language schools and one from a glassworks), which I immediately placed in the bin. I always take flyers.
I know that some people, usually youngsters, are paid by the hour, but others are paid for the number of flyers they give out. I think this is a rather thankless and poorly paid job. Taking a flyer and throwing it into a bin, which is usually nearby, doesn’t cost me a thing.
So I usually let people press flyers into my open hand, then maybe I take a look at them or not and throw them away immediately. On the way to the Market Square I was additionally tempted by storefronts promising incredible thrills inside, and a bank tried to talk me into taking out an unbelievably attractive loan. Before I had made it to City Hall, I walked by a man who resembled Lenin and was standing on a fruit box holding a giant red flag in his hand.
At his feet lay a prominently displayed hat for tossing money into, and it contained 10- and 20-zloty banknotes. Obviously, the idea was to prevent someone from thinking that they could just toss in some loose change. Not even for a moment did I consider throwing anything in there.
Next, I encountered a man dressed up in a suit and tie who tried to press a business card into my hand while explaining the virtues of a central vacuum system, and a painting salesman encouraging me toIntroduction 3 pick up an image of a beautiful deer in rutting season, saying that I could get it at steep discount while helping young artists at the same time. In both cases, I managed to not break my stride and avoided closer interaction. The car fragrance salesman, the owner of a bucket with water, the panhandler, the Lenin lookalike, the newspaper salesmen and the deer painting peddler .
. . in most of these cases, the people involved applied some more or less refined social influence technique.
These techniques – as the aforementioned “sample of events” demonstrates – are relentlessly used by practitioners of social influence. I assume that you, the reader, have had experiences similar to mine, even if you live in another part of the globe. Regardless of their geographic location, practitioners of social influence all want one and the same – they want us to order and purchase various things from them, to give money for their causes, to fill in the surveys, questionnaires and other forms they put in our faces, to leave them generous tips and to undertake all sorts of obligations.
We succumb to such pressure – sometimes subtle, sometimes less so – dozens or even hundreds of times a day. Quite often, as Daniel Howard indicates (1995), practitioners of social influence apply techniques consisting of connecting various methods into a chain, which makes it even more difficult to defend oneself from undesired social influence. Why do social influence techniques work?
Why do they work even when we are perfectly aware that someone is attempting to influence us? Contrary to appearances, these are very difficult questions. The basic question a psychologist who has succeeded in sniffing out some particular trick applied by practitioners of social influence must pose concerns the actual effectiveness of the technique.
For example, does the way a shoe salesman usually “can’t find” a pair of shoes in the right size for the customer, but then man- ages to locate “the last pair” after a few minutes, really increase the chances that the customer will buy those shoes? Perhaps he would be equally inclined to buy them if the salesman took them out straight away? How to determine this?
There is no better means than a carefully planned and meticulously performed experiment, or even better – a series of experiments. If the results of such empirical studies in fact reveal the effectiveness of the trick under analysis, then one of science’s most important questions must follow: “Why?” Why is a given technique a successful instrument of social influence? Here, the investigator primarily makes use of his knowledge about the mechanisms governing people’s reactions.
Over the last few decades, psychology has made significant strides in this area. However, many things remain uncertain, unclear and opaque. This is why there may be several potential mechanisms underlying the effectiveness of a particular social influence technique.
The following series of experiments is thus aimed at determining which of them is in fact responsible for a particular trick’s effective- ness. Uncovering the mechanism thus also leads to the generation of knowledge about factors that can enhance, sometimes significantly, the effectiveness of the studied behaviour. The precisely verified and described technique now becomes an element of psychological knowledge.
As such, it is also often propagated during all sorts of training sessions, university classes or seminars. It is also sometimes the case that a description of the technique can be found in books, such as this one. As a4 Introduction consequence, the technique can become an instrument of social influence for those who learn of it thanks to this manuscript.
In this way, the circle of social psychology described by Robert Cialdini is complete. It has closed. The technique was born in real social life and has returned to it.
The great majority of psychological influences described in this book have travelled a similar path: from practice, through detailed empirical and theoretical analysis, to practice. It is no different with the techniques that my collaborators and I have studied for many years. We thus stake no claim to being the authors of most of these tricks.
They are not our inventions. They are the creations of anonymous practitioners of social influence over thousands of years, individuals who derive all sorts of benefits, not only material, from their effectiveness. To obtain a full picture, it is necessary to say that, at times (although rarely), psychologists think up social influence techniques, or somewhat accidentally uncover them in the course of conducting empirical research.
In this book I also describe the results of various experiments by a host of social psychologists conducting research around the world. My primary objective is to introduce the reader to the current state of knowledge in the area of social influ- ence techniques. At the same time, however, I devote significant space to research conducted by myself and my co-experimenters.
I do this not because I feel our experiments are more interesting or more important than others; the possibility of offering a detailed presentation of one’s own research and thoughts is simply a natural privilege enjoyed by every author. I have decided to take advantage of it. In works dedicated to social influence, various means of organizing the presented material have been adopted.
The author of one of the most popular psychological books, Robert Cialdini (2001), states that six main laws or principles of social influence can be distinguished. They are the principles of reciprocation, commitment and consistency, social proof, liking, authority and scarcity. Cialdini dedicates successive chapters of his best-selling monograph Influence: Science and practice to them.
This approach allows him to provide a good structure to the pre- sented material. There is no doubt in my mind that the aforementioned principles are of particular significance, and they allow for an excellent explanation of various phenomena belonging to the area of social influence. The approach consisting in an argument constructed on six rules of social influence does, however, have certain flaws.
First and foremost, it should be acknowledged that all techniques of social influence (or at least the majority of them) can be counted as one of these rules. Cialdini himself is of this opinion, but this is not so obvious to many other researchers. The framework of the aforementioned six basic rules is a poor fit for such techniques as those associated with emotions experienced by people, tech- niques based on the sudden induction of incogitance or those making use of egotistical mechanisms.
It is also worth noting that Cialdini uses descriptions of various tricks and tech- niques as specific illustrations of the rules he himself has differentiated, rendering the book coherent and believable. The problem is, among researchers there is no consensus as to the psychological basis for the effectiveness of particular means ofIntroduction 5 exerting influence on people. In the relevant literature we may observe vigorous debate over the psychological mechanisms that underpin the effectiveness of assorted social influence techniques.
Thus it is often possible to take issue with Cialdini’s “classification” of particular techniques. In this book, the problem of organizing the content is resolved in a different manner. Pride of place is given to descriptions of particular social influence tech- niques and empirical studies testing their effectiveness.
In addition, competing interpretations of techniques and research results under discussion are presented, and it is my hope that they will assist readers in coming to their own conclusions on the accuracy of each of them. It is thus time to enumerate the subjects to be addressed in the individual chapters of this book. You are presently reading the first of them; it is an introduction to the subject of social influence and to the content of this manuscript.
Chapter 2 examines what are referred to as sequential social influence techniques. They all consist in the main request being preceded by a different one. Depending on the particular tech- nique, the secondary request can be harder or easier to fulfil than the one that follows it.
The subject’s contact with the initial request – meaning whether he fulfils it, attempts to fulfil it or rejects it – influences the probability that he will want to fulfil the next one. Research on the effectiveness of sequential techniques and the search for mechanisms underlying them have a long and rich tradition in the science of psychology, which is why I have devoted many pages to describing them. The remaining chapters are shorter.
This is not because I feel the techniques presented in them are uninteresting, but rather because there is far less empirical research concerning them. The third chapter contains a presentation of techniques associated with people’s need to satisfy their ego and for self-presentation. Individuals undertake all sorts of activities throughout their lives in order to maintain self-esteem and to make a positive impression on others.
These motivations can, in some cases, result in them being more inclined to act on requests, suggestions and orders addressed to them. Some social influence techniques are thus grounded in just these human needs. Chapter 4 focuses on the content and form of messages directed at an individual on whom social pressure is being applied.
Here I attempt to demonstrate the complex role words play in processes of social influence. A specific phrase or an individual word appearing in a particular moment of a social interaction can sig- nificantly affect the reaction of an individual to whom we turn with a request or suggestion. The thesis that interpersonal interactions are of a dynamic nature is a truism.
That this dynamic can find itself under the control of the individual forming the request, and thus take the form of a social influence technique, is itself not a truism. The fifth chapter describes just those techniques in which something out of the ordinary occurs when one person asks another for something. Chapter 6 contains descriptions of successful influence techniques based on emotional mechanisms.
Here we can observe just how significant readiness to fulfil a request is on the influence of affective states experienced by the addressee of said request.6 Introduction The seventh chapter – “A few more issues and final remarks” – as the term would suggest, closes out the book. Alongside a summary, I grant myself the liberty of presenting some of my reflections and doubts. I also consider the possibility of using psychological knowledge in practice and others of an ethical character, of particular importance concerning the exertion of influence on others.
That should suffice to describe what you, dear Reader, will find in this book. There is one more thing that requires clarification, something that with all certainty concerns social influence but is not in this work. In the book I focus almost exclusively on techniques designed to induce people to behave in a par- ticular manner.
However, I neither present nor analyze techniques for influencing cognitive attitudes. It must be stated clearly that such an approach under which the researcher is primarily interested in observable behaviours is not, at present, the dominant one in psychology. Quite the opposite, we may even say that it is “unfashionable”.
As jokingly stated in the title of an article by Roy Baumeister, Kathleen Vohs and David Funder (2007), contemporary psychology has become “a science of self-reports and finger movements”. Since the 1970s there has been a steady decline of interest on the part of psychologists in non-verbal human behaviour. While writing their article, Baumeister and his colleagues opened up the then newest edition (January 2006) of the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, one of the most influential psychological journals.
And what did they find? The articles contain descriptions of individuals’ judgements and opinions. The contemporary researcher no longer follows in the footsteps of his predecessors, introspective types who listened to what subjects had to say; he rather asks them to press the appropriate button on a keyboard.
The psychologist thus studies behaviours . . .
consisting of pecking at a keyboard, he explores . . .
finger move- ments! “We have to break up!” cries out Robert Cialdini – the leading researcher on altruism and social influence – in the title of his 2009 article. He observes that psychology is focusing more and more on explaining behaviours, while ignoring the actual causes of those behaviours.
It is hardly an exaggeration to say that social psychology, in its drive to explain, has lost sight of just what is to be explained. In some places psychologists have got themselves into such a quagmire that they are only explaining processes of explanation. The book which you hold in your hands is thus a continuation of Cialdini’s appeal “We have to break up!” It focuses on the reality of human behaviour, and not on their judgements, opinions or verbal declarations of particular behaviours.
While this is an unfashionable approach, I follow it in the firm conviction that it is a proper one. Experiments studying real human behaviours are difficult to con- duct, time-consuming and labour intensive. It is far easier to just ask subjects to imagine themselves in a situation and say how they would behave .
. . simpler, quicker, easier .
. . but doubts of a fundamental nature arise: do we, in this manner, get closer to the truth of human behaviour, or do we get further from that truth?
One of the most important experiments in the history of social psychology was conducted by Stanley Milgram (1974). Milgram demonstrated that in certain conditions the majority of participants in an experiment, ostensibly concerning theIntroduction 7 effect of punishment on learning, can be induced into shocking another participant with 450 volts of electricity. However, if we were to ask people how they would behave in the same circumstances, hardly anyone would be able to imagine them- selves in the role of a person zapping another with such a horrendous amount of electricity.
Things are similar in the case of investigations of social influence techniques. In Chapter 5 I describe research concerning the role of touch. As it occurs, when an individual is asked to do some favour, such as signing a petition, the chances that this request will be fulfilled are greater when we gently grasp this person by the arm or forearm.
I told my students to imagine a stranger asking them to sign a petition, and then asked them whether the fact that this stranger were delicately touching their arm at the same time would influence the probability that they would agree to do so. They responded that it would obviously have an influ- ence! But .
. . they were convinced that the touch of a stranger would result in their refusal to fulfil the request!
There are countless examples demonstrating that investigations of real human behaviours generate an entirely different picture than research on imagined own reactions. Thus, in this book I consistently describe research concerning real social behav- iours, and not work concerning verbal declarations about such behaviours. What is more, a clear majority of experiments presented within are field studies in which people are studied in their natural environment (in parks, libraries, restaurants, at universities or in their own homes) and not in a psychological laboratory.
Furthermore, in the majority of these experiments, the subjects were unaware that they were interacting with psychologists conducting scientific research; they did not know that they were participating in an experiment. These facts give us the right to be confident in the veracity of the results, and that they demonstrate how people really behave in various situations and what conditions their reactions. As the author, I obviously bear full responsibility for the content presented in this book.
However, I would like its readers to be aware that it would not have come about without my friends, colleagues and collaborators – and also my students – with whom I had countless opportunities to conduct scientific discussions, debates and polemics, and from whom I have learned so much. I deeply wish to thank them sincerely for their comments, which have helped me to avoid assorted errors, vagueness and inaccuracies. I would also like to thank Matthew La Fontaine for his strong language support.
I’m truly grateful to Routledge and their staff for their cooperation and lending their hand at all stages of producing of the book. Thanks are due, as well, to Christopher Carpenter, Michael Hogg and one anonymous reviewer for their insightful comments on an earlier version of parts of the text and to Robert Cialdini and Nicolas Gueguen who expressed opinions about the final version of this book. I acknowledge the Ministry of Science and Higher Education, whose grants (N N106 327339 and BST WROC/2013/A/02) helped make this book possible.
Last but not least, I would also like to thank everyone who has decided to read this book. For them (and for myself) I hope the time sacrificed reading it will prove well spent.2 SEQUENTIAL TECHNIQUES OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE “Honey, are we finally going to paint the walls in the hallway?” a wife asks her husband. “Yes, we talked about that already,” the husband replies.
“Maybe we can remodel the bathroom too, since there’s already going to be such a mess, let’s just do it all together?!” This sort of conversation is an example of what are referred to as sequential techniques of social influence. The wife starts discussing remodelling the bathroom only after she has been assured by her husband that the walls in the hallway will get painted. Sequential techniques are based in the assumption that we can boost the potential of another person’s acceding to our request, succumbing to urging, taking advantage of a proposal or carrying out a demand by presenting a different request (suggestion, proposal, command) first.
Particular techniques assume that the initial request will be fulfilled (at least with a verbal declaration, as in the example given at the beginning of the chapter), will be rejected or will simply be impos- sible to be fulfilled. Our presentation of sequential techniques of social influence will begin with the first type of situation. Foot-in-the-door Proverbs highlighting people’s tendency to escalate their demands are seemingly present in nearly every culture.
In the USA and United Kingdom people say “give them an inch, they’ll take a mile”; Germans and Poles – while speaking different languages – jointly declare that “give someone a finger, they’ll take your whole hand”. Both Hungarians and Spanish speakers are in agreement that “if you give someone your hand, they’ll take the entire arm”. The essential idea in all of these expressions is the same: if someone convinces us to cede a bit of ground, the chances increase that we will take a much larger step back.
To look at it from a different perspective: if we want someone to agree to fulfil a difficult request, we should first ask him to fulfil a clearly simpler one.Sequential techniques of social influence 9 If we look at these issues from the perspective of social influence techniques and their efficacy, is it really the case that if someone has reason to believe a direct request will go unfulfilled, the chances of it succeeding can be enhanced by first lodging a less serious request? The first to attempt at answering this question were American psychologists Jonathan Freedman and Scott Fraser (1966). Their research constitutes what were likely history’s first experiments exploring social influence techniques.
The participants in Freedman and Fraser’s experiments (1966) were housewives; they were contacted by telephone and asked to allow a few men to enter their homes. They were told that the men were members of a consumer’s organization and their task was to enumerate and classify all the household products. It turned out that only around 22% of those asked gave their consent.
The researchers treated this group as the control group. The experimental group was comprised of other housewives, who were also called by phone but to whom a much simpler request was submitted: they were asked to answer a few questions about the kinds of soaps they used. The vast majority of women agreed and responded to all of the questions given.
A few days later, the experimenters called those women again and asked them to allow a few men to visit them so they could enumerate and classify the household products. It turned out that in this case the women were more inclined to let the unfamiliar men into their home than were people in control conditions. In these circumstances, consent to a visit from the unknown men was given by 53% of respondents.
Why was this so? One answer stands out: the women who had previ- ously answered questions about their consumer behaviours felt their telephone interlocutor was someone they were familiar with (or at least represented a company they already knew). It is commonly known that people are more likely to fulfil the requests of people (and likely institutions) they are familiar with than of those they are not.
The results obtained by the study should not strike us as unusual, all the more so considering that it involved participants letting someone into their home, where the element of trust would seem to be crucial. We hasten to mention, however, that Freedman and Fraser were testing a hypothesis assuming that the key to acquiring consent to the fulfilment of a difficult request is to first convince people to perform an easier task. Thus we are faced with a dilemma: does the greater percentage of women in the experimental cohort consenting to allowing a group of unknown men into their homes result from the fact that the women previously fulfilled some request, or rather because they consider those men to constitute acquaintances, at least to a certain degree?
Freedman and Fraser foresaw this ambiguity, and therefore brought two more groups into their experiment’s structure. In the first of them, the women were asked to give a brief interview. After agreeing, they were then told that, in fact, only initial registration was being con- ducted, and that the interview would be held at a later time.
In the case of the second group, the experimenter only informed the study participants that a special organization had been formed that investigated consumers’ behaviours, and he explained that he wanted the women to be aware of that fact. When the women from those two groups were again contacted by telephone a few days later and asked if they would agree to host a group of men who would enumerate and classify all the household products in their home, this request was not fulfilled with10 Sequential techniques of social influence significantly greater frequency than in the case of the control group (consent was given by around 33% and 28% of women, respectively). We can thus observe that the factor increasing pliancy in the face of a serious, difficult request is previous submission to a similar, clearly easier request; the mere earlier contact with an individual who then formulated a serious request was not enough to generate increased compliance.
Freedman and Fraser thus proved in this experiment that the trick “first a small request, then a big one – the real one” is an effective social influ- ence technique. They also proposed the name foot-in-the-door for this technique. The name would seem to reflect the essence of that technique: in order to enter someone’s home (to get a lot), it is first necessary to get the owner’s permission to put your foot in the door (to get a little).
In order to determine whether the results of the study under discussion were fully reliable, and also to find answers to a range of other questions, the authors conducted another experiment. This time, they started with the assumption that it would be relatively difficult to convince the owners of homes located along the roadside to give their consent to the installation of large billboards in their yards displaying messages to drivers asking them to drive carefully. Indeed, who would like to have a giant billboard in their yard, blocking their houses?
As it turned out, individuals selected at random were quite resistant to the idea; fewer than 17% of those questioned gave their consent. In the remaining four study groups, 2 weeks before the request to install a billboard was formulated, they were asked for their agreement to do something far easier. Participants were asked either to put up a small sign or to sign a petition, and the issue was either safe driving or keeping California beautiful.
It can easily be observed that in the case of two of the groups, the first (initial) and the second (main) request addressed the same issue – improving road safety. In the case of the remaining two groups, the first request concerned a different issue (keeping California beautiful) from the second (road safety). Regardless, in two groups we encountered a similarity in the actions required of study participants – both cases involved expressing consent to the installation of visual propaganda (a sticker in the case of the initial request, and a billboard in the case of the target request).
In the other two conditions, there was a discrepancy in the character of the two tasks given to participants (first to sign a petition, then to consent to placing visual propaganda on their property). Freedman and Fraser were of course interested in seeing which experimental groups would give their consent to placing a billboard in their front yards with greater frequency than the control groups. The results of this experiment can be reviewed in Table 2.1.
As we can see, in the first group (similar themes, similar nature of tasks), consent to putting up a billboard was given by over two-thirds of those asked. In the remaining three groups, the percentage of participants agreeing to fulfil the target request was lower, yet even this was clearly higher than in the control group. The results of this experiment indicate that the “foot-in-the-door” technique is at its most effective when both requests are similar in content (in this case, both of them concern road traffic safety) and involve similar activity (expressing consent toSequential techniques of social influence 11 TABLE 2.1 Percentage of subjects complying with the large request in Freedman and Fraser (1966) experiment Issues Task Similar N Different N Similar 76.0 25 47.8 23 Different 47.6 21 47.4 19 One-Contact 16.7 (N = 24) Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1966, vol.
4, p. 201 Copyright 1966 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. the presence of visual propaganda).
On the other hand, however, it is not necessary for any of the aforementioned similarities to be strong in order for the technique to succeed (i.e. in order for the addressee’s fulfilment of the target request to be more likely than in conditions in which the request is made directly). Increased compliance was observed even in situations when both requests concerned differ- ent issues and required different actions.
It is worth emphasizing that the aforementioned dissimilarity is not total. Indeed, both requests concern some sort of engagement on behalf of the common good. What is the psychological mechanism that results in people who fulfilled an easier introductory request then being more inclined to fulfil a significantly more serious one?
Before we try to answer this question, let us consider two details in the experimental procedure applied by Freedman and Fraser. First, one fact that stands out is that the initial request (sign a petition or put on a sticker) and the target request (install a billboard) were formulated by entirely different people. What is important and should be emphasized is that the person who requested consent to install a billboard behaved as though he had nothing in common with the person who had made the introductory request.
Second, it should be noted that 2 weeks passed between the initial and the second request. The first of these facts indicates that the “foot-in-the-door” technique does not owe its effectiveness to any interpersonal mechanisms (e.g. the establishment of a bond between the person formulating the request and the person to whom it is addressed, nor any particular obligation resulting from such an interaction that would induce the addressee of the request to fulfil further ones).
The second of the aforementioned facts, however, suggests that the technique under discussion here is not based on any sort of short-term mechanism. With these issues in mind, Freedman and Fraser took on the assumption that an individual who agrees without being placed under pressure (threats, blackmail, offer of financial reward, etc.) to fulfil the first request will then begin to view himself as “the kind of person who does this sort of thing, who agrees to requests made by strangers, who takes action on things he believes in, who cooperates with good causes” (Freedman & Fraser, 1966, p. 201).
The authors posit the presence of a principle that was later elaborated in full by Daryl Bem (1967, 1972) and is presently referred to as self-perception theory.12 Sequential techniques of social influence If you ask a man whether his wife likes soap operas, he might respond “I think so, after all, she does watch them all the time”. But what if we pose the same question to the wife? If she said, “I think I do, after all, I watch them every day”, then it could be said her process of deduction about her own TV preferences is exactly the same as her husband’s.
In Bem’s opinion, this would be nothing unu- sual. The answers to questions about what leads to one’s own reactions, decisions and choices are generally located in the external world (someone induced us to do something, someone forced us, someone offered a large reward, someone did a favour for us previously). However, in the absence of such factors, or when they are not very convincing as explanations for our own reactions, we come to the conclusion that the root causes lie within – in our own attitudes, convictions and inclinations.
The woman in our example, wondering whether she likes soap operas, first considers whether it’s because her friend forces her to watch them, or maybe because she only watches them because she has just one TV station, or maybe because a research company pays her to. If it turns out that this “review of the circumstances” fails to indicate any external factors influencing her choice to watch soap operas, she will then search for the answers inside herself. She thus comes to the conclusion that she likes this form of entertainment.
Let us observe that not only does Bem assume the process of deduction about one’s own preferences or attitudes takes a course analogical to that of deduction about the preferences of others, but he also turns the association between our attitudes and actions upside-down. It is commonly known that our attitudes lead us to engage in some behaviours and to refrain from others. If I like books, I read them.
If I like exotic animals, I go to the zoo. If I’m happy I laugh, and if I’m sad I cry; Bem does not call this association into question, but he does ask: how can I know that I like books and exotic animals? Because I read a lot, and I spend my free time at the zoo.
How do I know that I am happy or sad? Because I laugh out loud, or I feel tears streaming down my cheeks. Of course, Bem does not declare that think- ing about the causes of one’s own behaviours is the sole source of knowledge about self.
Sometimes, however, we have no other foundations for coming to conclusions about our own preferences and attitudes. Possibly the most suggestive evidence in support of Bem’s theory is an experi- ment conducted by Fritz Strack, Leonard Martin and Sabine Stepper (1988). The experimenters asked a portion of their study’s participants to assess some jokey cartoons.
Another group assessed the same jokes while holding a pencil between their teeth. Still another group assessed the jokes with a pencil between their lips and with their teeth closed. What was the result?
The jokes seemed the funniest to those who held the pencil between their teeth, and the least funny to those who held it using their lips (Strack et al., 1988). Thus it was the loosening or tightening of the facial muscles associated with expressing joy and amusement, or disgust and distaste, lead to us concluding that we find something more or less humorous! I know that a joke is funny because I feel the activity of my zygomatic muscle extending from the base of my ear to the corner of my mouth.
I know that it irritates me and seems stupid because I can perceive the activity of other facial muscles.Sequential techniques of social influence 13 The theory of self-perception is most often referred to in the literature as the psychological underpinning for the effectiveness of the “foot-in-the-door” tech- nique. Someone who accedes to the first, initial request begins to question why he has done so. Not finding any sensible external explanation (nobody has black- mailed him, nobody has offered him serious money for doing so), he arrives at the conclusion that his own preferences and convictions must be at the heart of the decision.
Put differently, he comes to the conclusion that he possesses attitudes and convictions that are consistent with that decision. Owing to the process of self- perception he becomes a psychologically somewhat different person, a person who now defines or expresses himself in a slightly different fashion. The next, more serious request is now in line with this new self-image, thus it comes as no surprise that the chances he will agree to it increase.
Several decades have passed since the publication of the experiments by Freedman and Fraser described above. In that time, many experiments demonstrating the effectiveness of the “foot-in-the-door” technique have been conducted, encompassing quite a few areas of life. For example, it can be used to boost the chances of receiving large donations to charitable causes.
This has been explored in several experiments, with direct practical implications. Patricia Pliner, Heather Hart, Joanne Kohl and Dory Saari (1974) did this in conjunction with a campaign in support of the fight against cancer. One day they handed out stickers with messages about caring for those afflicted by cancer to randomly selected residents of a small town, and asked them to display the stickers on their clothes.
Not once did someone refuse. The next day, donations for the fight against cancer were collected among residents of the same town. It turned out that those who had previously agreed to sport the stickers were more generous than others.
Joseph Schwarzwald, Aharon Bizman and Moshe Raz (1983) asked randomly selected individuals to sign a peti- tion to authorities concerning funding for a disabled persons’ social club. Almost everyone approached agreed to give their support. Two weeks later, people were asked to donate money.
In this case as well it turned out that people who had previously been asked to do a small favour were more likely to reach for their wallets. Peter Reingen (1978) decided to examine whether the positive effect of the foot-in-the-door technique could be achieved in the framework of single interac- tions. He asked students on a university campus to make a charitable donation.
It turned out that he was much more effective when the participants were first asked to answer a few questions in a survey concerning the organization (engaged in the fight against heart disease) on whose behalf the money was being collected. Similar positive effects were noted by Morton Goldman (1986) while conducting a cam- paign for the municipal zoo, by Robert Bell and Matthew Cholerton (1994) as they collected funds for educational campaigns to raise awareness about AIDS and ways of avoiding the disease, and by Sebastien Meineri and Nicolas Gueguen (2014) encouraging people to get involved in protecting the natural environment. Jacob Hornik and Tamar Zaig (1991) demonstrated that the technique under discussion can prove very helpful in conditions involving a telephone survey with questions about issues that respondents are not particularly keen on discussing14 Sequential techniques of social influence (e.g.
income, sexual education for children, watching pornographic films, etc.). The portion of respondents refusing to answer questions in such surveys is generally high, which leads to the study sample losing its representative character. Hornik and Zaig show that a double-digit increase in the readiness of respondents to answer such questions can be attained if they are first asked personal but less invasive questions.
The foot-in-the-door technique is exploited extensively in totalitarian political systems. New regimes rarely require extremely immoral acts from their subjects at the beginning, but rather step up their demands over time, escalating the expecta- tions and requirements addressed to them (Gilbert, 1981). Meta-analyses aimed at determining the conditions necessary for the foot-in-the-door technique to be effective show that it is successful both when the first and the second request are formulated by the same individual and when two different people are involved in the process (Fern, Monroe & Avila, 1986).
The length of time between requests and the difficulty of the initial request are rela- tively inconsequential (Beaman, Cole, Preston, Klentz & Steblay, 1983; Dillard, Hunter & Burgoon 1984; Fern et al., 1986). It also turned out that the foot-in-the-door effect can be achieved even without the queried individual fulfilling an initial request; it is enough that he attempts to do so in spite of adversity. In one such experiment, individuals walking along the pavement were approached (Dolinski, 2000).
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: experimental and control. In the experimental conditions, a young man approached participants and asked for directions to Zubrzyckiego Street (in fact, the city in which the study was conducted has no such street). The normal response was to stop and think for a moment, then respond “I don’t know”, “I don’t have any idea” or something similar.
Next, after the participant had gone another 100 metres down the street, he was approached by a second experimenter, a young woman. She stood on the pavement with a large bag, pointed at the top floor of a multi-storey building and asked for a favour, saying that she wanted to visit her friend living on the fifth floor, but that she had an unusually heavy bag, which there was no good reason to carry up there. She then asked the participant to watch the bag for a few minutes.
It turned out that while 34% of participants agreed in the control condition to watch the bag, 58% consented to do so in the experimental condition. While there have already been a large number of experiments concerning the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique, far fewer have addressed whether the mechanism of self-perception in fact lies at the heart of its success. As we shall see, this is a complex issue.
Miron Zuckerman, Michele Lazzaro and Diane Waldgeir (1979) observed that, in accordance with Bem’s theory, if the fulfilment of the first request is accompanied by the promise of a reward, the process of self- perception should be halted. Individuals often have a purely external explanation for their reactions. As a consequence, such conditions should not lead to increased readiness to carry out a second, more serious request.
The authors called people randomly selected from the phone book and asked them to participate in a 5-minute discussion on pedestrian safety in the city. Half of the participants were offered a reward of $1.50 for their involvement, while in the case of the other half there wasSequential techniques of social influence 15 no mention of any reward at all. After two days another experimenter called study participants and asked them to give a 25-minute interview concerning the house- hold products they used.
The experimental design also included a control group whose cohort was asked straight away to participate in such an interview. It turned out that in the control group, 45% of participants agreed to carry out the request. Participants from the group that had given the 5-minute interview for no reward agreed with greater readiness (64.3%), while in the group that received an award for participation in the short interview only 33.3% of participants consented.
Such results are entirely consistent with self-perception theory. The absence of external motivation (in this case, a reward) for fulfilling the first, relatively simple request induces people to think of themselves in categories such as “since I did THAT, then I am THAT KIND of person”. However, monetary compensation for doing so leads to explaining one’s own behaviour as “I did it because they paid me”.
This type of thinking, in turn, prevents the occurrence of the “since I did THAT, then I am THAT KIND of person” line of reasoning, and the individual is not inclined to do similar things in the future in the absence of some benefit. The link between offering a reward for fulfilling an initial request and decreased effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique is also confirmed by the results of various meta-analyses (e.g. Burger, 1999; Dillard et al., 1984).
It may be assumed that self-perception also does not appear in conditions involving the presence of an explanation other than non-monetary reward, which unequivocally explains the individual’s compliance with the initial request. Taking this assumption as his starting point, Seymour Uranowitz (1975) asked women shopping in supermarkets to guard his shopping bag for a few minutes. He explained to a few of the participants that he needed to find a lost one-dollar bill, while he told others that he had lost his wallet and needed to look for it.
After a few minutes he returned, declaring that he had found what had gone missing, and thanked the women for his help. After he walked away, a situation was staged in which the participant became a witness to a parcel falling out of the bag of another experimenter. It turned out that for the condition in which a weak justification for guarding the bag belonging to the man who went to look for something was offered (i.e.
when he went to look for a one-dollar bill), as many as 80% of par- ticipants informed the second experimenter that something had fallen out of his bag. However, when the justification for fulfilling the initial request was an obvious one (i.e. when the man went in search of a wallet), this number dropped to 45%.
In the control conditions, when the reactions of women who had not been asked to guard the bag were tested, 35% of them informed the experimenter that some- thing had fallen out of his bag. Thus, the patterns of results from other experiments involving conditions modifying the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door tech- nique also coincided with the assumptions underlying self-perception (e.g. DeJong & Musilli, 1982; Dolinski, 2012; Gamian-Wilk & Dolinski, 2015; Wagener & Laird, 1980).
Self-perception as the mechanism underlying the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique would also seem to be indicated by the results of a meta-analysis conducted by William DeJong (1979).16 Sequential techniques of social influence However, not all of the empirical data gathered over the years by psychologists from around the world provides verification that this particular mechanism under- lies the effectiveness of the technique being reviewed here. Beaman et al. (1983), undertaking a meta-analysis of an even greater number of studies than did DeJong, claim that the conclusions of those studies are not as definitive as initially thought.
At the same time, the psychological literature is seeing an increasing number of theoretical interpretations differing from self-perception intended to explain why fulfilling a simple request makes an individual more likely to then carry out a more serious later request. We shall review them one by one, starting with the model proposed by Robert Rittle (1981), who draws attention to the possibility that after fulfilling an easier initial request, an individual perhaps does not begin to perceive himself in any particular associated categories (e.g. I am a person who helps others, I am a person who fulfils the requests of others), but rather his attitude to the idea itself of helping other people is what changes.
Helping other people is nearly always associated with some cost, and to a certain degree with risk. Indeed, it could turn out that someone doesn’t wish us to intervene and exhibits disapproval or even aggression. It may also occur that a social milieu demonstrates some sort of hostility towards an individual trying to help.
Rittle thus suggests that fulfilling the easier request is linked with positive emotional experiences. The person who has been given help is generally nice, usually smiles and says thank you. This leads to a change in the attitude of the individual towards the very act of providing assistance.
He then begins to perceive altruistic activities as a general human obligation, and it also seems relatively unlikely to him that something bad would happen to an individual offering help. In one of his experiments Rittle received a certain confirmation of his ideas. Participants were invited to a psychological laboratory.
In the waiting room of the laboratory, some of them encountered a helpless child struggling with a vending machine offering sweets and beverages. In the large majority of cases the partici- pants spontaneously made an effort to help the child. (The few times they did not do so, the child asked them directly for help.
Nobody refused). Next, they proceeded to the laboratory, where they were first asked to fill in a questionnaire. It measured, among other things, their convictions regarding their own altruistic tendencies and attitudes concerning helping others.
It turned out that the differ- ence in their assessments of own levels of altruism between the experimental group (helping the child) and the control group (not encountering the child) was not great, and even statistically insignificant. Participants from the experimental group, however, were demonstrably less convinced than those from the control group that an individual helping a stranger could experience problems. Rittle goes on to suggest that this pattern of results contradicts the theory of self-perception, and rather confirms his proposed interpretation.
Many researchers dispute this conclusion. The primary charge is that Rittle’s experiment does not match the situation assumed in the foot-in-the-door procedure. In his experi- ments, most people spontaneously provide help to a child, while foot-in-the-door (at least in its classic form) requires the individual to be asked to fulfil some initialSequential techniques of social influence 17 request.
Also important is that self-perception can concern not only one’s own altruism, but also many other things – such as one’s own submissiveness, support for “good causes” or engagement in “good deeds”. Particularly sceptical of the conclusion arrived at by Rittle are Nancy Eisenberg, Robert Cialdini, Heather McCreath and Rita Shell (1987). These authors relied on earlier psychological studies demonstrating that children under the age of 7 do not possess sufficient cognitive resources to draw inferences from their own behaviours, and then use them as the foundation for formulating predictions as to their own reactions.
For example, they are not capable of such thoughts as “since I helped someone before, I will also probably help someone in the future if I’m in a similar situation”. It is this absence of such cognitive capacities that leads to children behaving inconsistently in successive similar situations. Eisenberg and her collaborators therefore assumed that if the foot-in-the-door technique is based on the mechanism of self-perception and the need to exhibit consistency in behaviour, then it should not be effective on children under 7 years of age.
The experimenters invited people from three age groups to participate in their experiments: the first group was composed of 5- and 6-year-old children, the second of 7- and 8-year-olds, and the third of 10- and 11-year olds. In each of the groups, studies were conducted in control conditions (directly addressing the target request to the children) and in experimental conditions (first lodging a small initial request). In the experimental conditions, children were given six coupons that they could exchange for toys, and were then asked if they would give back one of them to benefit poor children who had no toys at all.
One or two days later the children were given a choice – they could either play with fun toys or they could engage in the much less enjoyable activity of sorting pieces of coloured paper into four single-colour stacks for sick children in hospital. The control conditions involved only the second situation: a choice between playing and sorting the coloured paper. The youngest children displayed no difference between the control and experi- mental conditions.
In both cases, they were uniform in rarely agreeing to sort the paper. A difference approaching statistical significance did appear with the 7- and 8-year-old cohort, and a clear, statistically significant difference came out in the case of the 10- and 11-year-old children. While this effect is entirely in line with the authors’ expectations, I do not agree that it is proof of the inaccuracy of Rittle’s suggestion.
Indeed, doubts arise whether children 7 years and younger are capable of changing their attitudes and convictions concerning assisting others under the influence of some incidental experience. If this is not the case, then it could be argued that the results attained by Eisenberg et al. (1987) are consistent with the interpretation offered by Rittle.
The aforementioned studies were aimed at indirectly testing theories that state the self-perception mechanism is what underlies the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique. We should, however, observe that this can also be tested directly, by measuring changes in what participants believe about themselves (they should transform following the fulfilment of a simple request), and then examine whether a change in beliefs is accompanied by an increased propensity to carry out18 Sequential techniques of social influence a subsequent request. Taking this very assumption as his point of departure, James Dillard (1990) asked study participants for help in addressing envelopes to be used in correspondence for an organization engaged in environmental protection efforts.
After a certain time – a period of 1 to 3 weeks – another experimenter asked a number of the same participants to complete a specially constructed scale regarding their attitudes towards environmental protection. Other participants were asked to do something difficult. The request involved sacrificing several hours on the construction of a hiking trail.
A control group of participants to whom no initial request was addressed was also asked to either fill in the scale or to join in the construction of the hiking trail. It turned out that those who had previously agreed to help with the envelopes displayed a more positive attitude towards the need to protect the environment than participants from the control group. In addi- tion, agreement to work on the construction of a hiking trail was more frequent among those who had been subjected to the foot-in-the-door procedure than among those to whom the request had been addressed directly.
Such results are consistent with the hypothesis that assumes the foundation of the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique is the act of self-perception. Dillard’s studies do, however, display a certain weakness. Asking different groups of people to fill in an attitude scale and to carry out a serious request does not facilitate an investigation of the causal links between an attitude transformed as a result of fulfilling an initial request and later compliance with the real request.
To put it more simply, in this case we have no evidence that the individuals whose attitudes undergo change are then inclined to fulfil a subsequent request. Donald Gorassini and James Olson (1995), operating differently than Dillard, decided to measure self-assessment and inclination to fulfil a subsequent request in the same group of individuals. They observed that if the self-perception interpreta- tion is correct, then individuals who carry out the easier initial request should begin to perceive themselves differently than those from the control group, and those differences should be reflected in later varying levels of compliance of par- ticipants from both groups towards a serious request.
Carrying out a series of experiments, Gorassini and Olson (1995) first asked participants to help them for 5–10 minutes in preparing a psychological experiment, and then to complete a specially designed survey. This survey measured such items as self-assessment of participants’ tendency towards altruistic behaviour. The same survey was also filled in by members of the control group.
After that, the target request was addressed to all of the participants, in accordance with which they were asked for their consent to participate in a time-consuming psychological experiment. The results turned out to be quite problematic for the theory that the foundation of the technique under analysis here is self-perception. While there was a difference between the experimental and control groups in respect of self-assessment of tendencies towards altruism and a greater propensity of compliance with the target request in the experimental group than the control group, those phenomena affected different people.
In other words, those who had begun to view themselves as altruists after fulfilling the initial request were not subsequently more likely to accede to anotherSequential techniques of social influence 19 request than were participants from the control group. However, those who did not begin to perceive themselves as altruists after fulfilling the first request were inclined to sacrifice their time to participate in a psychological experiment. Gorassini and Olson conclude that three primary elements must be taken into account when considering the mechanisms underlying the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique.
First, compliance with the initial request must activate an attitude already held by the individual that will correspond most closely with the content of the next request. Second, the target request must be formulated in a manner that the entity acceding to it behaves in a manner consistent with the aforementioned attitude. Third, when fulfilling the initial request, the individual should be in a position to see the association between that attitude and his own reactions, which will make it clear to him that rejection of a subsequent request would be inconsistent with his accepted values.
This interpretation is somewhat similar to that offered a while back by Mary Harris (1972), which holds that fulfil- ment of the first request leads to an enhanced feeling of social responsibility. The norm demanding that people help each other and extend a hand to those in need of aid comes into sharper focus, and by the same token exerts a greater influence on future behaviour. A different view of the mechanism underlying the foot-in-the-door technique is taken by William Crano and John Sivacek (1982).
They assume that the fulfil- ment of an initial request may be associated with the receipt of rewards with a social dimension. An example of such a reward is an expression of gratitude from an individual receiving help, or a pleasant smile. These types of occurrences boost the likelihood that individuals will behave in a similar manner in the future.
The authors’ interpretation seems interesting and suggestive. I would also add that one particular reward could be the simple fact of satisfaction experienced by the person who has helped another. Yet another theory is advanced by James Cantrill and David Seibold (1986).
They state that when an individual makes the decision to comply or not to comply with a request, that the difficulty of the request is evaluated in relation to the amount of the effort that would need to be made, the amount of time to be sacrificed, or the amount of money to be spent. All of these estimates, while rather objectified, do not generally provide a definite answer to the question about whether the request is an easy one to fulfil or not. For example, is it a simple mat- ter to watch someone’s bag for 5 minutes, or a difficult one?
At times it is definitely easy, while at others hard. What determines our judgement in these matters? In Cantrill and Seibold’s opinion, people subjected to the effects of the foot-in-the-door technique estimate the difficulty of the target request based on information about the difficulty of a request that is at least somewhat similar in nature and which they have fulfilled in the recent past (that is, the initial request in the sequence).
Because there was no great expense in performing the first request, there are grounds to assume that the second one will not prove problematic. The so-called assimilation effect is at work, manifesting itself in overestimation of the similarity of difficulty levels exhibited by the two requests. Those from the control group are deprived of20 Sequential techniques of social influence this point of reference, which can lead to difficulties in estimating the difficulty involved in requests directed to them, in turn making refusal to fulfil them seem a rational step.
While the authors’ idea is quite interesting, it does have some weak points. First and foremost, it seems unlikely that, assuming a relatively long period of time between two requests (initial and main) and their formulation by different individuals, an individual would spontaneously recall information concerning the difficulty involved in fulfilling the first request and compare it with infor- mation about the task at hand. In addition, according to the proposal of Cantrill and Seibold, the individual’s contact with the first request rather than consent to its fulfilment is the key issue.
Merely the appearance of the initial request provides a convenient frame of reference for estimating the difficulty of the next one. If this is the case, we could expect that the consent of the individual to fulfil the initial request is not a necessary condition for the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique. However, research results indicate that individuals who refuse to fulfil the initial request nearly always refuse to go along with a subsequent one.
Existing research results also fail to confirm the key assumption in this model of a linear association between the difficulty of the first request and the effectiveness of foot-in-the-door (see e.g. Beaman et al., 1983; DeJong, 1979). Finally, the authors themselves failed to empirically demonstrate the accuracy of their model.
It would thus seem that, in spite of a wealth of theoretical approaches, the first one remains the best – that offered by Freedman and Fraser (1966) assuming the occurrence of an act of self-perception following the fulfilment of the initial request. That said, there remains a fundamental problem associated with this particular interpretation. In most of the studies recording the foot-in-the-door effect, the pause between the issuing of the first and the second request lasted several days (Beaman et al., 1983; Dillard et al., 1984; Fern et al., 1986).
Let us recall that in Freedman and Fraser’s original study (1966, exp. 2) this period lasted as long as 2 weeks. It would seem that in explaining their research results with the mechanism of self-perception, the authors accept the unspoken assumption that an individual fulfils the initial request, comes to the conclusion that she is an altruist, and then hears no other requests for favours over the following several days.
Suddenly, a serious request is issued by the experimenter, and the individual agrees to it. This line of reasoning would assume that a given participant is shoved into a freezer after performing the first request, then is taken out a split second before the experimenter decides to state the second (final) request. In the real world, there is no such freezer.
Participants live their normal lives, hearing dozens of requests every day from different people. They agree to some of them, while to others they do not (Dolinski, 2009). So why should the reaction to the initial request from an experimenter be more impor- tant than favours later asked for by other people?
Let us imagine that someone agrees in the morning to a request from an experimenter to fill in a short survey, but in the afternoon ignores the plea of an Internet user asking for the completionSequential techniques of social influence 21 of a survey that is to serve as the basis for a master’s thesis. Why should a reaction to the request of the experimenter induce self-perception and lead the indi- vidual to the conclusion “I am altruistic”, but the reaction to the Internet user’s request would not lead to the thought that “I am not altruistic”? Additionally, if study participants engaged in self-perception after every request, whether fulfilled or not, their perception of themselves in respect of altruism or submis- siveness would be ridiculously unstable.
Every instance of agreement should boost one’s conviction as to one’s own altruism or submissiveness, while every refusal should lead to a drop in the strength of those beliefs. Meanwhile, studies indicate that people exhibit rather stable beliefs about themselves (Campbell, 1990; Goldman, 2006). In this context it is worth remarking that this criticism does not apply to an interpretation very similar to that based on self-perception while remaining distinct.
Specifically, I am referring to Robert Cialdini (2001), who invokes the human need for consistency. In this case, an individual considering whether to fulfil a difficult request may take into consideration past behaviours in similar situ- ations. If he acceded, he should now behave consistently.
This interpretation has found confirmation in experiments concerning personality indicators and suscep- tibility to the application of the foot-in-the-door technique, in which participants first completed a specially designed preference for consistency scale (PFC) measur- ing the individualized need for consistent behaviour in situations occurring sequentially (Cialdini, Trost & Newsom, 1995). Next, some participants were asked to agree to an easy request. They were asked by telephone if they would be willing to spend 60 seconds answering three questions about TV programmes.
After receiving the consent of the participant, the three questions were posed, and then the target request was issued. It concerned agreeing to fill in a special ques- tionnaire comprising 50 items. Participants in the control group were asked immediately to respond to the experimenter’s questions.
It turned out that the foot-in-the-door effect was only noted among participants who had received high scores on the PFC scale. Among those characterized by a reduced need for consist- ency, this effect was not observed. Such participants from the experimental group also expressed their consent to complete the questionnaire with the same infre- quency as those from the control group (see Table 2.2).
In respect of my rather strong criticism of the assumption that the mechanism underlying the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique is self-perception, TABLE 2.2 Percentage of compliance with the large request in Cialdini et al. (1995) experiment Preference for consistency Foot-in-the-door Control Low 68 (45/66) 71 (49/69) High 66 (33/50) 50 (27/54) Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1995, vol. 69, p.
323 Copyright 1995 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.22 Sequential techniques of social influence I hasten to add that my reservations concern only the classic dependency as expressed in the literature, meaning the sequence of “fulfilment of the first request – act of self-perception – appearance of the second request”. However, it could be assumed that this mechanism is slightly different. It would seem to me that we could assume with a great degree of probability that the performance of easy, relatively frequent requests is generally automatic.
When asked for directions to the train station, we stop and point in the right direction; asked for the time, we pull out our phone and provide an answer. It is taken as self-evident that we will fulfil such requests, and they do not lead to questions such as “Why did I behave in that manner?” Why, indeed, should I stop and think about the reasons I agreed to answer some questions over the phone, or what caused me to complete a ques- tionnaire when asked to do so by some psychologist doing a study? (I’ve already done it, why wouldn’t I?).
However, if a similar but more difficult second request is made, I neither accede to it nor reject it out of hand. Now I begin to think about whether I should fulfil it. While analyzing the problem, I can recall that not long ago I agreed to carry out what was indeed an easier but still similar request.
If I also recall the circumstances surrounding that event without observing external factors that would lead me to carry out the request (nobody forced me, nobody paid me, etc.), then I might come to the conclusion that I am “the kind of person who does those things”. So, while the act of self-perception in the classic model of foot-in-the-door occurs after the initial request is fulfilled, in the theoretical proposition made above, it only occurs at the moment a clearly more difficult request is made (Dolinski, 2009). Four walls and repeating “yes” Door-to-door salesmen around the world apply a technique of some similarity to do foot-in-the-door.
Frequently, before they try to sell their potential customer something, they ask a few questions. Such questions are designed to ensure that the vast majority of people answer them in a predictable manner. Immediately after, the salesman pitches them some product or service.
Refusal to take the salesman up on his offer would contradict the answers given to those questions. We can imagine that a salesman would ask us something like “Is it worth living a healthy lifestyle?”, “Does the body need vitamins?”, “Isn’t it worth feeling confident that our body has enough of the nutrients it needs to function properly?”, and then after the third “yes” he offers us “an amazing multivitamin supplement with added zinc and magnesium”. Robert Cialdini and Brad Sagarin (2005), who were likely the first to describe this type of sales strategy in scholarly literature, named it the “four walls technique”.
A team of French researchers interested in social influence decided to examine the effectiveness of such strategies empirically (Gueguen, Joule, Courbet, Halimi-Falkowicz & Marchand, 2013). A young woman approached men walking alone on the pavement who, una- ware of the fact, became participants in the study. In the control conditions the participant was invited to participate in a survey study for which they would needSequential techniques of social influence 23 to answer 45 questions on people’s food habits.
The questions were to be answered at home, and apart from the survey participants also received a stamped addressed envelope for returning the completed survey to the researcher. In the experimen- tal conditions, before asking the participant to take the survey home, complete it and post it back, he was asked if he would agree to answer eight simple “yes or no” questions about odd jobs in the home (the participant thus likely expected that the interaction would not take long). In half of the cases the questions were designed in order to ensure that nearly every one would be answered in the affirmative (e.g.
“Have you ever assembled a storage unit?”), while in the other cases they were crafted in order to generate a series of negative responses (e.g. “Have you ever installed a solar water-heater?”). After answering the eight questions, the men were asked to participate in a survey study, thus making the same request as the men in the control conditions.
It turned out that 30% of participants from the control group agreed to partici- pate in the time-consuming survey; in conditions where participants first carried out an initial request and responded “no” several times this number jumped to 60%, while when they answered “yes” eight times, over 83% of men agreed to the subse- quent request. The differences between each of the three conditions were statistically significant. The experiment’s authors concluded that a scenario involving the initial fulfilment of an easy request and negative answers to eight simple questions followed by participation in a time-consuming survey study could be considered a demon- stration of the effectiveness of the “foot-in-the-door” technique, which you, dear Reader, read about in the previous section of this book.
However, the greater readiness to fulfil the final request in conditions where the participant had first given several “yes” responses, compared to circumstances in which he said “no”, was an illustration of the four walls technique’s effectiveness. While the technique itself seems interesting, and the experiment described here would attest to its efficacy, some doubts do arise (as they usually do at the outset of investigations into a par- ticular psychological phenomenon). Let us try to present them here.
First, we have no idea why the authors presented only the percentages of indi- viduals who agreed to complete a long survey concerning food habits in their homes. If the participants were directly handed such questionnaires, together with stamped envelopes, it was also possible to easily determine what percentage of people in particular groups actually did fulfil the request to participate in the time- consuming survey. Second, while it is true that the proportion of individuals in the group that responded in the negative and then fulfilled the target request was greater than in the control group, the actual consequences of multiple repetitions of the word “no” remain unclear.
Unfortunately the experimental design did not contain a group in which the questions would require a different response than “yes” or “no”. It is easy to imagine a question like “How often do you eat fruit?”, “What time do you usually go to sleep?” or “Do you prefer to wear a sweater or a blazer?” If it turned out that in those conditions there was also an increase in the tendency to fulfil a subsequent, more difficult request compared to the control group, it would be worth engaging in more in-depth analysis. Differences in24 Sequential techniques of social influence compliance among participants in three experimental groups could be examined: in a group that used the word “yes” several times in a row, in a group that said “no” with equal frequency”, and in a group that fulfilled the initial request and agreed to answer a few questions but without answering “yes” or “no”.
This would help us establish whether multiple uses of the word “no” reduces the effectiveness of a classic social influence technique (foot-in-the-door) or whether it is of no signifi- cance from that perspective. However, the most important issue remains that of the psychological mecha- nism underlying the technique being discussed here. Let us observe that if we return to the practices of clever door-to-door salesmen, we can imagine an effec- tive marketer who first leads his interlocutor to answer “no” to some questions, but then inclines him to purchase a given product.
We can imagine such questions as “Is it worth needlessly risking your health?”, “Should you ignore symptoms of the common cold?” or “Would you like to gain 10 pounds over the next 2 years?”, and after hearing the answer “no”, the salesman then offers a supplement designed to protect people from these problems. What would seem to be the key element in the behaviour of door-to-door salesmen is not so much getting their interlocutor to say “yes”, but rather to guide them into the trap of commitment and consistency. Indeed, the interlocutor should behave consistently with his or her previous verbal declaration.
However, it should not matter whether an answer of “yes” was given to a question about whether we should take care of our health, or “no” to a ques- tion about whether it is worth thoughtlessly endangering our health. In both cases, the proper course of action is to purchase the vitamin supplement. The situation ccrreeaatteedd bbyy GGuueegguueenn,, JJoouullee,, CCoouurrbbeertt aanndd tthheeiirr ccoollllaabboorraattoorrss ((22001133)) iinn tthheeiirr eexxppeerr-- iment is entirely different.
There is no association between the content of the introductory questions (concerning e.g. a storage unit or solar water-heater) and the request to complete a long questionnaire at home about food habits. The com- mitment and consistency trap here concerns the very fact of consenting to participate in a time-consuming survey study after previously participating in a short survey study.
It is thus limited to the foot-in-the-door effect. This mechanism does not, however, explain why people who have repeated the word “yes” several times in a row are particularly inclined to fulfil a subsequent and more difficult request. We are therefore dealing with a slightly different technique than four walls.
How can we explain the effectiveness of a strategy designed to induce another person to repeatedly respond “yes”? TThhee rreessuullttss nnootteedd iinn tthhee eexxppeerriimmeenntt bbyy GGuueegguueenn, , JJoouullee, , CCoouurrbbeertt eett aall.. ((22001133)) can be explained by reference to the mechanism of activation of selected mental representations and patterns of action (Higgins, 1996).
Multiple repetitions of the word “yes” lead to an increased likelihood that the response to successive questions or another request or proposal will be the same. It should be observed, however, that accepting this interpretation leads to the conclusion that the effectiveness of this technique, aimed at inducing an individual to repeat the answer “yes” multiple times, should be limited to situations in which the target request appears immedi- ately afterwards. The technique should then be unsuccessful in conditions whenSequential techniques of social influence 25 the target request surfaces after a certain time (e.g.
on the next day). Separate empirical studies would be needed to determine whether this really is the case. While researchers are just beginning to explore the “four walls” and “repeating yes” techniques, the next sequential technique of social influence to be presented here has already been the subject of empirical study.
Door-in-the-face A group of social psychologists researching social influence techniques – Richard Miller, Clive Seligman, Nathan Clark and Malcolm Bush (1976) – presented read- ers of one of their articles with a story from the popular comic strip “Blondie”. Because this story is an excellent illustration of the essence of the door-in-the-face technique, I will repeat it here. The action begins with Blondie returning home.
The situation differs from the everyday in that she comes back in a new hat, new shoes and new dress. She asks her husband Dagwood if he likes what he sees. His response is to ask how much they cost.
After hearing the answer, he becomes enraged and demands that Blondie return the new items. The woman begins crying and asks him to let her at least keep the hat, which she is particularly fond of. Dagwood magnanimously agrees, but emphasizes that he doesn’t want to hear of any other purchases.
The story concludes with a scene in which Blondie con- gratulates herself on getting her husband to agree to her buying an expensive hat, and Dagwood is pleased that he managed to recover the majority of the money spent by his beloved but spendthrift wife. The door-in-the-face technique is based on the assumption that if we want to induce an individual to fulfil a rather difficult request, we should begin by presenting an even more difficult one. This request will almost certainly be rejected by its addressee.
However, the chances grow that he will agree to fulfil a request easier than the one which he has just refused. The first psychological experiments addressing this technique were conducted by Robert Cialdini and a group of his collaborators (Cialdini et al., 1975). In one of them, the experimenter introduced himself as an employee of an institution that assisted juvenile offenders, and asked the study par- ticipant to lend a hand.
The control group’s participants were asked to go on a two-hour trip to the zoo with a group of young people who had experienced trouble with the law. Just under 17% of participants agreed to do this. In the experi- mental group, the first request was a very difficult one: to assume the role of a counsellor and advisor for juvenile offenders.
This would require 2 hours a week of involvement over a period of 2 years. Participants refused to carry out this request. However, when a one-off form of activity was then proposed (taking juvenile offenders to the zoo), 50% of participants gave their consent.
The experimental design also contained a group that was asked to engage in the process of resocializing underage offenders; participants were given the choice of two forms of involvement: 2 years of regular consultations or taking a group of “difficult youngsters” to the zoo. In this case as well, the first alternative was universally rejected, while one in four participants agreed to act as a chaperone at the zoo (see: Table 2.3).26 Sequential techniques of social influence TABLE 2.3 Percentage of subjects complying with the smaller request in Cialdini et al. (1975) experiment Treatment % Compliance Rejection-moderation condition 50.0 Exposure control 25.0 Smaller request only control 16.7 Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, vol.
69, p. 209. Copyright 1975 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
In considering the mechanism that underlies the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique the authors take into consideration the contrast effect and the norm of mutual reciprocity. The contrast effect (Kenrick & Gutierres, 1980) can be illustrated by something experienced by one of my col- leagues. He owned an apartment that he wanted to sell.
I wouldn’t say it was particularly attractive. It was located on the top floor of an old, tall tenement house without an elevator. The layout of the apartment was also not the nicest.
Hallways took up more space than the rooms did. However, the owner of a real estate agency assured my colleague that he was sitting on a treasure worth a fortune. He appraised the property at a very high price, and guaranteed that he should be able to sell it quickly.
My colleague was delighted, and he expected to quickly come into a tidy sum of money. Soon thereafter, crowds of people came to see the apartment. They looked around, shook their heads and walked away.
However – in the agent’s opinion – there was no reason to worry. “If they don’t buy it, someone else will,” was what he said to steady the nerves of my colleague. But nobody came to buy the apartment.
By chance, the owner of the unfortunate apartment ran into a woman who had come to see the apartment the previous day. “The thing is . .
. you wanted so much money for such a little cage. Right after we left, the agent took me to a bigger, cheaper apartment in a good neighbourhood.
I liked it so much that I bought it on the spot.” As my colleague belatedly came to understand, the agent was only using his apartment to evoke the contrast effect. After a potential client had looked over his apart- ment, viewing one whose price seemed to be realistically calculated made an excellent impression on him. Continuing our exploration of topics related to social influence, it is worth mentioning studies by Sotohiro Kojima (1994).
This psychologist asked people about their subjective feelings associated with the acquisition of various consumer goods. Participants spoke of the joy they felt when purchasing new furniture or photographic equipment, but they also emphasized the discomfort associated with the necessity of paying for those products. Kojima observed that this discomfort was reduced among those who had recently purchased homes compared to those who had not.
Considering that the groups were no different in terms of financial status, it could be supposed that the aforementioned contrast effect was at play. When people have recently spent a lot of money on something, then anotherSequential techniques of social influence 27 object that costs a fraction of that sum feels inexpensive to them. However, without this frame of reference the same item seems expensive.
Kojima generated similar results in other studies. For example, he demonstrated that sales staff in electronics stores were very adept at convincing customers to pick up some little gadget in the course of a high-value transaction. In respect of the experiment by Cialdini et al., (1975) under discussion here, the contrast effect consists in the request to take difficult youngsters on a trip to the zoo seeming easy (or even very easy) when compared to the extremely difficult request to become a mentor to underage offenders.
We should also observe that the contrast effect is present in the third group, which was presented with the choice between the two aforementioned activities, and the proportion of people who decided to take the youngsters to the zoo was in this case half that of the group in which the sequence of extremely difficult – relatively easy request was applied. Thus, while the contrast effect may play a certain role, Cialdini et al. per- ceive the primary psychological mechanism underlying the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique in the norm of mutual reciprocity.
This norm is a particular version of the broader and more general rule of reci- procity. According to this rule, individuals are obliged to compensate others for goods received from them (Uehara, 1995). This is a principle that organizes the lives of individuals, social groups and entire societies.
It facilitates the establishment of social bonds, trust and lasting coalitions. Alvin Gouldner (1960) even feels that the norm of reciprocity is the “starting mechanism” of societies, without which the establishment of any lasting group life would be impossible. In the case of the door-in-the-face technique the norm of mutual reciprocity is materialized when someone makes a difficult request, is refused, and then reduces his expectations towards the partner in the interaction, making a particular type of concession.
The partner in the interaction is now obliged under the principle of symmetrical reciprocity to make a concession himself, which may come in the form of fulfilling the second, easier request addressed to him. Support for an interpretation involving the norm of reciprocity can be found in results that indicate the door-in-the-face technique loses its effectiveness when the second, easier request is formulated by a different individual than the one who submitted the first, extremely difficult one (see e.g. Dillard et al., 1984; Feeley, Anker & Aloe, 2012).
In essence, we cannot speak in this case of perceiving a con- cession from the partner in the interaction, and what follows is that the norm of mutual concessions is absent. By the same token, there is no motivation to accede to a subsequent request. However, the assumption that the norm of mutual reci- procity is at the heart of the effectiveness of the technique being analyzed here is not consistent with results indicating that such effectiveness is associated with the length of time separating the lodging of the two requests.
Arnie Cann, Steven Sherman and Roy Elkes (1975) called up study participants, introduced themselves as employees of an organization promoting road traffic safety, and asked their inter- locutor to join in a campaign being planned by their organization. The request involved standing for 2 hours on the pavement and counting the cars passing by28 Sequential techniques of social influence on the street. The overwhelming majority of people refused to agree to this obviously excessive request.
A second request was then issued. The participant was asked to distribute among friends and acquaintances 15 brochures that the road traffic safety organization would send via post. Depending on the experimental conditions, this request was formulated either immediately after the participant gave notice of refusal to stand and count cars, or during a follow-up phone call made after 7–10 days had elapsed.
In the control group, who were asked immediately for their consent to receive the brochures and distribute them to their friends, 62% of participants agreed. In the group to which the aforementioned request was made immediately following refusal to carry out the very difficult request, this number was much higher and amounted to nearly 90%. However, in the group which experienced a delay between the two requests, the percentage of those agreeing to the easier one was even lower (albeit statistically insignificantly) than in the control conditions: half of the participants agreed to hand out the brochure.
Results from meta-analyses paint a similar picture. Dillard et al., (1984) demon- strated that the longer the break between the two requests, the less effective the technique becomes. Thomas Feeley, Ashley Anker and Ariel Aloe (2012) deter- mined that in experiments during which the final request appeared more than one day after the rejection by the participant of the initial request, compliance rates did not exceed those in the control conditions.
Meanwhile, in real-life situations people adhere to the reciprocity principle even after a very long time has passed. We send Christmas cards to those who sent them to us last year, we loan money to friends who loaned us a large sum of cash ten years ago, etc. Why, then, does the door-in-the-face technique stop being effective on the very next day?
There is yet another result that proves troublesome for the assumption that the effectiveness of this technique is grounded in the norm of reciprocity. Indeed, it may be assumed that the intensity of the obligation felt by an individual to fulfil an easier request should correlate with the extent of the concession made by the individual who first made a difficult request, followed by the easier one. However, it turns out that the extent of the concession is not associated with the effectiveness of the technique (Fern et al., 1986; O’Keefe & Hale, 1998).
Daniel O’Keefe and Marianne Figge (1997) hold that the interpretation set forth by Cialdini et al. is fundamentally incorrect, and propose their own alternative. They state that the mechanism explaining the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique is the feeling of guilt.
Refusing the first request leads to this feeling, because the individual knows that while it would be difficult to do, it is socially desirable. Acceding to the easier request helps to minimize the unpleasant feeling of guilt. Taking this perspective, it becomes clear why the technique is less effective when requests are made by people representing commercial interests as opposed to conditions in which they are advanced by charitable organizations (Dillard et al., 1984; Fern et al., 1986).
Refusing to purchase a vacuum cleaner does not lead to a feeling of guilt, and thus there is no subsequent agreement to buy a less expensive hair dryer. The extent of the concession also plays no role here, for it isSequential techniques of social influence 29 correlated neither with the intensity of the feeling of guilt nor the potential to successfully reduce it. In turn, results attesting to a negative correlation between the extent of the delay separating the two requests and the efficacy of the door-in-the-face technique, problematic for an interpretation grounded in the principle of reciprocity, become relatively easy to explain from the perspective of the feeling of guilt.
The emotion dies down over time, thus rendering the technique increasingly less effective. The authors also draw attention to two limitations on the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique that result from their model. This technique should prove unsuccessful in conditions in which refusal to fulfil the first request does not evoke a feeling of guilt, as well as when the fulfilment of a subsequent request can- not serve to reduce the feeling of guilt.
O’Keefe and Figge have not conducted studies to confirm the accuracy of these assumptions (or at least they have not published them), but they have tried to demonstrate, through a review of the sub- ject literature, that the results of studies conducted in the past are more consistent with their interpretation than with the one advanced by Cialdini and his collabo- rators. Indirect support for their ideas is also provided by the research of Lohyd Terrier and Robert Joule (2008). They demonstrated that if the individual making the requests clearly demonstrated an understanding of the fact that the other per- son would refuse to agree to the first of them, saying something like “Of course, I quite understand that you may not be able to accept”, the technique is less effective than in conditions when that statement is not made.
It could be thought that such an expression of understanding leads to a reduction in the intensity of the guilt felt by the addressee of the request, and thus that person experiences reduced motiva- tion to actively deal with the guilt by acceding to the subsequent, easier request. O’Keefe and Figge (1997) do not, however, stop to consider an effect that is not consistent with their own proposal. Studies on the door-in-the-face mechanism primarily feature situations involving a brief interaction with a stranger.
The feeling of guilt in these situations could be limited not only by doing something positive for him, but also by fulfilling a similar request made by another person. Meanwhile, as the results of meta-analyses demonstrate definitively (Feeley et al., 2012), the technique ceases to be effective. The norm of mutual concessions and the appearance of negative emotions stemming from a feeling of guilt are not the only potential sources of the effective- ness of the door-in-the-face technique.
Mark Pendleton and Daniel Batson (1979) draw attention to the role potentially played by mechanisms associated with self- presentation. Rejection of the initial request may lead an individual to feel concerned that this will be taken badly by his partner in the interaction, as well as by any potential witnesses. This concern induces compliance with the subsequent easier request.
Such an interpretation would be linked with the expectation that the dimension of the initial request would be the decisive factor in the conviction of the request’s addressee that his interlocutor could have a poor opinion of him. The likelihood that an obviously difficult request will lead to such a feeling is smaller than the likelihood that it will appear after the rejection of a modestly30 Sequential techniques of social influence difficult one. Indeed, the rejection of a more difficult request is easier to understand and socially justifiable.
Pendleton and Batson (1979) received data consistent with this assumption; however, Robert Reeves, Gary Baker, Jeffrey Boyd and Robert Cialdini (1991) did not succeed in replicating that result in their research. Yet another theoretical proposition is offered by Tusing and Dillard (2000). They assume that individuals do not worry so much about what others think of them, but just the opposite: they begin to focus on their own internal standards.
Rejection of the first request leads them to begin thinking that it is socially responsible to help people who deserve it. Activation of this mental scheme makes it easier to submit to a new request. While there is not yet empirical research providing direct evidence of this model’s accuracy, there is some indirect support for it in the results of meta-analyses (Feeley et al., 2012).
Matthew Abrahams and Robert Bell (1994) have also conducted some interest- ing research aimed at identifying the mechanism responsible for the effectiveness of the technique under analysis here. In their experiments they differentiated the dimensions of the initial request, the level of expectation on the part of the addressee that there would be future interaction with the individual formulating the request, and also that person’s emphasis on the fact that withdrawing the initial request is a concession. Each participant was invited to a psychological laboratory.
In the waiting room they encountered another person who was in fact a confederate of the experi- menter. The experimenter soon arrived and informed the pair that they would soon be participating in a study (conditions of expected interaction), or that they would soon be separated (conditions of absence of expected interaction), after which they were then left alone while the experimenter (supposedly) went to prepare the laboratory equipment. The experimenter’s confederate confided to the participant that he was involved in a campaign to assist AIDS victims and to raise awareness in society of how to avoid the disease.
He also said that a march of soli- darity with those afflicted by the illness was being organized, and asked the participant if he would be willing to devote 30 hours (very high level of difficulty of the initial request) or, in other conditions, 10 hours (moderate level of difficulty of the initial request) to the organization. When the participant refused, the con- federate responded either that it would be equally helpful if he agreed to sponsor the march and donate some money, or suggested that volunteers were needed more now than ever before. However, if the participant could not afford to get involved personally, it would at least be good if he agreed to sponsor the march.
The assump- tion was that the second case would involve an emphasis on the concession and a reduction of expectations towards the participant. The authors assumed that differentiation of the individual experimental factors would enable them to identify the mechanism responsible for the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique. If it turned out that the factor of emphasizing the concession made to the addressee was significant, this would indicate that the rule of reciprocity plays a role.
If it was the dimensions of the initial request that turned out to be significant, this would be explained rather by the contrast effect. If,Sequential techniques of social influence 31 however, the significant factor was to prove the expectation of a future interaction with the partner, this would point to self-presentation (an interpretation grounded in the feeling of guilt was not taken into consideration). Unfortunately, the study’s results were not definitive, but the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique was very high (66.4% compliance in experimental conditions compared to only 25.9% compliance in the control conditions, which involved the proposal to sponsor the march being issued to the participant directly).
The recorded results were the least consistent with the contrast effect, as the dimensions of the initial request did not lead to differentiation in the compliance of participants. The other two factors, however, led to differences in the behaviour of participants only in specific circumstances that are beyond the scope of the ques- tions being discussed here. While the experiment described above, as well as other studies, have failed to produce unequivocal results, it is my belief that the hypothetical mechanisms dis- cussed so far are not exclusive of one another in any way.
We cannot exclude the possibility that they frequently combine to induce compliance, while in particular situations one of those mechanisms (not necessarily the same one) plays the lead role. It can also not be excluded that this is precisely why the door-in-the face technique proves effective in very different areas of social life. For example, it has been demonstrated that the technique can be effectively employed for conducting a charitable collection drive in both face-to-face situations (Reingen, 1978) and over the Internet (Gueguen, 2003), for convincing people to participate in opinion polling (Mowen & Cialdini, 1980), in seminars addressing the subject of racism (Rodafinos, Vucevic & Sideridis, 2005), and even for convincing people with greater frequency to purchase home-made cheese (Ebster & Neumayr, 2008).
From one perspective, research conducted by Magdalena Paska (2002) is par- ticularly interesting. It explores the issue of whether this technique can prove effective in conditions under which requests concern behaviours that violate ethical norms. Paska asked drivers getting out of their cars in a supermarket car park to participate in a campaign for the elimination of separate parking places for disabled individuals.
In the control conditions participants were asked to sign a petition in which customers were demanding that store management take action to remove the parking spaces. It turned out that 37.5% of people approached agreed to sign the petition (as an aside, it is worth musing over that alarmingly high number). In the experimental conditions, participants were first asked to help in gathering signatures.
They were asked to approach drivers in the same manner as the researcher, asking them to place their signatures on the petition. None of those who were asked gave their consent. Immediately after hearing the refusal, the experimenter submitted an easier request – to sign the petition.
Only 12.5% of participants agreed. It thus turns out that the “door-in-the-face” technique leads to a clear decline in people’s inclination to perform the unethical act they are being encouraged to do! Paska received similar results in a second experiment during which students were first (unsuccessfully) encouraged to participate in a protest against providing support for the homeless from public funds, and then asked to32 Sequential techniques of social influence sign a petition on the matter.
None of the students agreed to sign the petition, yet in the control group – where students were simply given the petition to sign – one third of those approached agreed to do so. Analogical patterns of results were attained in both studies: opposite patterns to those in situations in which people were encouraged to engage in ethical or ethically-neutral behaviour. This would seem to demonstrate the very interesting potential for practical application of the door-in-the-face technique in circumstances where people display a tendency to exceed moral boundaries.
Foot-in-the-face As we know, in the case of the foot-in-the-door technique discussed at the begin- ning of this chapter, an easier request is first issued assuming its fulfilment will increase the chances that the individual will later fulfil the more difficult, target request. With regard to the sequential technique discussed in the preceding section (door-in-the-face), the procedure is reversed: first, a clearly difficult request is for- mulated with the assumption that its rejection will make the individual more inclined to carry out an easier one. From a certain perspective we could say that an increase in the chance that a moderately difficult request will be fulfilled can be generated either by starting with an easier request, or with a clearly more difficult one.
The foot-in-the-door and door-in-the-face techniques are thus symmetrical to one another. The question may arise of what will happen if we apply a sequence involving two requests of the same level of difficulty. This question was asked by Cialdini et al.
(1975) during research on the door-in-the-face technique. Their starting point was the assumption that we may not exclude the possibility of the technique relying not on the second request being easier than the first, but rather on the simple renewal of the request by its initiator. This repetition is a social signature indicating that the person making the request is in real need of help, and this may constitute the key mechanism in achieving compliance from people subjected to this tech- nique.
Thus, the experimenters created a situation in one of their experiments involving a sequence of two requests with analogical levels of difficulty. Participants were first asked to accompany a group of youngsters in danger of falling into a life of crime on a two-hour trip to a museum. Regardless of their agreement or lack thereof, they were then asked if they would be willing to go on a two-hour walk with the same youths to the zoo.
It turned out that 8 of 24 people agreed to the museum trip, and 7 of that 8 agreed in turn to go to the zoo. From among the 16 who refused to go to the museum, only 1 agreed to take the youths to the zoo. Thus it can be said that in general participants behaved consistently (save for two cases) – if they agreed to the first request, they agreed to the second, while if they refused the first they also refused the second.
The compliance rate of 33.3% with the target request (to go to the zoo) was analogical to the control group, which was directly issued with the proposal to go to the zoo. The researchers thus received information leading them to believe that the concession of the one making theSequential techniques of social influence 33 request is key to the door-in-the-face technique. The mere repetition of the request (urging) is not sufficient.
It should be kept in mind that Cialdini et al. applied a sequence of requests that was adequate in respect of their research objectives. They thus took care to ensure that the addressee of the request had no doubt that the two requests were of equal difficulty, and similar to each other.
In both cases the request involved caring for a group of young people in danger of succumbing to the temptation of a life of crime. In both cases it was necessary to devote 2 hours to the youngsters. Finally, in both cases the trip was to take place on a Saturday.
One may, however, wonder what would happen if we applied a sequence of two requests whose respective levels of difficulty are difficult for the addressee to compare. It is obvious that devoting 2 hours to an activity is a greater sacrifice than 1 hour to the same activ- ity, and equally it is less of a burden than devoting 4 hours. How much of a loss is 2 hours spent on some activity when compared to, for example: •• completing a long questionnaire when we are not in a position to estimate how much time it will take us?
•• making a donation equivalent to our hourly wage? •• spending 2 hours on an entirely different activity? It would seem that doubts could arise in all three of these examples.
So, what will happen if an individual is asked to carry out in sequence two requests which, while exhibiting entirely different characters, are performed by a similar propor- tion of people in control conditions (thus fulfilling the criteria applied in the relevant literature on social influence to state that they are of similar difficulty)? It is obvious that in respect of the first request in the sequence, the addressee has two options: to carry it out or to refuse. Let us observe that if he accedes to the first request, then in accordance with the foot-in-the-door principle, he should be more inclined to fulfil the next request.
This should be all the more likely if the second request is not in some way obviously more difficult than its predecessor. The majority of participants in the aforementioned experiment conducted by Cialdini and collaborators behaved in just this manner: of those who agreed to go to the museum, a significant majority also agreed to go to the zoo. What would happen, however, in the case of an individual refusing to carry out the first request?
In the experiment by Cialdini et al., when such conditions were observed nearly everyone refused to carry out the subsequent request. That said, I believe that in conditions in which the second request was to involve an entirely different type of activity, we could encounter different results. The mere fact of the second request being clearly different itself constitutes a real alternative.
The addressee of the request sees that he has been presented with a choice. This, in turn, may activate the rule of reciprocity in the same manner as a concession in the classic door-in-the-face technique. In addition, it would seem that in real-life social situations, when some- one formulates a request or a proposal that is then turned down, this is followed by a more beneficial proposal or a request that should be easier to carry out.34 Sequential techniques of social influence We may assume that this individual has encountered similar situations on multiple occasions in the past.
Thus, in conditions that render it difficult to accurately assess the objective difficulty of the two requests, the addressee may be inclined to inter- pret the second of them as easier than the first. Such a situation would be analogical to the door-in-the-face technique. We can then imagine a technique whose essence consists in the successive pres- entation of two requests that are clearly different in form or content, but are very similar in respect of their objective levels of difficulty (measured by the percentage of people who fulfil such requests spontaneously, i.e.
in control conditions). Regardless of what decision the addressee takes in respect of the first request, he will be pressured by psychological forces inclining him to fulfil a subsequent request. If he accedes to the first one, he sets off down the path of foot-in-the-door.
Rejection of the first request places him on the path of door-in-the-face. Because this technique is a synthesis of the two techniques mentioned above, it could best be given the name foot-in-the-face (Dolinski, 2011). One of the experiments dedicated to the foot-in-the-face technique was pre- ceded by a series of pilot tests intended to identify two requests of average difficulty level, while at the same time being as similar in difficulty to each other as possible.
It turned out that roughly half of the students approached agreed to complete a survey that the experimenter explained would serve as the empirical foundation of a master’s thesis prepared by a blind student, and that it would take around 30 minutes to complete. A similar proportion of students agreed to a request to record a dictation of five pages from a psychology textbook, also allegedly for a blind student. The design of an experiment testing the foot-in-the-face technique should, naturally, facilitate a comparison of compliance in the group to whom the request of average difficulty is submitted as the second request (that is, after the participant either carries out or rejects an initial request) with conditions in which the same request is issued immediately.
The decision as to which of the two requests (com- pleting a survey or dictating a few pages for a recording) should come first and second would of necessity be arbitrary. Instead, I operated under the assumption that a more appropriate design would involve the first condition beginning with the request to complete a survey followed by the request to record material for a blind student, while the second condition would reverse this order. The experi- mental design can be presented like this: CONDITION 1: Request A, then, regardless of participant’s reaction, Request B CONDITION 2: Request B, then, regardless of participant’s reaction, Request A with A denoting the request to complete the survey and B denoting the request to dictate a recording of a few pages.
It should be noted that this condition also allows for the omission of classic control groups. A test of the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-face technique could be based on comparing compliance with request B in condition 1 (in this case considered the experimental condition) to compli- ance with the same request (B) in condition 2 (in this case considered the controlSequential techniques of social influence 35 condition), along with a comparison of compliance with request A in condition 2 (experimental condition) and compliance with the same request (A) in condition 1 (control condition). In other words, the design is a comparison of compliance with the request that comes second in the sequence and compliance with the very same request when issued directly.
One more factor was added to the experimental design – the amount of time between the first and the second request. The assumption of Alice Tybout, Brian Sternthal and Bobby Calder (1983) concerning the classic foot-in-the-door and door-in-the-face sequential techniques is that an individual considering acceding to the second request can take two types of information into account. First: how he himself behaved in a similar situation in the past; and second: how the person issuing the second request behaves.
The assumption under which this model oper- ates is that people wish to view themselves as consistent and coherent. Thus, when the addressee ascertains that he has fulfilled the first request, this should make him more inclined to comply with the second. In turn, declaring that he rejected the first one should provide motivation to reject the subsequent one.
In relation to the role of information about the behaviour of the other person in the interaction, the model’s authors assume that if the addressee becomes aware of an escalation of the demand being made of him, he will refuse to fulfil the first request. However, if the addressee can observe that his partner in the interaction is scaling back his expectations, he will be more inclined to agree to the second request. We are therefore dealing with a situation where, in the case of foot-in-the-door, the addressee is influenced by information about himself to carry out the second request (“I agreed to a similar request before”), but information about the behav- iour of his partner in the interaction leads him in the opposite direction (“he’s stepping up his demands”).
The opposite occurs in the event of door-in-the-face. Information about himself (“earlier I refused”) leads the addressee to say “no”, while information about the manner in which the person lodging the request is reacting (“he’s lowered his expectations of me”) push him towards complying with the second request. The model’s authors assume that the key determinant in both techniques is the information that the addressee of the requests focuses on.
The foot-in-the-door technique should prove particularly effective when the addressee concentrates on information of the first type (i.e. about himself) while ignoring information of the second type (i.e. about the behaviours of his partner in the interaction).
Door-in-the-face, in turn, would prove to be an especially effective technique in precisely the opposite conditions. What does this have to do with the amount of time separating the requests? The authors’ belief is that in the case of foot-in-the-door, the addressee’s concentration on the second type of information can be made to wane when a particular amount of time lapses between the fulfilment of the initial request and the submission of the second one.
This de-emphasizes the fact that the demands made of the addressee are escalating. With regard to the door-in-the-face technique, it would be more beneficial for the second request to come immediately after the first, as this serves to emphasize the concessions made by the partner in the interaction.36 Sequential techniques of social influence The experiment used the requests selected in the aforementioned pilot study. The individual carrying out the study visited students in dormitories and explained that he wanted to help his blind friend, himself a student as well.
In half of the cases the participant was asked to complete a survey that was supposed to be an impor- tant element of the blind student’s master’s thesis, while the other half of participants heard a different request. It was explained to them that a blind student used recorded course material in order to study, and they were asked to dictate five pages of a textbook into a recorder. If the participant agreed to carry out the initial request, he was given the survey or (in the other conditions) a textbook and tape recorder.
Those who refused to carry out the first request were politely thanked. In conditions involving the absence of a delay between the requests, the second request was made at a moment when the experimenter arrived to take the com- pleted survey or textbook and tape recorder or directly after the participant declared his refusal to fulfil the first request. When there was a delay, the second request was issued after two days had elapsed.
The foot-in-the-face technique turned out to be effective. The request to help out the blind student was carried out by 58% of participants when it came as the second in the sequence, while 48.8% of them agreed in conditions when it was formulated directly. While these differences do meet the threshold for statistical significance, it would be a stretch to say that a difference of less than 9% was excep- tional.
The picture changes when we take into additional consideration the factor of time elapsing between the requests. Compliance with the second request reached a level of 66.8% if we take into account only conditions in which either compliance with the first request was followed by a two-day wait before the second request was issued, or if the first request was turned down then the second TABLE 2.4 Decision tree of people who agreed to fulfil the second request in each condition in Dolinski (2011) experiment First request: Record Second request: Questionnaire or questionnaire or record, respectively Without delay Yes = 98 Yes = 59 No = 39 No = 102 Yes = 59 No = 43 2-3 days’ interval Yes = 97 Yes = 74 No = 23 No = 103 Yes = 40 No = 63 Source: Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 2011, vol. 41, p.
1531. Copyright: 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.Sequential techniques of social influence 37 came immediately thereafter (Dolinski, 2011). The results of this experiment are presented in Table 2.4.
A practitioner of social influence making use of the foot-in-the-face technique should thus observe the following rules: prepare two requests exhibiting similar levels of difficulty. If the person you are approaching agrees to the first then give him some time and do not rush with the second, but rather wait a few days. However, if he refuses the first one, issue the second one right away.
Dump-and-chase As we have seen, the foot-in-the door technique consists of this sequence: easier introductory request – more difficult target request. The door-in-the face tech- nique reverses the sequence as difficult request – easier (main) request. In turn, the foot-in-the-face technique allows for the use of two requests displaying similar difficulty levels, but different enough in content that it is difficult to view them as such.
We also hasten to remind that Cialdini and his collaborators (Cialdini et al., 1975) demonstrated that if two requests appearing in sequence are obviously similar in content and difficulty, compliance with the second request is no greater than with the same request given to the control group (that is, in conditions where it is the only request lodged). It would therefore seem obvious that a technique based on a repetition of exactly the same request following its rejection ought to be ineffective. Franklin Boster and his collaborators, however, argue that in such situations the matter is not entirely clear (Boster et al., 2009).
They observe that refusal to accede to a request can take one of two forms: rebuff or obstacle. Rebuff is an open and unequivocal refusal, without explanation or justification. Obstacle is something different – the addressee of the request explains why he refuses to carry out the request.
By doing so he opens the door to the possibility of convincing him that the grounds for refusal that he presents are not, in fact, important or may not even exist at all; it also creates the possibility of explaining why it is worth agreeing to the request. In other words, from the point of view of the person formulating a request, refusal in the form of an “obstacle” is far better than a “rebuff”. What to do if a rebuff is encountered?
Boster et al. propose a social influence technique that rests on the assumption that in such cases it becomes necessary to effect a “trans- formation of the target’s rebuff into an obstacle” (Boster et al., 2009, p. 220).
When we hear “no”, we should just ask “why not?” If we receive an explanation, we can then begin questioning its sense, present arguments to the contrary and . . .
even repeat our presentation of the same request many times over. The key to success is obstinacy. The authors also provide a name for the technique, which they label “dump-and-chase”.
The experimenters decided to test the technique in conditions under which they asked passers-by to guard their bicycle for around 10 minutes. If the partici- pant refused and gave a reason, an attempt was made to convince him that there was no good reason why he couldn’t watch over the bicycle. If he refused without38 Sequential techniques of social influence giving a reason, first the experimenters attempted to draw the reason out of him, and then to convince him that it wasn’t a serious problem.
The researchers com- pared the effectiveness of this with the application of the door-in-the-face technique (the participant was first asked to guard the bicycle for 20 minutes, and upon refusing was told that watching it for 10 minutes would be enough). The experimental design also included conditions in which the request was accompa- nied by a (superficial) justification for submitting the request (the person making the request said “will you watch my bike for me until I return because I cannot watch it?”). The authors of the study report that their technique was more effective than door-in-the-face.
In the dump-and-chase conditions 60% of those approached agreed to watch the bicycle for 10 minutes, while with door-in-the face this was only 20%. The authors do not, however, examine the reasons why the door-in-the-face technique proved utterly ineffective in their experiment. This can easily be explained by the specifics of the study: if someone asks us to watch a bicycle for 20 minutes, but after hearing our refusal proceeds to assure us that 10 minutes is long enough, we might reasonably fear that the person making the request won’t return after 10 minutes.
The individual guarding the bicycle is then placed in a very uncomfortable situation regardless of how he chooses to behave. If he waits, he wastes time, but if he leaves, he faces the feeling that he has let down someone who entrusted him with property. As it turned out, the percentage of those agreeing to watch the bicycle in the door-in-the-face conditions was even lower (20%) than in the conditions in which the dump-and-chase technique was just beginning to be applied, meaning the request was simply formulated and addressed (40%).
However, if we compare this indicator with the success of the dump-and-chase technique, it does not turn out to be effective. However, the authors themselves admit their technique may not be more effective than presenting the request with a superficial justification. In a second experiment the authors expanded the exper- imental design using foot-in-the-door conditions, as well as changing the nature of the requests.
While in the first experiment the person making the request was clearly acting in his own interests (having his own bicycle guarded), this time the experimenters presented themselves as members of the “In Your Face Theater Troupe” and explained that they were attempting to combine education with entertainment in order to increase awareness of sexuality issues that may affect students. They stood on the pavement, handed out brochures with information about the group’s activities, and tried to discern whether passers-by were interested in them. In the dump-and-chase conditions, participants were asked to perform a similar role at any chosen time the following week.
In the door-in-the-face condi- tions, the initial request involved doing it in another city where the group was scheduled to perform, and then, after they refused, they were told that it would also be helpful to be active in the town in which they had been approached. In the foot-in-the-door conditions, participants were first asked to agree to wear a small sticker supporting the group, and then asked to distribute brochures to passers-by. The group in which the superficial justification was used heard the phrase “because it is essential that we have someone here” appended to the request.
The dump-and-chaseSequential techniques of social influence 39 technique turned out only to be more effective than the request accompanied by a superficial justification. It was not proven to be more effective than the two classic sequential techniques. Unfortunately, the authors again failed to compare the percentages of those who ultimately agreed in dump-and-chase conditions with those who agreed to carry out the request at once (which could be treated as control conditions).
This difference did not achieve statistical significance, which makes it difficult to label the technique a successful one. For the sake of accuracy, we must add that both experiments had very small sample sizes, which makes it hard to expect that the differences between groups would cross the threshold of statistical significance. In spite of the absence of empirical evidence demonstrating the effectiveness of the technique under discussion here, it remains worthy of attention.
However, there can be no doubt that proper studies conducted with larger groups of par- ticipants are necessary in order to answer questions about both the technique’s effectiveness and, if it proves successful, the psychological mechanism underlying it. The most likely explanations for the (potential) effectiveness of this technique may be associated with the individual to whom the request is being addressed perceiv- ing the persistence of the one making the request. This could lead to the conclusion that fulfilment of the request is of great importance to him.
If this is the case, then a feeling of empathy towards the person making the request may arise, as well as a feeling of guilt from refusing to help someone in a difficult situation. (In Chapter 6 you will have the opportunity to read about experiments demonstrating that such emotions can induce compliance). It is, however, possible that another mechanism is at work, related to the cognitive and motivational sphere.
If someone who is asked for something presents an obstacle, he implicitly states “if it weren’t for certain reasons, I’d agree to the request”. During the subsequent conversation, if it occurs that the problems preventing the request from being fulfilled are smoothed over or resolved, then the addressee may feel obliged to carry it out. It is also pos- sible that the very conversation between the person formulating the request and the person to whom it is addressed is the key element (regardless of the substance of the conversation).
Enmeshing one’s interlocutor in a dialogue is a factor that markedly increases the chances he will agree to various requests, something that you will have occasion to read about in Chapter 4. Low ball Let us imagine that a shop display contains a pair of shoes and the information that they are on sale for a 40% discount. The offer is shockingly attractive.
It’s the begin- ning of the season, and the shoes are the height of fashion! An interested customer asks about the shoes, but it turns out that her particular size is out of stock. As she is heading, disappointed, to the exit, a pair of her desired shoes in just her size turns up!
She tries them on and takes a look at herself in a large mirror. They’re perfect! Her friends will all be jealous.
They’re a bit tight but they’ll definitely loosen up (beautiful and fashionable shoes definitely loosen up; a tight squeeze would40 Sequential techniques of social influence disqualify ugly shoes from consideration). The customer heads to the shop assistant, with a smile on her face. She asks for the shoes she was wearing when she arrived to be packed up, and she’ll put the new ones on right away!
The shop assistant, however, seems to be a bit troubled. He explains why he couldn’t find the customer’s size at first. Her shoes were on another shelf .
. . and they aren’t on sale.
Will the customer who wished to have fashionable shoes for a song give in to temptation and purchase them at the regular price? If the answer is “yes”, it means that the sales trick turned out to be successful. Robert Cialdini, John Cacioppo, Rodney Bassett and John Miller (1978) observed similar behaviour among American car salesmen.
They resort quite often to generating a client’s interest with an exceptionally good offer, such as unusually low monthly instalments or an amazingly low price. When the customer, whose interest has been piqued by the outstanding opportunity, takes a test drive, asks about some technical details, warranty conditions and insurance, and then finally declares his desire to purchase the vehicle, the problems begin. It turns out, for example, that there are no more cars available on the outstanding instalment plan, and that the ones left on the lot are available under normal payment terms (it’s the customer’s own fault for taking too long to decide).
If, however, the “once in a lifetime oppor- tunity” consisted in a very low price, it turns out that “the higher-ups in corporate” won’t agree to sell that particular car at a lower price because it’s probably already reserved for another customer, or that the salesperson made a mistake and forgot to inform the customer that the price doesn’t include some headers that regulations require to be installed (for an extra fee of course). One way or another, the situation is always the same: the factor that got the customer interested in the car and led him to decide to buy it (such as an instalment plan or a low price) has been removed. The conditions of the sale are now the standard ones, but the client is now aware that he is particularly fond of one particular car and wants to have it.
He is therefore unlikely to withdraw from the transaction and will probably agree to purchase the car on worse terms than the ones initially offered to him. The psychological mechanism underlying the effectiveness of this method, named the low-ball technique by Cialdini et al., is described by Charles Kiesler (1971) as the feeling of commitment. In Kiesler’s model, if an individual engages in some behaviour assuming he has the freedom of choice to do so, and believes that he himself, without any external pressure, is working towards the pursuit of some goal, he then feels an obligation to continue.
So even if the conditions involved in accomplishing a given aim are transformed, the individual feels obliged to continue the activities he has already begun and to reach the goals already set. Cialdini and his collaborators decided to undertake empirical verification of the effectiveness of the strategy they had observed among car salesmen. University stu- dents were invited to take part in a psychological experiment.
Participants in the control group were informed immediately that the experiment would begin at 7:00 am. Those from the experimental group were first asked if they would agree to take part in a psychological experiment, and then after they had agreed, they were told that the study would begin at 7:00 am. The students were then asked to reaffirmSequential techniques of social influence 41 their readiness to participate in the experiment.
Two measurements of the strategy’s effectiveness were taken into consideration: a verbal declaration of participation in the experiment, and actual arrival at the laboratory at 7:00 in the morning. In the low-ball conditions, 56% of students declared their participation while only 31% did so in the control conditions. Comparisons of actual behaviours turned out to be even more suggestive.
While 53% of those approached in the low-ball conditions turned up at the laboratory, only 24% from the control group did so. Another study examined whether students living in dormitories would agree to put up posters from a charitable organization on the windows and doors of their rooms, assuming they themselves first had to go down to the dormitory’s ground floor within the next hour. In the control conditions they were asked directly to do so, and 26% of the students agreed.
In the low-ball conditions, participants were first asked if they would agree to display the posters in their rooms, and after receiving their agreement the experimenter dug through his bag and stated that he had just run out of posters. He went on to say that if the participant was still inter- ested in hanging the posters up in his room, he could go downstairs within the next hour and take one. In these conditions, 60% of people agreed.
In the next experiment, the researchers offered students credit hours in exchange for participating in a psychological study. They were given a choice between two forms of activity, of which one (which we shall call B) was slightly more attractive than the other (which we shall call A). The researchers, however, stated that participation in study B was worth one credit hour, while volunteering for study A would net them 2 credit hours.
Having received this information, the majority (81%) decided to participate in the activity that would give them 2 credit hours. At that moment, however, “a mistake was discovered”, and it turned out that regardless of which study they chose to participate in, they would receive only one credit hour. In spite of this, when the participants were asked to make a final declaration, 61% of them indicated they would participate in study A.
In the control conditions, the number of those volunteering for study A was reduced by nearly half (31%), and the vast majority selected task B. In another version of the experiment the participants were very strongly persuaded to select task A, allegedly worth 2 credit hours. When it then “occurred” that this activity was only worth one credit hour, only 41% elected not to change their original decision.
Thus the low-ball technique requires that the addressee feels free to choose at the moment of selecting a given option. If, however, the choice is made under pressure from an external source, then the engagement of the addressee in a given activity is not strong enough to make him inclined to continue following the emergence of new circumstances that render that option less attractive. One variation on the low-ball technique is known as ‘the lure’, described by a group of French researchers, Robert Joule, Fabienne Gouilloux and Florent Weber (1989).
While in the case of the classic low-ball technique the addressee of the request retains the possibility of receiving what he wants in spite of a sudden change of circumstances increasing its cost (e.g. it happens to be necessary to get up at the break of dawn to participate in an experiment), in the case of42 Sequential techniques of social influence the lure technique it “turns out” that the initial option becomes unavailable, and an alternative is proposed. In their study, Joule et al., (1989) offered students the chance to participate in a psychological experiment.
It was explained to the control group that the experi- ment would involve a test of memory, and volunteers were asked to sign up for one of two dates. In the experimental group, participants were invited to take part in an interesting experiment involving emotions, which would be described in greater detail after a short time. They were promised a sum of 30 francs (around $7or £5) for their participation.
When interested students arrived at the laboratory, they were told that due to some unspecified difficulties the experiment concerning emotions would not go ahead. However, they were offered the chance to take part in an empirical study for which they would, unfortunately, receive no financial benefit. It turned out that in those conditions, three times as many people decided to take part in the experiment concerning memory than in the control group.
The differences between the low-ball technique and the lure technique are just subtle enough that the literature fails to distinguish whether the changes concern the conditions involved in achieving something, or the thing that can be achieved. In this chapter, I treat the lure as a variation on the low-ball technique, presenting research on the two together. The relevant studies have shown, for example, that this type of influence can convince people to participate in time-consuming forms of protest against further tuition and fee increases, consisting of writing letters and postcards by hand to the Student Opinion Administration (Burger & Petty, 1981), to convince them to reduce the amount of tobacco they consume (Joule, 1987) or to lower the consumption of gas used in heating their homes (Pallak, Cook & Sullivan, 1980).
Jerry Burger and Richard Petty (1981) were interested in learning whether the low-ball technique would retain its effectiveness if the first and the second requests were made by different individuals. During their study they promised credit hours to students in exchange for participation in a psychological experiment. It then turned out that there would be no credit hours awarded, but the request to take part in the study was made again.
In conditions in which both requests were for- mulated by the same experimenter, participants nearly always reaffirmed their desire to participate. However, when the request came from another researcher, the proportion of those willing to take part in the study was reduced by nearly three- fold (see Table 2.5). In another study carried out by the same authors, the experimenter knocked on doors in a dormitory and informed students that he was a representative of The National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
He then asked the students to hang a poster from his organization on their doors. In some conditions the experimenter reached into his bag, gave the student a poster and left. In others, the experimenter also reached into his bag, but then put on an expression of surprise and stated that he had just given out the last one.
He promised to deliver one promptly. After 10–15 minutes a representative of the organization again knocked at the student’s door. In half of the cases it was the same individual who had visited previously, while inSequential techniques of social influence 43 TABLE 2.5 Percentages of subjects complying with initial and second requests in Burger and Petty (1981) experiment Group Initial Request Second request % N % N Same requester 65 13 55 11 Different requester 70 14 15 3 Control — — 20 4 Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1981, vol.
40, p. 494. Copyright 1981 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
the other half it was a different person. This time, the participants who had earlier been given the posters were told that the association was looking for volunteers to work that evening, while those who had not received the posters were told that there were none left, but if they wished to demonstrate their support for the Society then it was a good day to do so, as in the evening volunteers would be needed for work. The experimental design also contained a group of participants who were asked directly to become volunteers.
It turned out that the low-ball technique was only effective in conditions when the target request was made by the same person who had earlier run out of posters. The implication of the studies by Burger and Petty is that low ball is based rather on the obligation to make a concession to a specific person rather than to see a given commitment through. This conclusion is supported by the results of work by Konrad Maj (2002), who decided to examine how to explain to somebody that has given in to an attractive offer the fact that circumstances have changed and the offer is less beneficial than it was.
In both real-life and experimental situations, the individual who must com- municate this message offers an apology for the situation. If we concur with Burger and Petty that the foundation of the low-ball technique’s success is the particular relationship established during the interaction between the initiator of the request and the addressee, then this pleasantry serves to maintain the relationship and leads to the addressee acceding to the request or offer in its final (less attractive) form. It would be easier for the addressee of the request to act in his own interest and refuse, if not for the person making the request being so polite and nice.
In an experiment conducted by Maj (2002), students were given the opportunity to purchase special instructional materials helpful in studying for exams. This was done by an employee of an academic bookshop who appeared at the beginning of a class. In the control conditions, he said that the materials cost $20.
The price given in the experimental conditions was $15. He then requested all those inter- ested to place their names on a list. Participants from the experimental groups were again approached by the employee of the bookstore just before the end of the class and told that he had made a mistake.
Sometimes he offered a sincere apology and explained that he had confused the price with that of materials intended for other students, while in other cases he simply stated that the price was different from the44 Sequential techniques of social influence one initially given. In both situations, however, he gave participants the chance to cancel their purchase. In the control conditions, nearly 34% of participants pur- chased the instructional materials.
In the low-ball conditions in which the shop assistant politely apologized for the mistake, 62.5% of them did so. However, when the low-ball technique was not accompanied by an apology, the percentage of those prepared to purchase the materials for $20 was even slightly lower (not quite 25%) than in the control group. Maj recorded similar results in a replication experiment.
It would seem the results generated by Maj suggest that, contrary to what Cialdini et al. suggest, the individual who is the target of the low-ball tech- nique does not feel the need to continue the action engaged in, but rather simply cannot break off the interaction with an individual treating him politely and respectfully. Indeed, if these elements emphasizing the interpersonal connection go missing, the technique becomes utterly ineffective.
Summary Sequential techniques are based on a model in which the target request is preceded by a different one. Researchers have devoted the most attention to the foot-in-the-door technique. It consists in an easy request being made first, and then when the addressee of the request carries it out (or at least agrees to do so), a subsequent, more difficult request appears.
While the literature generally assumes that the foun- dation of this technique’s success is the mechanism of self-perception, not all study results provide confirmation. Four walls is a technique similar to foot-in-the-door, but the key element is for the individual being approached to make verbal declarations that will result in him being obliged in some way to carry out a request or take advan- tage of a proposal. The door-in-the-face technique, similarly to foot-in-the-door, has generated significant interest among scholars.
It essentially consists in the assumption that one can be induced to carry out a rather difficult request when we start with an even more challenging one. The addressee will most likely reject it, but if the easier request is then presented, he will be likely to accede. Empirical studies have demonstrated the efficacy of this technique, as well as the two condi- tions on which it depends.
First: both requests must be made by the same person. Second: the target request must be made immediately following rejection of the initial request. This technique also has led to discussions on the psychological mechanism responsible for its success.
The most commonly cited one is the reci- procity rule. An individual who rejects a request to fulfil a difficult request sees how the person making the request reduces his expectations and formulates an easier request. This, in turn, leads the addressee of the requests to feel obliged to make a concession, and he agrees to the second request.
Another theoretical model pro- poses that rejection of a difficult request often leads to a feeling of guilt, and by complying with an easier request we can ameliorate that unpleasant feeling. The next sequential technique analyzed in this chapter is foot-in-the-face, which is a merging of foot-in-the-door with door-in-the-face. This technique is based on the assumption that, prior to formulating the target request, anotherSequential techniques of social influence 45 request of a different nature but similar level of difficulty should first be advanced.
If the addressee fulfils this request, the mechanisms responsible for the success of the foot-in-the-door technique are activated. If he rejects it, the mechanisms that generate the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face technique are set in motion. Thus regardless of the decision concerning the first request, the chances grow that the second one will be carried out.
The dump-and-chase technique, in turn, con- sists of persistent repetition of the same request while simultaneously convincing the addressee to discuss the reasons for the refusal. In the course of the discussion those arguments become less convincing and counter-arguments are presented. Studies on this technique are still in their initial phase, but we can assume that under certain conditions it is a successful method.
The last of the techniques presented in this chapter is the “low ball”. It is based on issuing a proposal to an individual that seems very attractive. After the addressee becomes cognitively and emotionally involved in carrying out the particular activity, it turns out that the offer is not quite as beneficial as it was initially made out to be.
In spite of that fact, the addressee continues down the course he had set out on. While it was initially assumed that this was the result of the activation of mechanisms of engagement in activity and consistency, the newest research indicates that the feeling of an obliga- tion towards an individual with whom we have entered into an interpersonal relationship is the key factor.3 TECHNIQUES INVOLVING EGOTISTIC AND SELF- PRESENTATION MECHANISMS People can hold good or bad opinions about themselves. These opinions relate to particular characteristics, competences and skills, or they can be of a more general nature.
Psychologists are generally in agreement that such convictions are of importance, but controversy arises around the reasons why this is so. High levels of self-esteem obviously result in an individual experiencing positive emotions: it is pleasing to think of oneself as competent, humorous or physically attractive. This is why people try to find the good in themselves, applying an incredibly broad range of strategies and techniques that enable them to defend and even enhance their positive self-image.
For example, they attribute success to themselves rather than others, while chalking failure up to others instead of themselves (e.g. Gilbert, 1995), they are eager to disclose any link they may have to famous people, which gives them pride and satisfaction (Cialdini, Borden, Thorne, Walker, Freeman & Sloan 1976), and they also exhibit tendencies towards bias in comparing themselves to others, maintaining their belief that they are better (Wills, 1981). It would, however, be an oversimplification to make the assumption that all of these efforts are based solely on the desire to experience pleasing emotions.
Researchers emphasize that an affirmative view of oneself is a condition of effective task performance, as well as of making both short- and long-term plans (Taylor & Brown, 1988). Thus, striving to view oneself in even a slightly exaggerated positive light is adaptive. Yet another aspect is highlighted by Sheldon Solomon, Jeff Greenberg and Tom Pyszczynski (1991), authors of terror management theory.
According to this notion, humans are the only entities on earth aware of their own mortality, this awareness being the source of fear and of threats. However, an individual can maintain the pretence of being immortal in both the literal and symbolic sense. Literal immor- tality is offered by the vast majority of religions, promising everlasting continuation of the soul and a second life after the one on earth.
Symbolic immortality, on the other hand, is ensured by participation in broadly-taken culture, whose lifespan isEgotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 47 far longer than that of an individual. High self-esteem allows individuals to feel they are valuable elements of culture (or a part of it, such as a nation or a group of a football club’s fans). Thus, maintaining positive beliefs about oneself is a means of reducing the terror that results from being aware that our life must, eventually, end.
Roy Baumeister and Dianne Tice (1990) do not concur with these assumptions. They do not directly dispute the theory itself that awareness of mortality gives rise to fear, but they rather feel that the bulk of people’s daily anxieties are grounded in the threat of exclusion from the community in which we function. A strong majority of communities accepts competent, honest and valuable individuals.
The conviction that one fulfils these requirements leads to a weakening of the afore- mentioned fear. So, while Solomon, Greenberg and Pyszczynski on the one hand, and Baumeister and Tice on the other, posit completely different sources for the majority of human beings’ fears, they are in agreement that the antidote to them is positive self-assessment. Most people are concerned, not only with what they think of themselves, but also with how they are viewed by others.
We try to manipulate the impression we make on others so that they think of us in a manner consistent with our own interests. Sometimes we desire for people to like us, other times we want them to fear us, or even to treat us as helpless and in need of immediate assistance (e.g. Leary & Allen, 2011).
When others react in the way we desire, this also contributes to improving and maintaining our self-esteem. In recent decades, an increasing amount of empirical data has begun to indicate that processes associated with one’s feeling of self-worth are not necessarily con- scious ones. Anthony Greenwald and Mahzarin Banaji (1995) propose applying the term ‘implicit self-esteem’.
People are not aware of their special relationship to things associated closely with the “I”, even while those things are totally unrelated to their attitudes, skills and level of competence. While the effects associated with people’s tendency to care for their positive self-image and to make the desired impression on others are strong and undisputed, the question is rarely addressed in research of how mechanisms associated with this can be used in successfully exerting influence over others. It appears that such stud- ies are focused primarily on four social influence techniques: using the name of one’s interlocutor; emphasizing one’s incidental similarity to that person; drawing attention to discrepancies between publicly declared and actual behaviour; and exploiting the presence of a witness to the interaction.
In this chapter I will discuss each of these techniques in turn. Using the name of one’s interlocutor When Napoleon’s army occupied the Netherlands in 1811, the emperor issued a decree ordering all residents of the country to officially register their surnames. Family names were not widespread at the time in the Netherlands but were the exclusive domain of people at the top of the social ladder.
For many of those at the bottom of it, Napoleon’s decree must have seemed a needless extravagance.48 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms The Dutch thus began thinking up quite exotic surnames for themselves, such as: Naaktgeboren (Born Naked), Den Boef (Swindler) or Poepjes (Little Halfwit). While surnames may have seemed unnecessary in some countries and during some periods of history, since the dawn of human civilization no one has questioned the need to use first names. The status of an individual without a name can be com- pared to one stripped of honour, or even of humanity (Koole & Pelham, 2003).
As a result, for many years a person’s name has borne exceptional significance. Jozef Nuttin (1984) described his impressions from a holiday he took with his wife. At one moment he observed that some of the licence plates on cars passing him were evoking warm feelings.
After thinking about it, he concluded that this was probably from the plates that contained the letters of his name or digits corresponding to his date of birth. This constatation served as a starting point for a sterling series of empirical studies in which Nuttin demonstrated that people do, in fact, exhibit an unusual preference for the letters that compose their name. Further studies conducted around the world demonstrated that the first letters of a name in particular seem to have impressive power.
It turns out that individual letters are liked more by people whose names begin with just those letters (Kitayama & Karasawa, 1997; Koole, Dijksterhuis & van Knippenberg, 2001). In our experiments (Dolinski, 2005), the first letters of names were described by partici- pants as having a more pleasing shape (perhaps a surprising conclusion) than letters that did not form a part of their own names. This effect was also observed in respect of letters printed from the commonplace computer programme Word for Windows (the fonts Courier and Times New Roman were used), as well as decorative letters, such as can be found at the beginnings of chapters in older volumes.
Brett Pelham, Matthew Mirenberg and John Jones (2002) demonstrated that the initial letters of first names have an influence on professional careers and on the places that people inhabit. For example, among American dentists there is a large number of people named Dennis (and vice versa, many people named Dennis are dentists), while a far greater number than chance would indicate of women named Virginia live in Virginia Beach. People with the first name or surname of Saint, more often than coincidence could explain, decide to take up residence in Saint Louis, Saint Paul or Saint Joseph.
The special role of one’s first name is also attested to by the cocktail party effect. During a cocktail party, people generally stand around in small groups, and in this intimate company discuss various things. The selectivity of top-down attention means that they can block out voices coming from other small groups, focusing on what someone in their immediate vicinity is saying.
The din, often loud, bothers them a bit, but they are able to tune it out to such a degree that, in a sense, they don’t hear it. However, if their own name pops up in this ignored murmur, not only do they register it immediately, but they also begin listening to what the per- son who has just used their name is saying. People are thus both ignoring and not (completely) ignoring this din at the same time: one’s own name is a stimulus so strong that it has the fascinating power to divert others’ attention.
In the context of this chapter, the cocktail party effect constitutes an outstanding example of theEgotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 49 importance of one’s own name. From a purely practical perspective, it advises us to avoid speaking the name of the person we would like to gossip about. We mustn’t be deceived by the fact that Christine is standing some distance from us and seems to be completely absorbed in her own, private conversation.
Sometimes it occurs that we recall someone’s name following a chance encounter. However, other situations occur more frequently. We know that we have been told several times the name of that tall, blonde woman, or of the balding man in the glasses, but we are simply incapable of recalling what their names are.
Fortunately, certain situations occur that demonstrate we are not exceptions in this regard: after all, we encounter people who themselves are utterly unable to remember our names. If someone meets us just once, then later can recall and use our name while making some request of us, does that mean there is an increased chance that we will fulfil this request? Daniel Howard and Charles Gengler (1995) asked them- selves this very question.
They began with the assumption that the starting point for an analysis of this issue should be the psychological consequences of someone remembering our name. Those, in turn, are very strongly dependent on how we view the causes underlying this fact. In Howard and Gengler’s opinion, the conse- quences will be minor if the cause is viewed as something associated with external circumstances, such as a short period of time (“It’s no surprise that she remembers my name.
After all, I was introduced to her just a minute ago”), or something exceptional occurring at the time (“I was sure he’d remember my name, because just after we met I got caught up in my dress and fell on the floor, then I spilled a whole glass of red wine on myself”). In other cases, the fact that someone remem- bers our name can give rise to a wholly different set of consequences. Setting aside particular situations like the one just described, this fact means that we have become a person of importance to someone else.
This sort of consideration fulfils the need to have our ego stroked (e.g. Bowerman, 1978; Bradley, 1978). It also causes us to feel positively about the person who is providing us with such pleasant and desirable experiences.
As a rule, we like people who are quick to remember our names. In turn, if we like them, we should be particularly inclined to fulfilling requests they target us with. In an experiment designed to shed light on this question, a natural situation involving a meeting between a professor and students was used.
The professor asked each of them in turn to introduce themselves to the group, and then con- ducted a standard introductory lesson. The next day, the professor sought out the students on campus and asked them to participate in a study he was conducting. What he wanted was for the students to fill in and return a questionnaire as quickly as possible.
In half of the cases, the professor addressed the student by name, while in the remaining ones he indicated that he knew he was speaking to his student but couldn’t remember that individual’s name. Regardless of how the professor addressed the student, he explained that one of the areas explored by the research was the effect of the time of day on cognitive functioning, and that students were asked to write down the exact time at which they began and finished filling in the questionnaire.50 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms None of the students refused to take the questionnaire and complete it. (It would have been odd had someone done so, taking into consideration the asymmetric relationship of professor/student.) We should keep in mind that the investigator emphasized it was of importance that the student return the completed question- naire as quickly as possible.
Thus, indicators of a positive reaction to the request were the time at which the student began and completed work on the questionnaire, and the time between the completion of this activity and the return of the papers to the professor (he had said that he would wait in his office until 11:00 pm). Analysis of the results demonstrated that students whom the professor had addressed by name began filling in the questionnaire more quickly (on average after around 2.5 hours) and brought it to his office a shorter time after completing it (on average around half an hour) than students whose names the professor appeared to be unable to recall (on average, after 5 hours and 1.5 hours, respectively). In another experiment (Howard, Gengler & Jain, 1995), the researchers exam- ined whether remembering someone’s name and addressing a person by it increases the likelihood that the person will make a purchase, the proceeds of which would go to benefit a charity.
Indeed, almost every handbook for salespeople in America advises them to remember the name and surname of their regular customers and to address them personally, but this advice is rather based on the intuitive feeling that such behaviour will increase their sales, not on any proper studies that would unequivocally confirm this. As in the previous example, the experimental design assumed a natural situation. During the first lesson, students introduced themselves to the teacher.
Following that, the teacher declared that he would like to meet each of them individually and discuss their expectations concerning the course, as well as past experience in the area the classes would focus on. The students signed up on a list, selecting the most convenient time. When a student appeared in the professor’s office, the professor greeted the person either by name and surname, or impersonally, or gave a clear signal that he was not able to recall the student’s name.
(By differentiating these three groups, it was possible to reject the hypothesis that it is not so much remem- bering someone’s name that increases the chance that person will fulfil later requests, but rather that a visible inability to remember someone’s name will make that person exceptionally unlikely to accede to them.) After a short conversation with the student, the professor mentioned that his wife was selling cookies, and that the proceeds from sales would go to a church conducting various charitable cam- paigns. A record was kept of whether students bought cookies or not, and also the number of packages purchased. Initial analysis indicated that neither the decision to buy nor the number of packages bought differed between the group of students greeted impersonally and the group of students whose names the professor could not recall.
This allowed for exclusion of the hypothesis that individuals observing that their name has clearly been forgotten would be particularly unlikely to fulfil requests targeted at them. Both of these groups taken together did, however, differ from the group of students addressed by their name and surname. Those students purchased cookies with more frequency and in greater quantities.Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 51 The results of the aforementioned experiment are consistent with the one described before it.
This does not, however, conclusively prove that the foundation of greater inclination to fulfil the request of a person who addresses us by name is a feeling of affinity. An alternative explanation can involve the roll of one’s mood. A large number of studies have indicated that people in a good mood are more eager to help others than those who are in a neutral mood (e.g.
Baek & Reid, 2013; Isen & Levin, 1972; see also Chapter 6). We may assume that the constatation that someone remembers our name and surname after the first meeting puts us in a good mood (because we have turned out to be important, interesting and of significance), which then inclines us to help others. The legitimacy of this interpretation was tested in a successive study based on a design similar to the one in the experiment previously described.
This time, however, students who had arrived for an individual meeting scheduled in advance with a professor were asked to fill in a special survey concerning their classes, place it inside an envelope, seal the envelope and place it in a box located in the office of another professor responsible for evaluations of courses and instructors. The questionnaires filled in by the students included questions about the attitude of the professor towards students, as well as a scale to determine the mood of the respondent while filling in the survey. Again, analysis of the results demonstrated that people who were addressed by name purchased cookies more frequently and in greater amounts than participants from the remaining groups.
It also turned out that individuals addressed by their name rated the professor’s attitude towards students more highly, and they were in a better mood than the other respondents. It was also shown that addressing study participants by name had a greater impact on their attitude towards the person interacting with them than the mood they were in. While both the attitude towards the professor and the degree to which their mood was positive impacted their readiness to buy cookies at the professor’s request, the strength of the former association was greater than that of the latter.
These results allowed the authors to adopt the assumption than an interpretation grounded in the mechanism of liking has a greater justification than the alternative interpretation linked to the mechanism of positive mood. It should be noted that the hypothesis assuming that the effectiveness of the technique of addressing individuals personally (by name) is based on good mood can be verified in an even more direct and conclusive manner. In order to achieve this, an experiment’s design should include conditions in which a request is for- mulated by an individual other than the one who used the name of the participant.
If this were to generate an increase in readiness to fulfil the request, it would indi- cate that a good mood is the key factor. However, if no differences were observed between those participants who had previously heard their name (remember: from another person) and those whose name was not used by anyone or could not be recalled, this would be direct evidence that such an interpretation was off the mark. Such a study has been carried out in Poland (Dolinski, 2005).
The experiment was conducted by a student of Polish language and literature doing a teaching intern- ship in the fifth grade of a vocational secondary school. During the first class she52 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms asked the pupils to introduce themselves and to say something about their favourite books. At the end of the last lesson that day (in another subject), the teacher excused the pupils one at a time, at half-minute intervals, in an order established beforehand with the experimenter.
Although the investigator did not have as phe- nomenal a memory of names as Howard (Howard & Gengler, 1995), she knew the name of every pupil leaving the room because they had been written down for her. She read out the name of every pupil before the student left the class, and in doing so she created the impression that she remembered them. The aforementioned researcher stood together with her colleague, another intern, in the corridor just outside the door to the classroom.
Upon seeing a pupil exiting, she either addressed the youngster personally: “Oh, hello James, you’re from the fifth grade, is that right?”, or impersonally: “Oh, hello, you’re from the fifth grade, is that right?” In addition, either the experimenter or her colleague made a request of the pupil. In the latter situation, the researcher stepped a few metres away, distancing herself from the interaction between her colleague and the pupil. The request addressed to the student involved “completing a survey at home”, which consisted of 60 questions concerning fears related to school-leaving exams, assessment of one’s prospects for the exams and future plans.
Pupils were told that if they agreed to participate in the survey study they had a week to return the completed survey, but also that returning it sooner would make the work easier for the individual undertaking the study, so it would be fantastic if they could bring it back the following day or the day after. The experiment was conducted with the participation of pupils from three groups preparing for their school- leaving exams. Nearly all of the pupils handed the surveys in, and the four experimental groups recorded equal levels of unreturned questionnaires.
However, the result was that in conditions when the experimenter addressed the pupils by name and made the request herself to bring the completed surveys back as quickly as possible, the pupils returned them quicker than in the other conditions. When the experimenter addressed the pupils by name but the request to fill out the survey was made by her colleague, the pupils returned them later, to be precise, with the same delay as in the two conditions in which the experimenter did not remember their names. So, we may assume that this study justified a rejection of the interpretation of results recorded by Howard et al.
(1995), in categories referring to the conse- quences of improving the mood of the person being addressed. By the same token, the most likely mechanism that would explain the compliance of people whom we address by name remains an increase in the interpersonal attractiveness of the person formulating the request. In their last experiment, Howard, Gengler and Jain (1995) accumulated addi- tional data indirectly confirming the accuracy of just such an interpretation.
This particular study was based on the assumption that an egotistic reaction to the sound of one’s own name would be the response primarily of people whose faith in their own capacities had been shaken. A situation was thus set up in which, prior to addressing the participants either by name or impersonally, they performed a taskEgotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 53 at which they either succeeded or failed. The task was an intellectual one, consisting of discovering the rule explaining the connection of two stimuli into a pair, and information on the participants’ success or failure was supplied in a random manner.
It turned out that the effect of hearing one’s own name on the inclination to purchase cookies was particularly evident in respect of those students who had failed at the task just a moment earlier. The question thus arises of whether it is really the case that increased fondness of the requester, and the desire of targets of the request to demonstrate gratitude for remembering and using their name are what come into play, or if there is also a fear (or at least anxiety) that failure to fulfil the request (or fulfilling it with insuf- ficient zealousness) may result in the requester exacting some revenge. Of course, from a subjective perspective, such revenge is all the more likely when the person making the request identifies us personally and wields great influence over our situation; it is, therefore, more likely when this individual knows and remembers our name than when that person is unable to recall it, or doesn’t even bother to try, and also more likely when the person in question is our professor or teacher rather than someone of similar status to us.
In their next study, Howard, Gengler and Jain (1997) made an attempt to confirm the hypothesis of the motivation for revenge as the mechanism underlying pliability in the situations under analysis. As in previous experiments, participants were students asked during their first seminar with a professor to introduce themselves and to discuss their areas of expertise and interests. At the end of the class, the students were informed that a longitudinal study was being performed to evaluate courses, and that they would receive addi- tional credits for participation.
Those interested were able to sign up for the research. Because everyone declared their participation, the next day the professor met with them again in order to give them the evaluation surveys. The study was of an individual nature.
Depending on the experimental conditions, the professor either addressed students by name, or stated that he was unable to recall students’ names and requested that they introduce themselves again. Participants then anonymously (in a separate room) filled in the questionnaire, which addressed such issues as the perception of the professor’s attitude towards students and the degree to which they feared that assessment of their work during the course and of their competencies could be based on something beyond substantive considerations. The students then returned to the professor’s office, at which time they received a document confirming the additional credits received for participation in the study.
At the same time, the experimenter proposed that they purchase cookies. In half of the cases he pointed to a table on which students could find the cookies and a piece of paper with information that they cost 25 cents each, as well as a box for money. In the other cases, the professor informed them that the cookies were in another room, and the students could go there and purchase them if they wished.
The self-service cookie point of sale was arranged in a similar way. It can thus be said that the potential purchase of cookies was either of a public nature (the student knew that the professor was aware of the decision taken) or a private one (the student did not think that the professor would see). The analysis of results revealed54 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms that students whom the professor addressed by name generally bought cookies more frequently (77%) than those whose name was not mentioned by the experi- menter (38%).
It should come as no surprise to us that students addressed by name did so with particularly great frequency in public conditions (92%). That said, what is symptomatic is that even in purely private conditions those students bought cookies more often (64%) than those whose names the experimenter “forgot” – both in private (25%) and in public (50%) conditions. This pattern of results is entirely consistent with the assumption that the fulfilment of requests by people we address by name results from their desire to repay us for doing so.
An analysis was also undertaken of the answers provided by the student participants to questions contained in the instructional evaluation questionnaire. It transpired that students whom the professor had addressed by name rated his atti- tude towards them slightly higher than those whose names the professor had “forgotten”. Responses to the question concerning fears over transparent assess- ment by the professor were not, however, a function of whether he remembered their names or not.
This result also indicates clearly that the effect discussed here is not grounded in the fear of people addressed by name that refusal to accede to a request will result in their being poorly treated by the person making the request. Incidental similarity In one experiment by Jerry Burger, Shelley Soroka, Katrina Gonzaga, Emily Murphy and Emily Somervell (2001), female student participants filled in a ques- tionnaire that they were told was a personality test. Next, they received feedback on the results of the test.
In some conditions they learned that another person who had filled in the questionnaire together with them received a very similar personality profile. In the following stage, that very person (who was in fact collaborating with the experimenter) turned to the experiment participant with a certain request. It concerned providing assistance with a task that the collaborator had received during a class in English literature, which involved finding and asking a previously unknown individual to provide an honest assessment of an essay the collaborator had written.
The essay was eight pages long, and the idea was for someone to give a sincere review of the argumentation contained therein and to write a one-page review. Would the person targeted with the request agree to it? The outcome was that this request was fulfilled much more often when the participant and the requester had allegedly similar personalities than in conditions under which no mention was made of a comparable personality profile.
How can this result be explained? The simplest assumption would be to say that, since we generally like our own personality traits, the consideration that someone else shares them should result in a positive attitude towards that individual. From this positive prejudice it should follow that we are more inclined to fulfil requests made by that person.
Jerry Burger, Nicole Messian, Shebani Patel, Alicia del Prado and Carmen Anderson (2004) began, however, with the assumption that people may be particu- larly likely to accede to the requests of people exhibiting any – even a purelyEgotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 55 coincidental – similarity. In the first of their experiments the researchers informed female participants that they were conducting studies on the link between person- ality and signs of the zodiac. Situations were arranged so that the participant sat in a room with the experimenter, who pretended to be another participant.
At the very beginning, the experimenter peeked at the birthdate of the participant, who had given it in a questionnaire containing demographic information. In half of the cases the experimenter provided an analogical date as her birthday, and in the remaining cases a different date was given. After a moment, the person conducting the experiment entered the room occupied by both women and explained that the personality test they would be given depended on their astrological signs.
She then asked her collaborator, who was only pretending to be a participant in the study, about her date of birth. As a result, in half of the cases the real study participant was able to take into consideration that she shared a birthday with the other “participant”. The person conducting the study then asked the real respondent about her date of birth (who, in the case of concurrence of dates usually made mention of her surprise at this unusual coincidence), after which she gave personality tests to both women.
After the allegedly completed study, both women exited the laboratory, and in the corridor the experimenter made the request to review an eight-page essay she had written. It emerged that prior constatation of the coincidence of birthdates generated almost a twice-greater chance that this request would be fulfilled. While under conditions in which there was no concurrence of birthdates, just over 34% of participants agreed to fulfil the request, when this concurrence did occur the rate of compliance was over 62%.
In their next study, the experimenters set two objectives for themselves. First, they decided to examine whether analogical effects would occur in the case of a slightly induced conviction of an incidental similarity. Second, they changed the nature of the request.
Whereas in the experiment previously described the request was of a personal nature, and accession to it provided the person making the request with immediate benefits, in this case the request had a socially beneficial essence. Here participants were invited to an experiment concerning creative thinking. They were asked to select one of the items placed on a desk, and then spend five minutes describing all of its possible applications.
With knowledge of each participant’s name, during these five minutes a scenario was arranged to take place following the participant’s exit from the laboratory. An experimenter stood in front of the building collecting donations on behalf of a severely ill girl. She wore an ID badge and held a picture of the sick girl in her hands.
Depending on the experimental conditions, the ID badge worn by the experimenter had either exactly the same name as the study participant, or a different one. In the latter case, different names of the sick girl on the picture were also given. Sometimes the signature under the photograph indicated that she had the same name as the study participant, whereas in other cases the names were different.
The researchers did not provide data on the percentage of people making a donation in particular experimental conditions, limiting them- selves to the average sums donated by participants in individual conditions. The results of this study are presented in Figure 3.1.56 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 Requester similarity Photograph similarity Control FIGURE 3.1 Mean amount of money donated in Burger et al. (2004) experiment As can be seen, when the study participants ascertained that the volunteer had the same name as they did, they gave significantly larger sums of money than in the remaining two conditions.
The observation that they share a name with the victim in need of assistance did not, however, result in such generosity. The per- ception by the target of the request of similarities to the person issuing the request is of key importance (see also Pandelaere, Briers, Dewitte & Warlop, 2010). Nicolas Gueguen, Nathalie Pichot and Gwenaelle Le Dreff (2005) invited stu- dents via e-mail to participate in a questionnaire study.
It transpired that they were far more successful in recruiting participants for such studies in conditions when the person lodging the request signed with the same surname as the person invited to participate. Randy Garner (2005) investigated the persuasive influence of name similarity on questionnaire return rates. He demonstrated that both undergraduates and college professors completed and returned questionnaires more frequently if the name on the cover letter was similar to their own.
This effect was independent of name familiarity. Angelique Martin and Nicolas Gueguen (2013), in turn, stopped passers-by on the pavement and asked them to answer a series of questions. They began with purely demographic questions (date of birth, marital status, etc.), pro- ceeding to slightly intrusive and intimate (the age at which their virginity was lost), until reaching the level of clearly “taboo questions” (e.g.
“Do you use sex toys?”). It is known that people very often refuse to answer such intimate questions (Tourangeau & Yan, 2007). Such refusal occurred with far less frequency in conditions under which the experimenter, upon hearing the respondent’s day of birth, stated with feigned surprise that he was also born on the same day of the same month.
Other studies have demonstrated that people declare their intention to take advantage of a dental care programme or recreation centre programme more often when they “discover by chance” that they were born on the same day and month as the indi- vidual making the pitch to them (Jiang, Hoegg, Dahl & Chattopadhyay, 2010).Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 57 Although the similarity induced in the studies discussed above concerned rather trivial things, it was sufficient to increase the tractability of people towards requests targeted at them. It is worth observing that the likelihood of such a coin- cidence occurring was rather minimal. The odds that another person was born on the same day and in the same month as us are 1/365; the probability that someone else has the same name as we do is more difficult to estimate, and depends on the degree of originality of our name in a given population, but we can safely assume that the chances of this happening are not great.
The question arises of whether the low probability of a similarity occurring is a condition that enhances submis- siveness? In attempting to answer this question, Burger et al. (2004) informed study participants that they were involved in a study dedicated to the links between personality and biological traits.
As part of this study, thumbprints were taken from the participants. Individuals taking part in the experiment were then informed that they had a type E fingerprint. As one might expect, another study participant also had the same type of fingerprint.
The experimenter also mentioned either that type E fingerprints could be found in just 2% of the population, or that it was the most common type, occurring in 80% of humans. In the control group, thumbprints were also taken from participants, but nothing was said to them about the type of fingerprint they had. Next, the official portion of the experi- ment was concluded, and an experimenter playing the role of a participant asked an individual actually taking part to review an essay she had written.
The same request was also made in the control group. It transpired that only an exceptional similarity to other individuals inclined people to fulfil their requests. While in conditions when type E fingerprints were allegedly present in only 2% of the population the request was fulfilled in the vast majority of cases; in conditions when it was said that type E was the most prevalent one, only about half of the participants complied with the request.
The rate of compliance in this group was not significantly higher than that observed in the control group. The results of this experiment are presented in Figure 3.2. One particularly distinctive form of similarity is imitation of the behaviours exhibited by an individual we begin interacting with.
As was demonstrated by Tanya Chartrand and John Bargh (1999), people usually unconsciously imitate gestures (e.g. wiping one’s face, foot tapping) made by the person with whom they are speaking. In another experiment, the authors also proved that people are gener- ally more positively predisposed to those who subtly imitate them.
It is this last discovery that served as a natural impetus to undertake a series of studies concern- ing social influence. The hypothesis that the subtle imitation of partners make them more likely to comply with our requests and suggestions has become exceedingly obvious. The results of experimental studies are quite definitive.
Rick van Baaren, Rob Holland, Kerry Kawakami and Ad van Knippenberg (2004) demonstrated that when an experimenter imitated the position of an interlocutor’s hands and legs, there was a greater likelihood of receiving assistance from the study participant in gathering coins that had allegedly spilled onto the floor by accident. In other experiments results indicated that waiters who repeated the words spoken by58 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Uncommon Common Control similarity similarity FIGURE 3.2 Percentage agreeing to the request in Burger et al. (2004) experiment customers while taking their orders received larger tips (van Baaren, Holland, Steenaert & Knippenberg, 2003), and sales staff in shops with electronics equip- ment (Jacob, Gueguen, Martin & Boulbry, 2011) and cosmetics (Kulesza, Szypowska, Jarman & Dolinski, 2014) sold more of it.
Wojciech Kulesza, Dariusz Dolinski, Avia Huisman and Robert Majewski (2014) demonstrated that similar techniques can induce people to make donations for charitable causes, and that copying the words used by our partner in an interaction results in an effect of equal strength, regardless of whether the order of those words is observed or not, as long as the sense of the utterance is maintained. Copying the behaviours of an interlocutor can, moreover, concern both behav- ioural and verbal reactions simultaneously. Robin Tanner, Rosellina Ferraro, Tanya Chartrand, James Bettman and Rick van Baaren (2008) invited participants to sample a new beverage named “Vigor”.
In some cases, while speaking about the product, the experimenter imitated the gestures and repeated the words spoken by the participant, allegedly to be sure that he had properly understood the statement. He did not do this with the other participants. It turned out that participants from the former group rated the taste of the beverage more highly.
Induction of hypocrisy At the beginning of the 1990s, Elliot Aronson, Carrie Fried and Jeff Stone (1991) described a technique that they termed ‘induction of hypocrisy’, which is based on inducing individuals to understand clearly that their behaviour is inconsistent with their public declarations. Such an observation of one’s own hypocrisy and incon- sistency in behaviour is an unpleasant experience, and motivates people to behave in a manner befitting of their previous public statements.Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 59 The induction of hypocrisy technique consists of two stages. In the first, individuals are encouraged to openly declare support for a viewpoint or idea they really do (at least on the level of verbal declarations) accept.
In the second stage, their attention is focused on their own behaviours that are inconsistent with that declaration. In a series of experiments Aronson et al. asked students to make short speeches on camera about the sensibility of using condoms.
Next, they held conversations with the students during which they asked the participants to recall all the situations in which they failed to use condoms. Study participants then had the opportunity to purchase condoms. Results indicated that the students subjected to the induction of hypocrisy technique bought more of them than those who were assigned to another group during the experiment – those who only made statements on camera about the necessity of using condoms, or those who only had to recall situations in which they did not use them.
In another study involving the induction of hypocrisy technique, students at a swimming pool were asked to sign a declaration that the obligation of every con- scious human being is to avoid wasting water. They were then asked to respond to questions in a survey whose alleged objective was the implementation of a water conservation programme. The questions were formulated so that students respond- ing to them were inevitably led to the conclusion that they did not conserve water.
They were thus made aware of their hypocrisy (I will sign an appeal about saving water, but I won’t do it myself) and a lack of consistency in their behaviour. As it turned out, students subjected to this influence later began limiting the time they spent taking showers in comparison to those who were not asked to respond to the survey nor to sign the petition (Dickerson, Thibodeau, Aronson & Miller, 1992). Using a similar approach it was also possible to prompt people to recycle packing materials (Fried, 1998), and to use sunscreen to reduce the risk of skin cancer (Stone & Fernandez, 2011).
What, exactly, explains the success of the technique being described? Aronson claims that the mechanism underlying its effectiveness is the individual’s experi- ence of a state of dissonance. In contrast to Leon Festinger, creator of the theory of cognitive dissonance (1957), who defined this phenomenon as an inconsistency between two convictions or between a conviction and a behaviour, Aronson (1969, 1997) also perceives its essence in a threat to one’s feeling of self-worth and the integrity of the “I”.
Cognitive dissonance in his definition is linked with the need to see oneself as an intelligent and moral person, and it emerges only when this perception is under threat. The successful reduction of dissonance is a condi- tion in which individuals can again view themselves as moral and intelligent beings. The induction of hypocrisy technique leads to people becoming consciously aware of the discrepancies between what they feel is important and proper (and what they publicly declare support for) and their real behaviour.
This state places their values under threat and wobbles the conviction of the integrity of the “I”. It motivates individuals to behave in accordance with prior public declarations. Their manifestation makes it possible to rebuild the conviction of self-worth and the view of self as an individual who behaves in a consistent, coherent manner.
It is60 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms worth stressing that the induction of hypocrisy technique also works when, following an individual’s realization of the differences between beliefs and behaviours, the opportunity is then created to boost the threatened self-appraisal in a manner other than adapting actions to declared opinions. Jeff Stone, Andrew Wiegand, Joel Cooper and Elliot Aronson (1997) first asked participants to videotape a speech for a high school AIDS prevention programme about the importance of using con- doms to prevent AIDS, and then encouraged them to admit they themselves had on occasion neglected to use condoms. It was made possible to recover one’s sense of self-worth either directly (participants were offered the chance to buy condoms, thus behaving in a manner consistent with their professed beliefs), or indirectly (participants could make a donation to benefit the homeless, and thus feel they were morally just).
Even though participants were given the chance to recover their self-esteem indirectly, they preferred to take the direct route, adjusting their behav- iour to their declared views. This demonstrates the strength of the induction of hypocrisy technique in altering people’s behaviours. Valerie Fointiat (2004) decided to examine whether the induction of hypocrisy technique is based in dissonance.
She began with the assumption that dissonance should be felt particularly acutely by people whose feeling of self-worth is uncer- tain or is being threatened. If the technique presently analyzed is particularly effective towards just these kinds of people, it will constitute a strong argument for a foundation in dissonance. In a study conducted in a supermarket car park, housewives were approached.
They were randomly assigned to one of four groups. In three of them, partici- pants were first asked to sign an appeal with the words “Everybody has to respect speed limits. When you drive slowly, life goes on”.
Then, participants were asked to respond to a series of questions about whether in the last two months they had been speeding, and to discuss the place, time and circumstances surrounding these incidents. Next, the women were offered to have a recording tachometer installed in their cars – a special device that registers the speed at which a car is driven. They were also informed that this would be free of charge.
In two of the aforementioned three groups an additional manipulation of the integrity of participants’ “I” was introduced. In one of the groups, the experimenter stated at the very beginning that although 95% of people exceed the speed limit, it didn’t seem that the participant would belong to this category (reinforcing the feeling of integrity); in the second group, the experimenter did just the opposite, expressing the belief that the participant did, at least sometimes, exceed the speed limit (a threat to the feeling of integrity). In the fourth (control) group a portion of participants were asked to sign the appeal, and the other to answer a series of questions.
The results of this experiment have shown that individuals in whom hypocrisy was induced (and thus those who first signed the appeal, then responded to questions about their own behaviours behind the wheel) agreed more often to the installation of a tachometer in their car than did those from the control group who either signed the appeal orEgotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 61 answered survey questions. The effect of the induction of hypocrisy was strong in those experiencing a threat to their own feeling of self-worth, but was absent in those who had this feeling reinforced. Thus the experiment by Fointiat (2004) not only provided another piece of evidence as to the effectiveness of the induction of hypocrisy technique, but also proof of its grounding in dissonance.
While keeping in mind empirical data attesting to the effectiveness of this technique, it should also be considered that its effec- tiveness is limited to particular areas of reality. Indeed, it is only useful when we desire to induce people to behave in a manner they support and value in the verbal layer. Other studies by Fointiat and her collaborators (Fointiat, Somat & Grosbras, 2011) also show that changes to behaviours do not occur if, immediately after becoming aware of one’s hypocrisy, the participant is given the chance to trivialize the discrepancies between words and deeds.
In one of their experiments, participants were made aware of their hypocrisy regarding observance of speed limits, and were then asked to participate in volunteer work for a road safety organization. If this request was made just after the induction of hypocrisy, the result was a greater tendency on the part of the participants to engage in altruistic behaviour. If, however, the offer to be involved in work for a road safety organiza- tion was preceded by a questionnaire filled in by participants in which they had to rate how important it was to adhere to the rules of the road regarding speed, they applied a different method for reducing cognitive dissonance: trivialization.
They usually responded that observing speed limits isn’t a particularly important matter, and then demonstrated no eagerness to become involved in altruistic work for the benefit of a road safety organization. In another article, Fointiat (2008) presents data that suggests the circumstances in which individuals become aware of their hypoc- risy may be of importance. The effects of changes to behaviours are stronger when a norm governing how people should behave is negotiated during a discussion with others rather than a situation in which they are asked individually about it.
This last issue brings us closer to another area of social influence – the potential presence of others (outside observers) in situations during which we are asking someone for something. A witness to an interaction One of the more well-known and classic books by Erving Goffman (1959) bears the title “The presentation of self in everyday life”. In essence, individuals are often not entirely themselves, but actors showing others their various faces, staged for the needs of particular audiences.
People do not want others to know they are irritated; they desire for others to see them as intelligent and to admire their sense of humour; on the beach they suck their stomachs in to show how attractive and thin they are. These types of behaviours are referred to in psychology as “self-presentation”. Activities involving self-presentation can exhibit a very wide range of features.
It has been shown in many studies that this often lies at the foundation of offering help to others. Generally, readiness to provide assistance is reduced when people62 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms are unobserved (e.g. Finkiel & Baumeister, 2010; Gottlieb & Carver, 1980).
When there are witnesses, however, people can demonstrate their altruism. With this in mind, Bruce Rind and Daniel Benjamin (1994) came to the con- clusion that certain types of requests will be more readily fulfilled by people when there is another person witnessing them. It would be best if the witness was an emotionally close person, whose opinion is of particular importance to the target of the request.
With a view to testing this assumption, Rind and Benjamin conducted an experiment in the period immediately preceding Christmas, at a small restaurant in a shopping centre. The study participants consisted of young men. The experi- menter approached men sitting at a table either alone, or in the company of a woman.
Next, he offered the man a chance to purchase a lottery ticket. The main prize was a weekend for two in Bermuda, and the proceeds from the lottery were to benefit a charity. The gauge of request fulfilment was the average number of tickets purchased in the two conditions compared with each other.
It turned out that the men purchased nearly twice as many tickets when they were in the com- pany of a woman (on average two tickets) than when alone (on average just over one ticket). It was also the case that half of the men sitting alone were not even interested in listening to the entire pitch given by the person selling the tickets, while in conditions in which a female was in their company, only six percent of the time did the men interrupt the ticket salesman before he had finished speaking. These results could suggest that the need to make a good impression on the witness to an interaction between a requester and the target of the request inclines the lat- ter to a greater level of amenity and to complying with the request.
This need could thus form the basis for an effective technique exploiting the presence of an observer. Some questions, however, arise from this experiment. First and foremost, the issue of whether the desire to cast oneself in a good light before a person of impor- tance to us is really at work here.
Conditions in which someone offers to sell a lottery entry to a man sitting with a woman induce him to listen to the entire pitch, not because he wants to look good to his partner, but because the situation itself becomes unclear and ambiguous. When a man is sitting alone and concludes after hearing just a few words that he is not interested in the proposal being made by a stranger, he can express this directly and interrupt the monologue. If, however, he is accompanied by someone else, he might assume that the proposal he himself is not interested in could be an attractive one for his female friend.
This fact pre- cludes him from interrupting the salesman’s monologue. Another problem with Rind and Benjamin’s experiment concerns the nature of the request itself. The lottery ticket salesman mentioned that the main prize was a trip for two people to Bermuda.
This could have rendered the chance to take a punt more attractive for a man sitting at a table with a partner (he could go with her to Bermuda) than for a person sitting alone (who would be more likely to think that he wouldn’t have anybody to go with, so there would be no point in buying a ticket). The sorting of participants into groups is also difficult to label as random. Men spending their time alone can differ in many ways from those sitting with women.Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms 63 The first of these issues was examined by Renata Koscielniak (1998) in a study based on a concept applied by Rind and Benjamin, but with an enhanced experi- mental design.
She assumed that if the need for positive self-presentation is what motivates people to hear someone out to the end when confronted with situations like the one created by the American researchers, then the readiness of the person to whom the request is addressed should be a function of who the witness of the inter- action between the asker and the asked is. A situation in which a young man is with a young woman he knows should provide a greater impetus to self-presentation than one in which a man happens to be with another man, or with an unknown woman. The research was conducted on the streets of Wrocław, a city in south-west Poland.
The target participants were young men either walking alone, or in the company of another man, or in the company of a woman. A female experimenter approached participants, introduced herself as a representative of a children’s founda- tion, and asked them to do something on behalf of the foundation (depending on the conditions, this could be purchasing a ticket for a lottery in which the main prize was a television; purchasing a ticket for a lottery in which the main prize was a New Year’s Eve package in the mountains for two; or making a donation for a particular charity). The experimental design also included conditions in which the targeted man was with an unknown woman for only a short moment.
In these cases, a female collaborator of the experimenter approached a man walking alone and asked him for directions. Next, the experimenter appeared and made her request, while the col- laborator remained as a passive observer of the interaction. As it transpired, participants were more inclined to purchase lottery tickets than to make a donation, but in none of the conditions did the presence of an additional person and witness to the interac- tion increase participants’ readiness to fulfil requests compared to conditions in which they were walking down the street alone.
Koscielniak’s second experiment precisely replicated that of Rind and Benjamin, but her results also failed to demonstrate a reduced interest in acceding to requests made by an unknown individual on the part of men who were alone compared to those of men accompanied by women. These results potentially suggest that there are differences in models of self- presentation between the United States and Poland. It cannot be ruled out that in the USA, a person who wants to make a good impression on someone else makes a demonstration of generosity and eagerly buys a lottery ticket whose proceeds will benefit a charity.
In Poland, this type of self-presentation is most likely far less com- mon, and people try to make an impression on others in an entirely different way. It could even be supposed that people in Poland want to show their assertiveness during a situation in which someone probably wants to cheat them out of money. However we look at it, the effectiveness of the technique of exploiting a witness’s presence requires further exploration, including of the intercultural dimension.
Summary This chapter has provided analysis of social influence techniques whose common denominator are the mechanisms underlying their effectiveness. These mechanisms64 Egotistic and self-presentation mechanisms appeal to a fundamental human need: most people want to see themselves in a good light, and they want others to think well of them. The first technique is very simple.
It only requires that we quickly and correctly remember the name of the person we are interacting with, and then use this name during future contact. This simple operation (requiring a very sharp memory) results in a greater propensity on the part of another person to comply with our requests. People treated in this manner feel they are favoured and appreciated when they consider that during the first, brief meeting someone has bothered to remem- ber their name.
This generates increased goodwill to the individual who is presently formulating a request towards us. The second of the techniques consists in displaying a similarity, if just an inci- dental one, to the individual asked to fulfil a request. This could be a shared birthdate, or some unusual trait (in the experiment discussed this trait involved fingerprint characteristics).
Interestingly, research has shown that even similarities in respect of entirely trivial (but rarely occurring) characteristics are sufficient for a marked increase in amenability. Compliance can also be induced in others by imitating their gestures, or by repeating their verbal communiqués. The third technique described in this chapter is more complex.
The induction of hypocrisy is comprised of two phases. In the first of them, individuals are encouraged to declare their support for a view or idea that they in fact (at least at the level of verbal declarations) accept. In the second phase, the focus shifts to their behaviours that contradict the declaration.
When people become aware that their own behaviours are inconsistent with their public statements, this evokes a feeling of dissonance. The desire to rid oneself of this feeling induces people to undertake behaviours consistent with previous public declarations. It must be emphasized that, while the technique is effective, this effectiveness is limited to situations in which the aim is to induce an individual to engaging in behaviours in line with openly declared convictions.
The fourth of the techniques placed under analysis is based on the assumption that many human behaviours are associated with the need for self-presentation. We behave a bit differently in the presence of others than in entirely private situations. American studies demonstrated that if the request concerns engaging in charitable activity, men are more eager to fulfil it when they are in the company of a woman than when they are alone.
In Poland, this result could not be replicated. Perhaps this is the result of culturally determined differences.4 THE ROLE OF WORDING THE REQUEST The overwhelming majority of human interactions involve a verbal component (Clark, 1985). It goes without saying that the same trait is true of the majority of social influence techniques.
For example, in the case of sequential techniques described in the Chapter 2 of this book, an initial request is first issued verbally, and then the target request is also presented verbally. Even when the role of non-verbal interaction is being studied, such as in the case of techniques based on making eye contact or holding the addressee of a request by the arm (see Chapter 5), these gestures are accompanied by a request expressed verbally. Words thus lie at the heart of social influence.
In this chapter, we will take a special look at words by examining techniques in which the word takes centre stage. We will analyze the role of subtle differences in the content of messages addressed to other individuals. It will become clear that seemingly superficial differences can in fact be of key significance, and that what seems obvious to us is not always so.
“Please” – is it always the magic word? Most of the time, being polite will not only increase the chances that our request is agreed to, but will also give rise to a symmetrical politeness when it is carried out. We can imagine a situation in which someone asks for directions to a building, like a university library.
This exceedingly simple request can be formulated in at least a dozen different ways. For example, we can ask “Where’s the university library?”, “Excuse me, where is the university library?”, or “I’m so sorry to bother you, but would you be so kind as to tell me where the university library is?” Herbert Clark and Dale Schunk (1980) conducted a series of studies in which they asked their students to read a list of similar requests and then write down the answers they would provide to them. The pattern in the results showed very clearly that the more polite the question, the more polite the response.
This gives rise to66 The role of wording the request the question of whether being polite always increases the strength of social influence. The body of empirical work examining this particular question, while admittedly small, gives us firm grounds to doubt that it does. Michael Firmin, Janine Helmick, Brian Iezzi and Aaron Vaughn (2004) examine the extent to which including the word “please” when making a request increases the likelihood that it will be carried out.
They called several hundred students and offered to sell them chocolate cookies, while informing them that the proceeds from the sale would go to help people suffering from hunger. A cookie cost 50 cents. Half of the time, the pitch was concluded with the words “Will you purchase a cookie?”, and in the other half the word “please” was added to the question.
The frequency with which people bought the cookie differed between the two condi- tions, but as it turned out, in conditions where the word “please” was added to the end of the request they were bought less often (65.3%) than in conditions where that word was absent (79%). While this result was quite surprising for the authors of the experiment, they made an effort to explain it. In my opinion, at least two of the potential explanations they offered for the results of their experiment deserve our attention.
First, it is highly probable that the word “please” in the context of a minor request submitted in the course of an experiment might seem strange, inappropri- ate or even suspicious to the experiment’s participants. “Please” is a word used in order to persuade people we do not know during interactions with them, so it may be the case that hearing that word at the end of a sales pitch for cookies leads to a heightened sense of caution. Second, the appearance of the word “please” at the end of a message may rede- fine the object which is receiving the aid.
When the situation consisted of the study participant being informed that by purchasing a cookie he would help those suffering from hunger, his positive decision was associated with providing aid to people who have nothing to eat. The word “please” may lead to a change in the perception of that situation. Agreeing to buy the cookie would be more likely associated not with the hungry, but rather the person who most clearly has a direct interest (that is, the person who is making the request).
Naturally, it is more sensi- ble to think that buying a cookie will help those who are suffering from hunger rather than someone who is likely sitting comfortably in a chair, talking over the phone as part of his everyday job. In another experiment, Aaron Vaughn, Michael Firmin and Chi-en Hwang (2009) examined the degree to which the word “please” could help a dishonest person avoid having his fraud uncovered. They took advantage of the fact that some students were supposed to take a test on general knowledge of psychology.
The students were invited to come in pairs into a room; one of the students was an actual student (the study participant), while the other was a confederate who was only pretending to take the test. A teaching assistant handed out the test to both of them, informed them that they had 10 minutes to complete it, and left the room. The confederate copied multiple answers from the student’s test on several occasions.
A minute before the examiner’s return, the confederate turned to theThe role of wording the request 67 participant and asked him to keep his cheating a secret by saying “Don’t tell the teaching assistant I cheated, I need your help”, while in half of the cases this message was preceded by the word “please”. In the control conditions he said nothing to the study participant. It was then recorded whether the study participant reported his colleague’s dishonesty to the teaching assistant (the confederate quickly exited the room, leaving the participant alone with the examiner).
It turned out that in the control conditions 24% of participants informed the examiner of the other student’s cheating. In conditions in which the “student” politely requested that the participant keep his secret, the results were similar (28.6%), while in the conditions in which he simply said “Don’t tell . .
.” they shot up to 52.2 %. What explains this pattern of results? Perhaps the very appeal not to expose the cheating focused participants’ thoughts on the dishonesty and violation of ethical norms by their partner in the interaction, and for this reason they reported the fraud more frequently in the “Don’t tell” conditions than in the control conditions.
“Please”, in turn, awoke a feeling of sympathy and had the opposite effect, minimizing the inclination to expose the dishonest partner in spite of the focus on his reprehensi- ble behaviour. One way or another, the polite request was, indeed, more effective than a simple message, but it was not as effective as silence. In two field studies which I conducted with Barbara Dolinska (Dolinska & Dolinski, 2006), we examined the role of the sex of partners in an incidental inter- action, involving conditions of formulating a request either politely or rather impolitely.
In the first study, the experimenter pretended to be looking for a lost gold earring, which was supposed to be a present for his/her mother; in the second, help was sought in guarding a bicycle as the experimenter needed to drop by his/ her aunt’s flat on the eighth floor of a block of flats in which the elevator was out of order. In half of the cases the request for help was formulated very politely (“Would you be so kind as to help me . .
.”), while in the other half it came across as an order (“I’ve lost a precious gold earring here. You must help me look for it!” or “Watch my bicycle so no one will steal it.”). It turned out that if the interaction took place between individuals of the same sex, the polite request was clearly more effective than the order (this probably comes as a surprise to nobody).
Surprisingly, however, it turned out that if a woman addresses an unknown man, or a man addresses an unknown woman, a quite impertinent order is more effective than a polite request! In attempting to explain this pattern of results, we assumed that an order constitutes an emphasis on the part of the person giving the message of his/ her privileged position in relation to the addressee of the message. In Western culture (European/American), men generally enjoy higher social status than women, something that also concerns situations involving communication (Carli, 1990).
Men therefore perceive that it is their right to order a woman to do some- thing. On the other hand, the same culture acknowledges that women, due to the disparity in physical strength between women and men, have the right to demand assistance and care from the opposite sex, therefore they have the right to issue orders to men. Both men and women are thus entitled to emphasize their privi- leged status during interactions with people of the opposite sex, which they may68 The role of wording the request do by way of direct orders.
The addressee of such a message clearly does not call this privilege into question and provides the necessary assistance to the person issuing the order. To tell the truth, I am not entirely sure if this is the right interpretation, but I am not able to come up with a more convincing one. Either way, the experiments presented in this part of the chapter demonstrate that the word “please” – contrary to what our instincts tell us – does not always boost our chances of success in having someone carry out a request.
Even a penny will help Robert Cialdini and David Schroeder (1976) draw attention to the fact that people do not experience great difficulty in refusing difficult requests. Indeed, if someone turns to us with a request that would cost us a lot of money, place heavy demands on our time, or would in some other way prove burdensome, we are capable of providing many reasons for which we cannot accede to that request. What is more, these reasons generally enjoy social acceptance.
Other people (including the one formulating the request) should, in turn, acknowledge the sensibility of our argu- ments. Easier requests, however, are an entirely different matter. First, it is difficult to provide rational, convincing arguments why we cannot agree to them; second, refusal to carry out simple requests may have negative implications for self- perception.
A person who refuses to do some small thing that would bring joy to someone close to him will have to deal with the feeling that he is unhelpful, insensitive and unsympathetic. The situation is thus quite disadvantageous from the perspective of the person issuing a request. If he asks for a lot, there are few who will agree.
If he asks for a little, the request will definitely be agreed to by more people, but each donor will give only a minimum. Cialdini and Schroeder indicate the way out of this paradox. They suggest employing a message in which we do not state exactly what level of help is expected, while at the same adding that any help at all – even the smallest amount – is highly valued and will be accepted with gratitude.
It is sufficient in the case of a standard request for financial assistance to add on the phrase “Even a penny will help”. In this manner, a person hearing the request will be prevented from thinking “I would do it, but I can’t afford it”, or “I’m not rich either”. To put it more simply, the addressee of such a request will not be able to identify rational arguments justifying a refusal to provide assistance.
On the other hand, we are not simply asking for a small amount of help (we are not saying that we want precisely one penny). The chance remains that the assistance offered will be more than symbolic. In an experiment testing the effectiveness of the “even a penny will help” tech- nique, people presenting themselves as members of the American Cancer Society went door-to-door in the suburbs, and after introducing themselves they stated that they were collecting donations for the fight against that awful disease.
The experimental group added the phrase “even a penny will help” to the standard pitch for donations. It turned out that in the control group just under 29% of thoseThe role of wording the request 69 approached were willing to make a donation, while in the experimental group this number reached 50%. Interestingly, those from the experimental group who made a donation to those engaged in the fight against cancer gave them, on average, the same amount of money as those approached in the control conditions.
Thus the experimental group collected a much higher sum than the control group. We can clearly observe that those who were told “even a penny will help” did not limit themselves to giving a just a penny. We may, however, question whether the information “even a penny will help” really accomplishes what the authors claim it does, which is to stop the addressee from explaining to both himself and others the reasons for not providing assistance in such terms as “I can’t afford it”, and thus becoming a factor that enhances the generosity of those approached; an entirely different mechanism from the one just described may, at least potentially, come into play.
The information that any sum of money will help could imply that the organization seeking donations is in a perilous financial situation. In such a situation the factor inducing people to offer assistance is rather a feeling of pity and the resulting obligation to support those who would not manage on their own. To examine which of these mechanisms played a real role in the study being discussed, Cialdini and Schroeder conducted an additional empirical study in which they applied four experimental conditions.
Along with the standard request and the appended “even a penny will help”, this time they added “We’ve already received some contributions, ranging from a penny and up, and I wonder if you would be willing to help by giving a donation”, or it was said that “even a dollar will help”. It turned out that the information about previous benefactors giving “from a penny and up” provoked a positive reaction on the part of those approached with roughly the same frequency as the phrase “even a penny will help”. Because this message does not evoke the image of a charitable organization in a dramatic financial situation (something which Cialdini and Schroeder exam- ined in yet another study), we may in fact assume that by providing information about the acceptability of a minimal donation, we are able to neutralize self- justifying interpretations for refusing to help, by the same token inducing people to reach for their wallets.
This interpretation is also supported by the fact that a larger sum was collected from the group which heard “even a dollar will help” as a part of the pitch for a donation than in the case of the control group. James Weyant and Stephen Smith (1987) decided to examine whether the ‘even a penny will help’ technique could be successful when applied in the context of a charity drive conducted via direct mail. A fundamental difficulty in using the literal formula, however, was the cost of organizing a campaign of that nature.
The sym- bolic penny was not enough to cover the costs of printing and postage. The researchers therefore decided to replace the phrase “every cent” with a suggested minimum donation of $5. For the experiment, people living in the suburbs were sent letters from the American Cancer Society.
The letter was accompanied by an index card designed to simplify the donation process. In some cases there was no suggestion of a minimum donation that should be made, while in others there were70 The role of wording the request various dollar amounts suggested, such as $50 (a typical number for a charity drive) or $5 (a very unusual figure, incredibly low). It turned out that when the minimum suggested donation was $5 the total sum of money collected was significantly greater than when no minimum donation was proposed, and also when the pro- posed donation was given as $50.
At the same time, the average value of donations from those who offered their support to the American Cancer Society was similar in all three experimental conditions. Thus it can be said that in the case of direct mail the principle “ask for less to get more” is also applicable. It should, however, be mentioned that when William DeJong and Arvo Oopik (1992) tested the “even a penny will help” technique when approaching potential benefactors for a dona- tion via direct mail, their results did not demonstrate a greater proportion of people offering help.
Perhaps this resulted only from the fact that study participants were sent a large number of very diverse materials, as a result of which most of the addressees of the appeal might not have even read it. The “legitimization of a paltry contribution” technique (this is a more official alternative name for the influence technique under analysis here) is not limited exclusively to situations involving the pursuit of monetary donations. Junko Takada and Timothy Levine (2007) recruited volunteers to help in administrating orienta- tion programmes for new international students by approaching young people walking around campus who appeared to be students.
They explained that various activities could be helpful, such as picking foreign students up from the airport or showing them around campus. In half of the cases the appeal to volunteers was concluded with the words “even a few minutes would help”. It turned out that this increased the percentage of people declaring readiness to provide assistance from 14% to 23%.
(However, owing to the small size of the cohort, this difference did not achieve statistical significance). In our experiments we approached residents of Wrocław, a large Polish city, and asked for their help in distributing flyers among their acquaintances promoting the organization of the World Expo in Wrocław. In half of the cases the appeal for help was concluded with the phrase “Every single distributed leaflet will count”.
The result was that, by adding this phrase, the percentage of people who accepted a packet of leaflets for distribution rose from just under 31% to over 43% (Dolinski, Grzyb, Olejnik, Prusakowski & Urban, 2005). A range of studies using the technique under analysis in other areas than col- lecting monetary donations have been conducted by Nicolas Gueguen. Interestingly, information that even a minimal level of contribution is legitimized was not stated verbally in these experiments.
Study participants could, however, get the message . . .
by reading the t-shirts of experimenters. In one such study (Gueguen, 2013a) students were encouraged to donate blood. Those who were engaged in recruiting donors were dressed in jeans and red t-shirts.
In half of the cases the t-shirts bore the slogan “Even one donation in your lifetime will help”. It turned out that the presence of this slogan on t-shirts increased the percentage of people donating blood from under 10% to over 16%. Celine Jacob, Virginie Charles-Sire and Nicolas Gueguen (2013) also dressed experimenters in t-shirts, but this time they stood in front of the entrance to a supermarket.
The study wasThe role of wording the request 71 conducted just before Christmas and involved the collection of food donations for impoverished families. When the t-shirts displayed the slogan “Even a single package of pasta will help”, the proportion of people who deposited food pur- chased from the store into specially prepared shopping carts increased from around 20% to over 29%. In yet another study, based on a similar design, the experimenters demonstrated that donations could be successfully increased just by wearing t-shirts with the slogan “Even a single marble will make him/her happy” (Gueguen, Martin & Meineri, 2013).
But you are free! Many legends of psychology have rightfully emphasized that people place a high value on personal freedom, and that they react with aversion when someone wants to restrict that freedom (e.g. Brehm, 1966; deCharms, 1968).
Taking this very assumption as their point of departure, Nicolas Gueguen and Alexandre Pascual (2000) formulated the hypothesis that direct semantic evocation of the subject’s freedom in making a decision facilitates compliance with the request. In their experiment they randomly divided shoppers walking alone around a mall into two groups. In the control conditions, a young man approached such an individual and said “Excuse me Sir/Madam, could I ask for some change to take the bus, please?” In the experimental conditions he added the phrase “But you are free to accept or to refuse”.
It turned out that while 10% of people in control conditions were inclined to agree to the request, in experimental conditions this number shot up to 47.5%! In addition, it turned out that participants who decided to make a dona- tion gave on average twice as much in the experimental condition. What is fascinating in this study is that none of the participants in the experiment had any reason to feel compelled to carry out the request.
Objectively speaking, freedom of action was the same in the control and the experimental conditions. Verbal emphasis of the freedom to choose, however, had an exceptionally simple effect! In another study conducted by the same authors (Gueguen & Pascual, 2005), the individual conducting the experiment approached passers-by and requested their participation in a survey that would take around 5–8 minutes.
It was explained that the study was to focus on the perception of local merchants and craftsmen in their town. The offer to participate in the study turned out to be quite an attractive one for local residents, as 75.6% of those approached agreed to take part. Could this already high number be boosted even further by emphasizing the freedom to choose?
This time, the relevant words were spoken in the experimental condition at the very beginning. The experimenter addressed passers-by with the words “Excuse me Sir/Madam, I would like to ask you for something but you are free to accept or refuse”, and then explained that he was asking for their participation in a survey. In these conditions, 90.1% of those approached agreed to participate.
Further studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of the “evoking freedom” technique as applied to a broad range of requests (Gueguen, Joule, Halmi- Falkowicz et al., 2013). It turned out that by telling people “you are free to accept72 The role of wording the request or refuse”, we increase the chances that they will share a cigarette with us, and also that they will agree to watch a video for 5 minutes and then fill in a questionnaire. Study participants to whom experimenters repeated the aforementioned phrase were also much more likely to buy pancakes when the proceeds from their sale were intended to fill the coffers of a charitable organization.
Another experiment examined whether the evoking freedom technique can be successful assuming a longer time horizon (Gueguen, Joule, Halmi-Falkowicz et al., 2013). Study par- ticipants were asked to participate in an environmental campaign, and their involvement would consist of recording their trash-sorting activities in a special diary for one month. The researchers examined whether they would agree to the request and whether they really did perform the task which they had consented to do.
The results of this experiment are presented in Table 4.1. As we can see, the technique proved successful in both respects. Further studies have demonstrated that the “evoking freedom” technique is also effective when we attempt to convince someone to do something over the phone, via traditional post and by e-mail.
It has also been shown that the phrase “you are free to accept or refuse” is not the only effective wording for emphasizing personal freedom, as “do not feel obliged” and “do as you wish” also turned out to be equally effective. What will happen if we initiate the conversation by saying “You are free (. .
.)” and finish it with “Do not feel obliged”? As it turns out, the tech- nique is even more effective! The feeling of personal freedom is particularly important for people living in individualistic cultures, in which strong emphasis is placed on the value of the pos- sibility to determine one’s own fate.
At the same time, we may assume that the technique under examination here should prove less effective in societies with a collectivist orientation, as the need to decide about one’s own life is less acutely felt. Significantly, multicultural studies conducted in France, the Ivory Coast, Romania, Russia and China (Pascual et al., 2012) demonstrated that the technique is outstandingly effective in the first of those countries, and also works well in Romania (a country where, particularly in recent years, an individualistic orienta- tion has begun to dominate over a collectivist one), while in Russia and the Ivory Coast the rate at which requests were complied with in experimental conditions (e.g. with the phrase “But you are free .
. .”) was only slightly higher than in the TABLE 4.1 Frequencies of participants who complied with the request for money in Gueguen, Joule, Halmi-Falkowicz et al. (2013) experiment “But you are “Do as you Control Total free .
.” condition like . . .”condition condition Male participants 83.7% (n = 43) 81.3% (n = 43) 60.4% (n = 43) 75.2% (n = 129) Female participants 67.4% (n = 43) 72.1% (n = 43) 20.9% (n = 43) 52.7% (n = 129) Total 75.6% (n = 86) 76.7% (n = 86) 40.7% (n = 86) 64.3% (n = 258) Source: Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 2013, vol.
43, p. 130. Copyright 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.24 Sequential techniques of social influence The role of wording the request 73 compliance among participants in three experimental groups could be examined: control conditions (without that phrase).
In China, the most collectivist, there was in a group that used the word “yes” several times in a row, in a group that said “no” practically no difference at all. with equal frequency”, and in a group that fulfilled the initial request and agreed MMiicchhaaeell PPaattcchh,, VViicckkyy HHooaanngg aanndd AAnntthhoonnyy SSttaahheellsskkyi ((11999977)) ddrraaww aatttteennttiioonn ttoo to answer a few questions but without answering “yes” or “no”. This would help another aspect of the freedom of an individual approached with a request.
This us establish whether multiple uses of the word “no” reduces the effectiveness of a time, a particular limitation in the freedom to choose comes into play, consisting classic social influence technique (foot-in-the-door) or whether it is of no signifi- in the elimination of one of the potential decisions. The researchers focused on the cance from that perspective. feelings that can be experienced by an individual approached by a stranger asking However, the most important issue remains that of the psychological mecha- for something.
They suggest that such an individual may observe that he has been nism underlying the technique being discussed here. Let us observe that if we placed in a rather uncomfortable situation: someone who is neither my friend, nor return to the practices of clever door-to-door salesmen, we can imagine an effec- even my acquaintance, has approached me utterly unexpectedly in order to ask for tive marketer who first leads his interlocutor to answer “no” to some questions, but something. Additionally, the request goes beyond trivial matters such as giving then inclines him to purchase a given product.
We can imagine such questions as directions or the time. Unwritten and vague cultural norms are violated, according “Is it worth needlessly risking your health?”, “Should you ignore symptoms of the to which a stranger is not entitled to make such requests. Yet it is also undesirable common cold?” or “Would you like to gain 10 pounds over the next 2 years?”, and to remind him of this fact.
Thus the addressee of the request refuses to assist the after hearing the answer “no”, the salesman then offers a supplement designed to stranger, but keeps his reasons to himself. protect people from these problems. What would seem to be the key element in What, however, will happen if the person making the request says directly to his the behaviour of door-to-door salesmen is not so much getting their interlocutor interlocutor that if he feels the request is an inappropriate one for an interaction to say “yes”, but rather to guide them into the trap of commitment and consistency.
with a stranger, or if he feels pressured, he can just say so? Paradoxically, this does Indeed, the interlocutor should behave consistently with his or her previous verbal not make the task easier for the addressee of the request, but rather makes it more declaration. However, it should not matter whether an answer of “yes” was given difficult!
The option “I won’t help you, and I’ll keep my reasons private” is, at least to a question about whether we should take care of our health, or “no” to a ques- to a certain degree, made inaccessible. Indeed, the addressee of the request is actu- tion about whether it is worth thoughtlessly endangering our health. In both cases, ally encouraged to state directly why he doesn’t want to provide his assistance.
Thus the proper course of action is to purchase the vitamin supplement. The situation he is left with only two possible choices in his decision tree: to refuse and to created by Gueguen, Joule, Courbert and their collaborators (2013) in their exper- explain that he feels the request is inappropriate, or to accede and comply with the iment is entirely different. There is no association between the content of the request.
Owing to the fact that explaining to a stranger – who happens to be a introductory questions (concerning e.g. a storage unit or solar water-heater) and polite one – that he has violated some code of conduct regulating interpersonal the request to complete a long questionnaire at home about food habits. The com- contacts is a confrontational and rather stressful act, people may simply prefer to mitment and consistency trap here concerns the very fact of consenting to comply with the request being made of them.
participate in a time-consuming survey study after previously participating in a In one of the experiments dedicated to examining the effectiveness of this short survey study. It is thus limited to the foot-in-the-door effect. This mechanism technique, students were asked to help by conducting interviews among their does not, however, explain why people who have repeated the word “yes” several acquaintances concerning the ways in which they spend their free time.
It turned times in a row are particularly inclined to fulfil a subsequent and more difficult out that those who were encouraged to state their reasons for refusing actually request. We are therefore dealing with a slightly different technique than four walls. agreed to fulfil the request more often (49%) than participants from the control How can we explain the effectiveness of a strategy designed to induce another group (34%).
person to repeatedly respond “yes”? The question emerges of whether the effectiveness of the technique being The results noted in the experiment by Gueguen, Joule, Courbert et al. (2013) analyzed here simply results from the fact that an individual who, when making a can be explained by reference to the mechanism of activation of selected mental request, asks the addressee to declare if he feels uncomfortable, is perceived as more representations and patterns of action (Higgins, 1996).
Multiple repetitions of the polite than one who does not do so. In order to exclude this possibility, Patch et al. word “yes” lead to an increased likelihood that the response to successive questions (1997) conducted an additional experiment whose participants responded to a or another request or proposal will be the same.
It should be observed, however, series of questions concerning their perception of individuals formulating a request that accepting this interpretation leads to the conclusion that the effectiveness of in various manners. This study succeeded in excluding the aforementioned inter- this technique, aimed at inducing an individual to repeat the answer “yes” multiple pretation. As it is, the most likely interpretation would seem to be the one times, should be limited to situations in which the target request appears immedi- suggested by the very authors of the studies under discussion here.
When facing ately afterwards. The technique should then be unsuccessful in conditions when the dilemma of “how to behave”, people believe it is less undesirable to fulfil a74 The role of wording the request request addressed to them than to enmesh themselves in the confrontational and stressful process of explaining to a stranger that they feel uncomfortable. Labelling and asking questions There are a great number of situations in which people happen to overhear opinions about themselves.
Sometimes these opinions take the form of so-called labels. Someone labels another as a brute, or a slob, others are called unreliable or untrustworthy. These types of labels, however, need not necessarily be negative ones.
Labels can be comprised of such words as “reliable”, “hardworking” or “gentleman”. Robert Kraut (1973) suggests that by applying various labels to people (labelling), in some circumstances they can believe that they really are what the labels say they are, and in consequence they begin to behave in accordance with the label they have received. Of course, this can lead to positive or negative effects depending on the content of those labels.
Richard Miller, Philip Brickman and Diana Bolen (1975) supplied pupils, from selected classes in a school, information about them suggesting that they were neat and liked to maintain order in the classroom. After a certain time it turned out that in those classes there was a visible improvement in cleanliness, and pupils took very close care to ensure that objects in the classroom were in their proper place. However, no improvements in hygiene were recorded in classes where traditional persuasive methods were applied.
Edvin Schur (1971), in turn, analyzed “labelling” of particular people as aggressive deviants. He stated that a certain time after being given this label, he could often observe changes in their behaviour, consisting of growing aggressiveness. The label- ling most likely led to so-called dispositional self-attribution in accordance with the content of the label.
The “labelled” thus came to the conclusion that “this is just the way they are” (the attribution is internal, stable and uncontrollable), and then begin to behave in a manner consistent with the image of themselves they had come to accept. Of particular interest from the perspective of the issues analyzed in this book are studies on the consequences of labels referring to altruism. A textbook example is supplied in a study by Angelo Strenta and William DeJong (1981).
In the first phase of their experiment, participants (students taking an introductory course in psychology) responded to a 49-question survey ostensibly designed to measure particular aspects of their personality. The questions were displayed on a computer screen, and respondents answered them using a keyboard. Next, the participants were provided randomly with information as to what their answers indicated.
Some of them were told the results suggested that they were kind and thoughtful. Others received information that they were more intelligent than the majority. Further participants were informed that the results would be calculated within a week, and one of the characteristics of particular interest to the researchers was kindness to others.
The last of the groups was not given any feedback. When the participants left the laboratory they experienced an unexpected event (which, in reality, had been meticulously arranged by the researchers). One of the experimentersThe role of wording the request 75 “dropped” a pile of 500 index cards.
It was observed whether a given participant would spontaneously act to assist in gathering the cards, and the number of cards each participant picked up was counted. The amount of time between the cards landing on the floor and the participant’s engagement in providing assistance was also measured, as well as the entire amount of time spent helping out. It turned out that those who had been given the label of altruists displayed different behaviour in all of the aforementioned respects when compared to the remaining groups.
This group saw 70% of its members provide assistance, while 50% of those from the group that did not receive feedback and the group that was informed that the results would be analyzed later on did so, and a mere 36% of those from the group that was given a label associated with intelligence elected to help out. Participants from the group given the label of altruist also picked up far more index cards than the people in other conditions. Measurements related to time were equally definitive.
Participants labelled as altruists reacted the quickest and devoted the greatest amount of time to providing assistance. Of course, in order for labelling to be effective, it is necessary for the person being labelled to believe in the accuracy of the label. This can be most easily achieved when a label appears immediately after the individual has engaged in behaviour consistent with the label; for example, just after offering someone help, one is told that he is helpful.
It should come as no surprise that experiments devoted to social influence techniques often combined labelling with a technique we have already learned about in Chapter 2: foot-in-the-door. One such study was conducted by Morton Goldman, Mark Seever and Margaret Seever (1982). These authors assumed that a positive label associated with altruism would magnify the effects of the foot-in-the-door technique applied to efforts at increasing people’s inclination to provide help to others.
A negative label could lead to reduction in the effectiveness of the aforementioned technique. The experiment was conducted in a university library. One of the experimenters stopped people headed towards the entrance of the library and asked them for directions to one of the buildings on campus.
After receiving directions they either thanked the person (foot-in-the-door conditions), or offered a rather unique com- ment on the help they had received. In the conditions involving foot-in-the-door joined with a positive label, the experimenter said: “You are very helpful. Thank you very much, you’ve really been a big help.” In conditions of foot-in-the-door combined with a negative label, the response was different and went: “You’re not very helpful.
You didn’t really bother to explain how to get there, and I still have no idea where to go.” Each of the study participants then entered the library, where they encountered the next experimenter who asked them if they would be willing to sacrifice 2 hours in the following month to assist a charitable organization that serves disabled children. The work was to consist of working a shift answering phones. The same request was addressed to participants from the control group, who had not been approached by anyone at the library entrance.
It turned out that while in the control conditions 17% of participants responded positively to the request to donate 2 hours answering phones, this result improved to 40% when the76 The role of wording the request “pure” foot-in-the-door technique was applied. When the aforementioned technique was combined with a positive label, the percentage of those ready to donate their time to help disabled children jumped to 67%. However, when a negative label was applied, this number plummeted to 20%, more or less the level recorded in the control group (the difference between the two groups did not reach statistical significance).
A series of interesting experiments concerning the effect of labelling in the area of marketing was conducted by Gert Cornelissen, Siegfried Dewitte and Luk Warlop (2007). They demonstrated that if study participants first learn that they are very concerned with the environment and ecologically conscious, they then go on to select environmentally friendly products with a clearly greater frequency, and also prefer biodegradable product packaging. An unusually original technique, which may be treated as a particularly specific variation of labelling, has been proposed by Anthony Pratkanis and Yigal Uriel (2011).
The researchers call the technique the “expert snare”. While the classic labelling technique generally refers to the personality traits or character of the person we wish to influence, this particular technique involves labelling the target as an expert in a given field. The request that subsequently appears is related to that very subject.
The first experiment dedicated to the expert snare technique was conducted on the beach of Santa Cruz in Santa Monica, California. Surfers were asked to endorse the proposal that the belly of all new surfboards be painted yellow with purple polka dots. Before this request was made, some of the surfers were complimented on their skills.
It turned out that such a compliment led to twice as many surfers signing what was in essence an idiotic petition. Perhaps the compli- ment put them in a good mood, and this led to them agreeing to the request? Maybe the receipt of a compliment from a stranger activated the mechanism of reciprocity – now the surfers should be polite.
From the start the researchers fore- saw the potential for such interpretations and introduced conditions into the experimental design in which the surfer was given a compliment, but the remark was not associated with his prowess as a surfer. Rather, he was praised for his nice wetsuit (or other swimwear). It turned out that this compliment did not serve to boost the inclination of study participants to sign the petition placed before them.
Why did the surfers who were given the label of experts sign an absurd petition? It may be significant that the petition bore the title “Polka Dot Safety Petition”. If you’re an expert in surfing, you should definitely have heard that polka dots enhance the safety of beginning surfers.
You haven’t heard about that? Maybe you should ask. But should an expert ask questions about that sort of thing?
No, he should know about it, and he should support it. A second experiment was equally as creative as the one described above. This time, the participants were Frisbee players and recreational dancers.
A portion of them were initially complimented for their proficiency, while others were not told anything related to their skills. Participants were asked to sign a petition concerning students who were beginning their university education. The petition concerned a requirement for students to take an orientation course in Tanzimat Frisbee or rootThe role of wording the request 77 dancing.
It turned out that “being an expert” made people more inclined to sign the petition, but only when the course that new students would be required to take was related to their own area of expertise. As it was, those labelled Frisbee experts more frequently signed petitions concerning the course in Tanzimat Frisbee than Frisbee players from the control group, but when the petition concerned a course in root dancing there was no difference between the groups. By the same token, when recreational dancers given the label of experts were asked to sign a petition concerning root dancing for students, they did so with greater frequency than dancers from the control group.
However, if the petition referred to a Tanzimat Frisbee course, there was no difference between the two groups of dancers. Thus, the issue of flattery is not the one in play here. Rather, the idea is that if you are an expert in some area, then you should be knowledgeable on various topics in that area and support sensible initiatives.
As for things in another area in which you are not an expert, you are not expected to know everything and do not have to support such initiatives. One important detail about this experiment should be mentioned at the end: Tanzimat Frisbee and root dancing do not exist – they were fabricated by the experimenters. A very interesting variation on the labelling technique is one called image induction, proposed by San Bolkan and Peter Andersen (2009).
While in the classic version of the technique the person exerting influence is also the one providing the label to the person who is being influenced, in the case of image induction it is the very person targeted by social influence who comes up with labels for him- self! How can this be? Bolkan and Andersen respond that it is sufficient to use “a single question to get targets to apply a label to themselves without any previous interaction and which asks them to comply with a direct request” (p.
318). In a simple but equally clever experiment, the authors asked each participant at the beginning of the experiment whether they felt they were a helpful person (every- one responded in the affirmative), and then asked if they would agree to help the experimenter by volunteering to take part in a 30-minute communication survey at a later date. It turned out that 77% of participants agreed to this request.
In the control conditions where the request was issued at once (without the initial ques- tion of whether participants viewed themselves as helpful), only 29% of participants consented. In a second experiment, participants were given the initial question “Do you consider yourself to be somebody who is adventurous and likes to try new things?”, or this question was not given. Next, all of the participants in the exper- iment were asked to provide an e-mail address in order to receive information about a new brand of soft drink.
It transpired that when the request was made at once, 33% of participants gave their address, while when the aforementioned ques- tion preceded the request 75% of them did so. The third experiment, in contrast with the previous ones, was not conducted face to face, rather participants completed a questionnaire. In the experimental conditions they initially responded to the question of whether or not they viewed themselves as helpful.
In the control conditions this question was not present. Next, participants were asked if they would help the experimenter with his work on survey studies. In the experimental78 The role of wording the request group 50% of participants agreed to help out, while only 32% did so in the control group.
In another version, a portion of people were first asked if they were adven- turous, and then asked to give their e-mail address in order to forward them information about a new brand of soda. In this case, 55% of those who had previ- ously defined themselves as adventurous gave their e-mail address, compared to 30% of those who had not. As it is, posing questions is itself a very effective social influence technique.
Steven Sherman (1980) demonstrated that people’s behaviours can be influenced without resorting to orders or requests. It is enough to ask them to predict how they would react if they encountered a given situation. Sherman assumed that people generally make inaccurate predictions regarding their own responses when the behaviours described are either socially desirable or undesirable.
In respect of the former, people naturally overestimate the likelihood that they will engage in a given behaviour, while in respect of the latter they underestimate this likelihood. Formulating predictions as to one’s own behaviour very often activates the script for engaging in a given behaviour (or for refraining from a given behaviour) with oneself playing the lead role. In one of Sherman’s experiments (1980) participants were asked to write an essay the content of which would clearly contradict their own attitudes.
Over two-thirds (67%) of those approached agreed to do so. Other participants were asked to declare if they would agree to write such an essay when asked by someone else to do so. Only 29% of respondents said that they would.
Sherman thus declares that if people estimate the probability of engaging in undesirable activities, their estimates are below the mark. Interestingly, when the same group of people who had estimated the chances that they would agree to write such an essay were asked a few days later to actually write it, only one-third (33%) of them expressed their consent. A second experiment delivered similar results.
This time, the activity in question was singing a song over the phone. In the case of the control group 68% agreed to do so, but when other people were asked whether they would agree to such a request from someone else, only 44% said “yes”. When these same people were then asked to engage in the behaviour, 42% of participants agreed to do so.
Writing an essay that does not correspond with one’s own attitudes and singing a song over the phone during a conversation with a person we do not know are, indeed, behaviours that do not enjoy the highest level of social acceptance, and may even be a source of embarrassment. What will occur, however, if people are asked about the likelihood they will engage in behaviours that enjoy social acceptance? In his next experiment Sherman (1980) asked participants to join in a charity campaign consisting in a three-hour collection drive gathering donations for the American Cancer Society.
Only 4% of respondents agreed to help out. Meanwhile, nearly half of those from the group asked to declare if they would hypothetically agree to participate in such a campaign said that they would. When these same people were then asked to actually engage in the campaign, nearly one-third of them consented to pitch in!
Sherman claims that in these cases we encounter a very interesting mechanism: while people do make erroneous estimates of the likelihood they will engage inThe role of wording the request 79 various behaviours (as people in comparable control groups whose real reactions were tested behaved in diametrically different ways), they then proceed to behave in a manner consistent with their own prediction. Anthony Greenwald and a group of collaborators (Greenwald, Carnot, Beach & Young, 1987) explored whether people’s voting patterns could be influenced in a similar manner. They called individuals who had already registered for elections and asked them what they were going to do until the announcement of the results of initial exit polls.
As it turned out, the majority of people mentioned that, among other things, they intended to visit their local polling station. Of particular interest, however, was that among those who were engaged in such a conversation, 86.7% of them did in fact cast their vote. This result was higher than the one recorded among a comparable cohort of individuals who were not called (61.5%).
The “ask about” technique also proved successful in conditions where it was used to encourage students to sort packaging material as part of a recycling cam- paign. Residents of some dormitories were asked to complete a sociological survey in which they were asked, among other things, if they would sort their trash. When containers were then placed in the dormitories for aluminium beverage cans to be recycled, they filled up more quickly in the locations where the survey had been conducted (Sprott, Spangenberg & Perkins, 1999).
Eric Spangenberg (1997) began his research by reviewing a list of members of a particular club whose primary objective was to maintain the health and physical condition of its members. Spangenberg selected those who had not visited the club for at least a month for his study. Participants were then assigned randomly to one of two groups.
In the experimental group, Spangenberg phoned and asked the participant if he planned to visit the club in the near future. In the case of the control group, he did nothing. The fact that twice as many people from the exper- imental group visited the club over the following week compared to the control group should come as no surprise, considering the results of previous studies on the effectiveness of the technique being discussed here.
What is fascinating, how- ever, is that when six months later Spangenberg examined the frequency of members’ visits to the club, it also turned out that people from the experimental group went there twice as often as those who had landed in the control group – in spite of the fact that members of the experimental group had only been called once, without any further contact! In yet another study it was demonstrated that this technique can be applied successfully on a mass scale. One day, in front of the entrance to a university building, an electronic notice board displayed the message “Ask yourself .
. . are you going to recycle?” The corridors and entrances to the building were littered with bins for paper, aluminium cans, etc.
The message on the board led to the bins filling up much more quickly than on other days when no such message was displayed (Spangenberg, Sprott, Grohmann & Smith, 2003). It is also worth drawing attention to two important advantages of this technique. First, it is exceptionally easy to apply.
All that needs be done is to ask people what they would do in a hypothetical situation. Second, it can be used both to increase80 The role of wording the request the probability of engagement in socially desirable behaviours and of elimination of socially undesirable ones. How are you feeling?
The technique I would now like to present to you is also based on asking a ques- tion. There are many reasons, however, for which it is deserving of its own section. Daniel Howard was primarily interested in the effectiveness of tech- niques that could be applied when collecting donations for charitable purposes.
He observed people working on behalf of charitable societies and participated extensively in various internal courses and training sessions designed to boost qualifications. Before you ask anyone for a donation, you first ask them how they are feeling. After they tell you they’re feeling good, and you tell them you’re glad they’re feeling good, they’ll be more likely to contribute to helping someone who isn’t.
(Howard, 1990, p. 1185) This is the advice Howard heard during one of those courses; he then observed that it is, in fact, applied quite frequently (particularly during telephone conversa- tions) by people seeking donations for charitable causes. As a scientist, Howard was naturally interested not only in the mere efficacy of the recommended technique, but also the psychological mechanism that could explain why people in such situ- ations succumb to the requests of others.
Howard assumed that the foundation of this technique was the mechanism of commitment and consistency. In his view, a person who publicly announces his good mood then feels obliged to care for the emotional well-being of those who do not feel good. Compliance with a request to make a donation to a charitable cause is then a means of fulfilling the obligation as it is understood in this particular situation.
In Howard’s first experiment, an individual presenting himself as an employee of a charitable organization placed phone calls to randomly selected residents of Dallas, Texas. In the control group, the interlocutors were informed that in their neighbourhood they would soon have the opportunity to purchase cookies at a price of 25 cents, and the proceeds from the sale would go to benefit the organization of a holiday meal for those suffering from hunger (the experiment was conducted in the period before Thanksgiving). Participants were asked if they would allow the person selling the cookies to visit them at their home.
In respect of the experimental group, after introducing himself the researcher first asked the interlocutor how he was feeling, and then – depending on the answer – said he was either glad or sorry to hear that, after which he proceeded to explain that a charitable cookie sale was being organized and asked if they would be interested in purchasing some cookies. It turned out that people from the experimental group agreed with greater frequency (25%) to have a cookieThe role of wording the request 81 salesperson and representative of the charity committee visit them than those from the control group (10%). Nevertheless, the question arises whether the more frequent compliance of people from the experimental group did not result from the simple fact that the person conducting the telephone conversation came across as more polite.
It could be assumed that asking how one feels and responding with satisfaction when the answer is positive (or with sympathy when the answer is not so positive) is polite behaviour. Indeed, it would not be a strange thing for people to consent more often to a request from a person who is behaving pleasantly compared to the same request issued in a less pleasant manner. In order to exclude this interpretation, Howard conducted a second experiment in which an additional experimental group was introduced.
In this case, the person conducting the study started the conversation by expressing the hope that his interlocutor was feeling well. It turned out that compliance among participants in that group was equal to that recorded in the control group, and was half that of the experimental group. This pattern of results led Howard to accept that the factor of politeness exhibited by the indi- vidual asking for help could not explain the differences in compliance rates across individual groups.
In his third experiment Howard undertook a precise analysis of the responses of those asked how they felt, demonstrating that the better their declared mood, the more often they expressed willingness to admit the cookie salesperson into their home and the more cookies they bought. People from the experimental group who declared they were in a bad mood were equally unlikely to participate in the charity drive as those who were not asked about their mood. In his interpretation of this pattern of results, Howard emphasizes that it is not a simple function of a good mood being favourable to altruistic behaviours, as people from the control group did not declare a worse mood yet they were clearly less inclined to comply with requests to join in the charity drive (while it is true that control group participants’ moods were not recorded, the random assignment of people to individual conditions should lead to that particular effect).
Thus of key importance is not necessarily the experience of a good mood, but rather of the public declaration of such feelings. Daniel Howard therefore concludes that asking people about their mood and expressing joy when they declare that they feel good is an effective social influence technique. He also proposes a name for this tech- nique, calling it “foot-in-the-mouth”.
Results similar to Howard’s were recorded by Valerie Fointiat (2000), who did not conduct her study by telephone, as did Howard, but rather in face-to-face interactions. Participants were asked to make a donation in support of those suffer- ing from hunger. In the control conditions this request was made directly – people were approached with the question of whether they would like to provide financial support for hungry residents of their city.
In the foot-in-the-mouth conditions this request was preceded by a question about their mood, to which the majority declared that it was good, at times responding even more enthusiastically. Fointiat also introduced a third group into the experimental design, as she was interested in82 The role of wording the request the effect generated by the combined application of the foot-in-the-mouth tech- nique and a technique familiar to us from the second chapter, door-in-the-face. In this case, the participant was first asked how he felt, then his response was heard and commented on, after which a very difficult request was made.
This request involved making a donation of food for the hungry once a week over a period of at least three months. When participants refused to fulfil this quite problematic request, they were immediately asked to do something much easier – to make a one-time donation to residents from their city who were suffering from hunger. It turned out that compliance with the target request was the lowest in the control group, higher in the group where the foot-in-the-mouth technique was applied, and the highest in conditions involving the joint application of that technique with influence based on the concept of door-in-the-face.
Valerie Fointiat managed not only to replicate the results achieved by Howard, but also demonstrated that the technique he described works equally in conditions where the contact between the person making the request and the addressee did not involve a telephone call. The results of the experiments conducted by Howard and the study done by Fointiat – who refers to his proposed theoretical interpretation when discussing her results – demonstrate that asking people how they feel and then declaring satisfac- tion upon hearing of their good mood serves to increase those people’s inclination to comply with a request to participate in a charitable campaign. Insofar as this particular result does not give rise to any doubts, the issue of the mechanism under- lying this truth is a different matter.
It does not seem that Daniel Howard succeeded in convincingly proving that the mechanism of commitment and consistency lies at the heart of compliance when applying the foot-in-the-mouth technique. First and foremost, it is not entirely clear why people who declare they are in a good mood should feel obliged to ensure those who have no reason to feel good themselves experience the same feeling. In reality we are not dealing with an obli- gation that would directly and logically result from a public declaration (as we would in the case of a declaration such as “I believe we should help people who are experiencing difficulties in life”), but at most with a discrepancy between one’s declaration of a good mood and the implied information that there are some who have no reason to be in such a good mood.
Also, by accepting Howard’s interpreta- tion, we should assume that the participants in his second experiment who heard that they felt good and did not dispute this should also (at least to a certain degree) feel obliged to help improve the mood of others. Meanwhile, in the case of this group the rate of compliance was practically identical to that in the control group. In many psychological studies it has been demonstrated that the experience of a worsened mood does not facilitate engagement in altruistic behaviours (e.g.
Milberg & Clark, 1988; Forgas, 1998). The results of Howard’s third experiment are consistent with this principle. Individuals declaring they did not feel good when asked about their mood were equally disinclined to engage in helping the needy as people from the control group.
We may assume that in American culture, with its social norm of reporting one is in at least a good mood; admitting to a more negative disposition occurs when one is in fact in a very poor mood indeed. ItThe role of wording the request 83 should thus come as no surprise that people who report precisely just such a mood rarely engage in altruistic behaviours. We may, however, ask the question of whether we would record a similar effect in a culture where the norm is to declare a bad mood.
If it turned out that people declaring this kind of mood engaged in altruistic behaviours with greater frequency than those from a control group, such a pattern of results could not be interpreted in the manner Howard proposes (after all, “If I am in a bad mood, I don’t feel any obligation to do something in order for others to feel good”). One of what is likely a very small number of countries where a norm of complaining exists is Poland (Czapinski, 1993; Wojciszke & Baryla, 2005). A good illustration of how complaining is a cultural norm in Poland is the results of a simple survey study in which respondents were asked about everyday conversations.
It turned out that 61% of Polish respondents declared that they liked to talk about high prices, 56% about the spread of poor manners, and 47% about the ineffectiveness and amorality of Polish politicians (Wojciszke & Baryla, 2005). Cultural differences between Poland and the majority of other countries in the world (including the USA) are also reflected in declarations of one’s emotional experiences. The most spectacular illustration of these differences would seem to come from the studies which I will now proceed to discuss.
In 1937, one of a small number of contemporary psychological journals published a brief report of results from studies conducted by Winifred Johnson. The participants in this study were a 30-person cohort of American students who responded to just one recurring question. They were asked to estimate their mood in comparison to how they usually feel, using an 11-point scale with extremes of -5 and +5.
The middle of the scale was 0, representing a “like usual” mood. Of course, one person’s mood is subject to greater or lesser variations. While we generally feel “like usual” (in Johnson’s study we would select 0), we can experience days when we feel worse than usual, as well as days when we feel better than usual.
We should have, on average, as many better days than worse ones. The average result generated by each of the participants should, therefore, oscillate around zero. Johnson’s calculations, however, showed that the respondents must have generally felt better than usual, because the average result recorded by each of them over a 65-day period was +1.2.
In the 1990s I replicated Johnson’s experiment in Poland (Dolinski, 1996), extending its time frame to 100 days. It turned out that all of the Polish respondents achieved a lower result than the neutral point of zero, and in the majority of cases (19 of 24) I recorded a statistically significant effect. For Polish students, it was typical for them to feel worse than usual!
Taking advantage of the fact that Poland is ensconced in a culture of complaining, Magda Nawrat (1997) conducted an experiment designed as a cultural test of the correctness of the interpretation suggested by Howard. Let us observe that the foot-in-the-mouth technique requires those asked “how do you feel” to respond that they at least feel good. This technique works in the United States (as shown by Howard), France (as shown by Fointiat), and probably in the vast majority of other countries because most people reply in just this way when asked about their emotional state (and only those people consent to the request to engage in a84 The role of wording the request charitable campaign more often than participants in the control group).
However, because it can be expected that the standard response in Poland will be a reaction like “not so good”, “bad”, or at best “not too bad”, this technique should prove ineffective (to put it more precisely: it should not be successful if the mechanism of commitment and consistency as proposed by Howard lies at the heart of the technique’s effectiveness). As a result, and somewhat paradoxically, the ineffective- ness of this technique in studies conducted in Poland (or in other countries where a culture of complaining holds sway) would provide an argument in support of Howard’s interpretation of the psychological mechanism driving the effectiveness of the social influence technique he studied. In the aforementioned experiment by Magda Nawrat, participants were drawn from residents of dormitories in Wrocław.
Participants identified in a dormitory and assigned to the control group were given information about the organization of a campaign to support a young children’s home. This campaign, they were told, consisted of collecting money, books and toys. They were informed that the drive would be starting soon, and then asked to give their address or telephone number in order to arrange the details.
In the experimental group the request for assistance was preceded by a question about their mood. Participants were asked “how they were doing” in the face of the upcoming examination session. It turned out that participants from the experimental group (asked about their mood) were more likely to provide contact information (62.5%) than participants from the control group (27.5%).
It was also the case that from among the 40 peo- ple from the experimental group, only 15 declared a positive emotional state. The level of compliance among those people did not differ from that observed among the 25 people who declared a different mood (i.e. negative or neutral).
As in the case of Howard’s study, it transpired that asking people about their mood increased the chances that they would agree to the later proposition to take part in a charity drive. However, in contrast to his experiments, the declaration of a negative or neutral mood also served to boost engagement. Another test of the hypothesis that the foundation of the foot-in-the-mouth technique’s success is the mechanism of commitment and consistency could be a situation in which the request to be fulfilled is not related to a charitable campaign, but rather to a clearly commercial venture.
If it were the case that also in these circumstances people asked about their mood complied more frequently with sug- gestions addressed to them, it would prove difficult to continue supporting an interpretation based on the aforementioned mechanism. Howard acknowledges this explicitly, suggesting that the regularities he recorded should only be limited to situations in which the addressee of the request knows that the person making the request will not personally benefit from it being carried out. Magda Nawrat, Iza Rudak and I decided to examine whether this significant limitation actually occurs (Dolinski, Nawrat & Rudak, 2001).
Our study’s participants were 100 women walking along the sidewalk in the centre of the city; 50 of them were randomly assigned to the control group, and the same number was assigned to the experimental group. A young woman servedThe role of wording the request 85 as the experimenter. She greeted participants from the experimental group, and then asked them how they were feeling.
If the participant responded that she was feeling good, the experimenter responded by saying: “I’m glad to hear that you’re feeling good”. If the participant responded by declaring something different than a good mood, the response went: “I’m sorry to hear that you’re not feeling par- ticularly good.” Regardless of the mood declared by the participant, the experimenter immediately followed up with the statement “I am selling aromatic Indian pastilles. Would you like to buy a box from me?” In the control group, people were greeted and immediately presented with the proposed transaction.
In the experimental group 11 out of 50 people decided to purchase the incense. In the control group, only 3 people did so (the difference in the proportions of people in both conditions who complied with the seller’s request was statistically significant). From among those asked about their mood, 21 declared a positive emotional state, while the remaining participants reported feeling either bad or not very good.
It turned out that the declared mood had no influence on the tendency to purchase the pastilles: in the experimental group they were bought by 5 of those who had declared a good mood, and by 6 of the remaining participants. We can again observe that asking people about their mood boosts the chances of inducing compliance also in situations when they declare feeling bad. Importantly, this experiment also demonstrated that the foot-in-the-mouth technique, contrary to the predictions made by Howard (1990), proved equally successful in conditions involving a request of a clearly commercial nature rather than a charitable one.
We now know what is not the source of the reported pattern of results: as Howard himself demonstrated, it is not one’s mood. In turn, studies conducted in Poland suggest that it is also not the mechanism of commitment and consistency assumed by Howard. Why, then, is the foot-in-the-mouth technique effective?
To what psychological mechanisms does it owe its success? An interesting interpretation of the phenomenon under analysis here has been proposed by Kelly Aune and Michael Basil (1994). In their view, asking people about their mood and then expressing satisfaction that it is good leads to the formation of a bond with the person asking the question.
Asking about some- one’s emotional state is something qualitatively different from asking for the time, or for directions to the university library. Someone who asks us how we are doing is expressing interest in us as people, while someone who asks us for the time or for directions is only interested in his or her own problems. An inquiry about mood thus constitutes an expression of interpersonal warmth and empha- sizes that the asker and the asked are on some level not indifferent to each other.
It could be said that asking this question leads to a particular relationship of intimacy and closeness. This relationship leads to the person being approached for assistance incurring an obligation to help. Indeed, there is a social norm requiring us to help those with whom something binds us, particularly if provid- ing such assistance does not result in a significantly negative impact on our own interests; this was precisely the case in both Howard’s experiment as well as in the others discussed in this section.86 The role of wording the request Of course, a question about mood is only one of many ways in which we can establish a relationship of intimacy and closeness with another person.
Aune and Basil thus conclude that compliance with a request can also be induced in other ways than expressing concern for well-being and the verbal techniques involved in creating the aforementioned relationship. They additionally present their own study, in which the experimenter either directly asked students encountered at a university campus to donate to a charity; asking first how they were feeling and then requesting the donation; or asking first if they studied at that university and then, upon receiving confirmation, declaring that she did too and following this up with a request for a donation. The first group was the control group.
The second was a copy of the conditions set up by Howard in which, depending on the theo- retical assumption adopted, either the mechanism of consistency or a relationship of closeness was activated. The third created conditions in which a feeling of close- ness was established resulting from membership of the same community. It turned out that participants from the last group complied with the greatest frequency, while those in the first group did so the least (see Table 4.2).
A second, complementary experiment conducted by these authors was done using “paper and pencil”. Study participants were given descriptions of the three experimental scenarios described above, and were asked to assess the relationship between the participants in the interactions (i.e. the experimenter and the person she approached).
It turned out that this relationship was perceived as being the closest in the conditions where the conversation involved studying at the same university, while it was the most distant when the experimenter directly addressed the participant with a request for a donation. In the authors’ opinion, this indicates that the perception of closeness in interpersonal relationships constitutes the mechanism responsible for compliance in both Howard’s experiments and their own. It should be added that establishing a relationship of closeness could also be the mechanism responsible for the effects noted in the Polish studies conducted by Nawrat (1997) and by Dolinski et al., (2001).
The mere question about one’s mood builds a relationship of closeness, and this in turn induces people to agree to carry out requests involving engagement in a charity drive, as well as to react positively to proposals with a commercial slant. My collaborators and I, however, have offered yet another interpretation of the effects recorded in studies on the foot-in-the-mouth technique (Dolinski et al., 2001). Because this issue goes beyond a simple explanation of the mechanism TABLE 4.2 Compliance by group in Aune and Basil (1994) experiment Complied Refused (n) Standard 5 46 51 FITM feeling-state 13 38 51 FITM relational obligations 24 27 51 Source: Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 1994, vol.
24, p. 551 Copyright: 2006, John Wiley and Sons.The role of wording the request 87 facilitating compliance on the part of people subjected to this technique, it is worthy of its own section, which follows. Dialogue involvement In the preceding section we analyzed the “foot-in-the-mouth” technique.
Let us recall that in Howard’s experiments the experimenter called up participants and introduced himself as an employee of a charitable organization. In the control conditions, he then immediately asked his interlocutor to purchase some cookies and informed him that the funds collected from their sale would go towards organ- izing a holiday meal for people suffering from hunger. In the experimental conditions, before the sale of the cookies was mentioned, he asked his interlocutor about his mood, listened to the answer, commented on it appropriately and only then formulated the request to buy the cookies.
People asked about their emotional state bought the cookies far more frequently than those who were not asked. Howard assumed that the sole difference between the control and the experimen- tal groups was that participants in the latter group had been asked about their mood. In my opinion, there was yet another difference: in the control group the contact was based on a monologue, whereas in the experimental group it was grounded in a dialogue.
In the control group, the study participant was informed of the character and the objective of a charity drive, and then asked to take part. In the experimental group, the participant was given a question, responded, heard a comment on the response, and only then was the request issued. The same procedure was used in our experiments as well, in which we tested the technique described by Howard.
Both when we attempted to convince students to join in a charity drive (Nawrat, 1997) and when we sold Indian incense to passers-by (Dolinski et al., 2001), we used a monologue with the control groups, while we engaged participants from the experimental groups in a dialogue. The studies of Aune and Basil (1994) and Fointiat (2000) were also constructed in an analogical manner. The control groups were directly asked for something (using a mono- logue), while the experimental groups experienced a dialogue between someone who asked for something shortly after the dialogue had been established and some- one who was asked for that thing.
Why might different modes of communication have an effect in respect of social influence? Dialogue and monologue are the primary modes of interpersonal communication. While monologue as a form of one-sided communication would seem “cold”, a dialogue, whose essence consists in the mutual exchange of infor- mation between participants in the interaction, would seem “warm”.
It could be said that a monologue is associated with avoiding a deeper interac- tion with the other person. If someone addresses us in the form of a monologue, we usually just listen to him and then conclude the interaction. We can also merely pretend to be listening, or we can even ignore what that person is saying.
Dialogue is a completely different case. This form of communication demands cognitive activity. In discussing with someone we are forced to listen to him in order to88 The role of wording the request respond to his ideas and arguments.
These are not the only differences between dialogue and monologue. It would seem that while the convention of verbal com- munication rooted in monologue is typical of interactions between those who do not know each other, dialogue is primarily characteristic of interactions between people who are familiar with one another. It could also be judged that in the case of a drastic decline in the relationship between two people who know each other, their mode of communication shifts from dialogue to monologue.
Workplace colleagues in conflict with each other do not engage in conversation (they do not use dialogue), but they can, if the situation demands, exchange terse messages based on monologue (such as “The boss wants you to prepare a report”, or “Last week I wrote the report, now it’s your turn”). Also, a frustrated parent engaged in punishing his child who has seriously abused his trust can say “Listen to what I have to say to you now” and launches into a monologue, while generally communicating with the child in the form of a dialogue. The transition from dialogue to monologue is thus associated with a sudden and radical decline in a mutual relationship.
If we agree with the assumption that in conditions of interaction between people who know each other well the dominant mode of communication is dialogue, while in conditions of interaction between strangers it is monologue, this will have real significance for explaining the results of all of the experiments presented in the preceding section. Indeed, if we accept that a given mode of communication can serve as a stimulus that activates a given reaction pattern, then a monologue would activate the pattern of behaviour assigned to strangers, while a dialogue would activate the pattern of behaviour assigned to people we are familiar with. Because people are more inclined to comply with the requests of people they know rather than of strangers (e.g.
Argyle & Henderson, 1984; Roloff, 1987), dialogue may serve to motivate them to comply with a request more effectively than monologue. We could thus assume that it is precisely for this reason interactions based on dialogue between the experimenter and the participant (typical for those familiar with one another) led to more frequent compliance in the studies presented above than did contacts rooted in monologue (characteristic of people who do not know each other). From this perspective it could be said that in Howard’s (1990) experiments the key aspect was not that participants were asked about their mood, but that they were asked about anything at all, and then something related to their responses was said.
Along the same lines, in the experiment performed by Aune and Basil (1994) what was crucial was not that participants were asked if they were students from the local university, but simply that a question was asked of them, and then their answer was commented on. In both cases the study participants were ensnared in dialogue. In our experiment, dedicated to verifying the assumption that it is the engage- ment in dialogue that plays a key role, we approached students on the campus of a Polish university.
They were randomly assigned to one of eight experimental con- ditions, with 50 people in each group. Independently of each other we differentiated the mode of communication (monologue – dialogue), posed or did not pose a question about mood, and fostered or did not foster closeness based on socialThe role of wording the request 89 identity. For example, in conditions of monologue, a question about mood and absence of closeness, the experimenter (a 20-year-old woman) addressed partici- pants in the following manner: “I hope you are doing well today.
I am collecting money for children with special needs. Would you like to contribute, please?” However, in conditions of dialogue, without a declaration of mood and without fostering closeness, the experimenter asked participants: “I guess you’re a student here. May I ask what you major in?” After receiving the answer, she said, “Well, do you consider it worth studying?” listened to the answer, and asked for a donation.
The analyses later conducted showed that participants in conditions of dialogue more frequently (31%) agreed to the experimenter’s request for a donation than in conditions of monologue (11%). The average sum given was also significantly higher in conditions of dialogue than those of monologue. The conditions of monologue that did not broach the subject of mood and did not foster closeness can be treated as the base conditions for estimating the effectiveness of various means of exerting influence on people’s submissiveness, applied in the remaining seven experimental conditions.
In other words, these conditions can be treated as a control group. A series of pairwise comparisons between the ‘control’ group and each of the seven remaining groups demon- strated that compliance was greater across all four groups in which dialogue was applied compared to the control group. The average sums raised in each of those groups compared to the control group was also higher.
However, all of the differences between each of the three groups in which monologue was applied and the control group were far from statistically significant. The results of this study are presented in Table 4.3. TABLE 4.3 Proportion of persons complying with the experimenter’s requests, average amount of donation (in parentheses), and average duration of the interaction (in seconds) in each condition in Dolinski et al.
(2001) experiment Closeness No Yes Mood Mood No Yes No Yes Monologue Compliance 08 (.044) 08 (.090) 16 (.108) 12 (.084) Time 10.22 17.54 16.36 20.78 Dialogue Compliance 32 (.262) 24 (.250) 36 (.398) 32 (.294) Time 23.52 18.44 16.42 31.78 Source: Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2001, vol. 27, p. 1400 Copyright 2001 by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc.90 The role of wording the request These results are very consistent with our hypothesis, which assumes that the activation of dialogue as the mode of communication increases people’s readiness to comply with requests made of them.
Emphasis on a relationship of closeness or of an interlocutor’s good mood in the context of monologue turned out to be an insufficient way of inducing submissiveness. However, if our assumption is correct that the key is to ensnare the other person in a dialogue, then a similar pattern of results should be achieved in conditions where the subject of the conversation is neither one’s emotional state nor something referring to a shared community identity. What is more, engaging someone in dialogue should prove equally effective in a situation that is purely commercial.
Thus we decided in another of our studies to sell Indian incense sticks on the street. In the monologue conditions we simply pitched our product to passers-by, encouraging them to make a purchase. In conditions of dialogue we asked passers- by who they thought was more sensitive to smell, men or women?
After hearing their response, we asked for a justification. After our interlocutor provided some arguments, we offered to sell them some incense. It turned out that, while in conditions of monologue we succeeded in selling the incense to roughly 1 in 17 people, this number was 1 in 5 when conditions of dialogue were used.
We also noted the responses of participants regarding which sex they felt was more sensitive to smells. One might assume that the mechanism of commitment and consistency would lead to those responding that their own sex was more sensitive to smells would be more inclined to purchase incense than those who declared that it was the opposite sex whose olfactory senses were more acute (“Since I’m particularly predisposed to take pleasure from smells, then I should take advantage of this opportunity”). However, it turned out that this aspect was of no significance.
This experiment was yet another demonstration of how using dialogue to ensnare a person whom we are attempting to exert social influence over is a means of increasing his readiness to comply with our request. A similar effect was recorded by Sebastien Meineri and Nicolas Gueguen (2011). In their experiment, they asked participants to take a telephone survey about their local newspaper.
In the control conditions they made the request at once, while in the experimental conditions they began by saying “I hope I’m not disturbing you, am I?”, waiting in half of the cases for an answer from the respondent while in the remaining cases proceeding immediately to the request for participation in the survey. It turned out that, in comparison to the control group, only those who were allowed to respond to the statement “I hope I’m not disturbing you” agreed more frequently to participate in the survey. Those who were told this but had no opportunity to respond consented to take the survey as rarely as participants from the control group.
The key element, therefore, was the presence of dialogue. Because we assumed that the use of a dialogue-based mode of communication would automatically activate the scenario “conversation with an acquaintance”, it could be thought that particular sequences of that scenario associate with a positive reaction to the request will be automatically and without reflection carried out alsoThe role of wording the request 91 when the conversation concerned banal issues of minor importance for the individual. However, if the conversation were to turn towards important things, then a more detailed analysis of the issues under discussion should be expected – the individual should function on a more reflexive level.
These expectations are a reflection of the rich literature on mechanisms of persuasion. Many studies have demonstrated that a high level of interest in information coming to us leads us to process it in a highly regimented manner, clearly engaging our cognitive resources in effortful mental processes. In turn, insignificant interest in the content of infor- mation coming to us results in a more superficial and automatic processing of information, and is associated with a very low level of cognitive engagement, referred to as noneffortful mental processes (see e.g.
Chaiken, Liberman & Eagly, 1989; Chaiken & Stangor, 1987; Maio & Olson, 1995; Petty & Cacioppo, 1990). In the last case, people pay less attention to the content of the information, and more to so-called peripheral issues such as whether the author of the message is nice, is an authority, is physically attractive, etc. In respect of the issue of interest to us here, it may be accepted that, in the event, the conversation involves an issue of significance to the individual, not only the activation of dialogue will be important but its content will be as well.
A person being approached in these conditions will pay attention to what his interlocutor is saying, as well as his attitude towards the issues under discussion. However, if the conversation concerns relatively unimportant matters, the simple fact of employing dialogue as the mode of communication will be the key issue. Dialogue as a mode of communication in this situation plays the same role as authority or the pleasant appearance of the person communicating the message does in studies on persua- sion.
Dialogue creates a positive attitude on the part of the addressee towards the person speaking with him, but also renders him less active, and as a result he will not engage in deep reflection on the information reaching him. Thus, from the perspective of boosting compliance – which is of interest to us here – of importance in a dialogue on a subject of minor significance is not whether the initiator of the conversation espouses the same attitude as the person being approached or a different one. In the event of a discussion on important subjects, this issue may take on real significance.
Only a dialogue based on a con- sensus of opinions should aid in boosting compliance. To examine whether this is really the case, we conducted another experiment in which we took advantage of the dramatic situation residents of Wrocław experienced following a giant flood that washed over the city. The experiment (Dolinski et al., 2001) was conducted in the streets of the city just after the flood waters had receded.
In the control group, the experimenter informed passers-by that studies were being conducted concerning various issue associated with daily life in the city, and issued a request that they respond to a few questions concerning the local press. He added that this would take about 15 minutes to do. In the experimental conditions this question was preceded by a dialogue with the study participant, about a topic of either minor interest or of great interest.
The topic of minor interest was the yellow colour of the new phone booths that had92 The role of wording the request just been put up on the streets of Wrocław. The experimenter asked some partici- pants if they liked the new phone booths or not. The topic of great interest was the issue of eliminating the consequences of the flood in the city.
The experi- menter asked these participants if they felt the clean-up after the flood was proceeding quickly and in an orderly manner, or not. In the case of both dialogues the experimenter’s reaction to the opinions voiced by participants was differentiated. Regardless of the opinion formulated by a participant, in half of the cases the experimenter declared that he was of the very same opinion, while in the remain- ing cases he said that he did not agree and had an entirely different opinion on that subject.
Immediately after this, the experimenter asked the participant to sacrifice 15 minutes in order to respond to questions about the local press. It turned out that, whether a participant agreed to the 15-minute interview depended on the level of engagement brought about by the initial conversation, as well as its course. The results of this study are presented in Table 4.4.
The rate of compliance in groups where communication with study partici- pants was done by way of dialogue (34.6%) was greater than the analogical statistic for the control group, in respect of which monologue was applied (20%). A series of pairwise comparisons between the control group and the four experimental groups, however, demonstrated that the rate of compliance in the group discussing the topic of great interest with an experimenter expressing an analogical opinion was higher than in the control group, but the rate of compliance in the group discussing the topic of great interest with an experimenter expressing a contrary opinion was similar to that of the control group. When the subject was of little interest, agreement or disagreement with the experimenter generated similar rates of submission, which themselves were higher than in the control group.
The results of the experiment thus turned out to be in line with our expecta- tions. In conditions where the dialogue touched on issues of minor importance, the simple fact of activating that mode of communication was sufficient to induce TABLE 4.4 Percentage of persons complying with the experimenter’s request to devote 15 minutes of their time to answer questions about the local press in Dolinski, Nawrat and Rudak (2001) experiment Compliance (%) Monologue 20.0 Dialogue Low involvement Disagreement 36.6 Agreement 35.0 High involvement Disagreement 23.3 Agreement 43.3 Source: Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2001, vol. 27, p.
1403. Copyright 2001 by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc.The role of wording the request 93 compliance among participants, while in conditions involving an important discussion only those participants whose opinion the experimenter claimed to share demonstrated increased compliance. In a series of experiments we succeeded in demonstrating that the initiation of a dialogue with a stranger makes that person more likely to comply with a request subsequently directed towards him.
Considering that the subjects broached in the conversations concerned various questions, and the requests involved various actions, we may assume that the rule we have uncovered is of a largely universal character. The results of the last experiment presented in this section also demonstrate certain limitations of this rule: when the conversation relates to important issues, dialogue only serves to increase submissiveness when the interlocutors are in possession of analogical opinions. The power of imagination Our brains store an incredible amount of all sorts of information.
While certain cognitive content is very readily accessible, gaining access to other content can be significantly more difficult. The essence of this phenomenon is illustrated in a study by Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman (1982), who asked over 100 people whether there were more words in English beginning with the letter k than those in which the letter k appeared as the third letter of the word. While in fact there are more than twice as many words in which k is the third letter, compared to words which begin with k, the large majority of study participants declared the opposite.
Why do people commit such obvious mistakes? The problem is that the manner in which our memory is organized is favourable to searching for words based on their first letter, but it does not facilitate a search for letters in the middle. To simplify even further, it was easier for people to recall words beginning with the letter k than to recall those in which k was the third letter.
The more that something is directly “accessible” to our memory or our consciousness, the more it seems likely to us. Psychologists interested in the above rule discovered by Tversky and Kahneman decided to examine to what degree it constituted a general principle, and also if it could be applied to social phenomena. From the perspective of interest to us here, the most interesting question was posed by John Carroll.
In an article published in 1978 he wondered whether imagining certain events would lead to an increase in the subjective probability that they could actually occur. In his experiments – which today constitute classics in the literature – Carroll supplied participants with a scenario for some incident in which they themselves were the focal point (e.g. they took part in a trip to another continent, passed an exam at university, communicated successfully in a foreign language they were not fluent in) and asked them to imagine such a situation.
It turned out that following this suggestion, people estimated the possibility of a given event taking place in their real life much higher than those who were simply asked to estimate the potential that they would experience an analogical situation. In Carroll’s opin- ion, the act of imagining a given event – according to a properly constructed94 The role of wording the request scenario – renders the event more cognitively accessible, and by the same token it seems subjectively more likely to the individual. Larry Gregory, Robert Cialdini and Kathleen Carpenter (1982) began with the assumption that this rule can be used in social influence, and proposed a technique whose essence consists in saying the words “Imagine that .
. .”. The researchers conducted a thought experiment, in cooperation with a television station from the city of Tempe, Arizona, just outside Phoenix.
Suburban home- owners were unwitting participants in the study. They were randomly assigned to one of two groups – control and experimental. Each of the participants was visited by a female experimenter.
In the case of the control group, she applied typical marketing techniques – she said that the company offered a broad selection of entertainment and informational channels. She also added that buying a subscription was a great way to save money: rather than spending it on fuel and child care – normal aspects of spending time outside the home – they could spend time in a very pleasant manner in the home, with the family, with friends or alone. In the case of the experimental group she also presented basic information about the cable TV offer, declaring that it contained a broad range of informational and entertainment channels, but she then appealed to the imagination of the participant by presenting a scenario.
She used arguments such as “Take a moment and think of how, instead of spending money on the babysitter and gas, and then having to put up with the hassles of ‘going out’, you will be able to spend your time at home, with your family, alone or with your friends” (p. 95). Participants were then asked to respond to a few questions concerning such topics as whether they felt people would like to have cable TV in their homes, would they be inclined to buy a subscription, would they have a positive attitude towards it, and would they be interested in receiving additional information.
Study participants who had been asked to engage their imagination responded more positively to these questions. The next portion of this experiment produced even more interesting results. After a few weeks had passed, each of the study participants was visited by another person.
This time, it was an employee of the cable television company unaware of the group to which a given person had been assigned. He offered a one-week free trial loan of equipment for receiving the cable TV signal, as well as the opportunity to purchase a full set of equipment and programmes if the customer decided to get a subscription following the end of the one-week period. It turned out that in the group on which the “Imagine that .
. .” technique was used, more people decided to borrow the equipment for a trial week than those in the control group. The differences between the two groups become even more visible when we compare the purchase decisions they made after the trial week.
In the “Imagine that . . .” conditions, nearly two-and-a-half times more people decided to purchase a cable TV subscription than those in whose case more conventional marketing methods were applied.
A similar pattern of results was reported by Anna Schlosser (2003), who replaced the cable television subscription with a digital camera, and real behaviour with theThe role of wording the request 95 declared intention to purchase the camera. The “Imagine that . .
.” technique in her experiment also proved more effective than conventional means of convincing an undecided customer to make a purchase. Why is such a simple technique not applied on a widespread basis? One of the important limitations in its effectiveness could be the difficulty involved in imagin- ing oneself in particular situations.
In one experiment, student participants were presented with a story about an illness that spread around a university campus. Some of them were asked to imagine that they were exhibiting symptoms of the disease; half of these participants were given symptoms that are easy to imagine, while the other half were given symptoms difficult to imagine. The experimental design also included a control group that was not asked to imagine anything.
Study participants were asked to estimate the likelihood that they could contract the disease. It turned out that participants given more easily imaginable symptoms felt they were more likely to fall ill than the control group, while those with symptoms more difficult to imagine felt they were not in danger of catching the disease (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman & Reynolds, 2002). Petia Petrova and Robert Cialdini (2008) recorded a similar effect in studies concerning social influence.
They proposed to their American subjects that they consider the possibility of spending their next vacation in Central Europe. In the standard conditions they were shown pictures of the landscape in Bulgaria and encouraged to take advantage of the opportunity to take a vacation there. In the experimental conditions, the participants were asked to imagine themselves spend- ing time there.
Half of those asked to do so were shown a crisp, clear picture while the other half were shown a fuzzy, unclear image. The latter group experienced difficulty in imagining themselves in the scenario that was presented to them. It turned out that the “Imagine that .
. .” technique was only effective when partici- pants in the experiment saw pictures they could make out easily. This means that the technique ceases to be effective when imagining oneself in a given situation is difficult.
To put it differently, the technique fails when activating the imagination of a scenario involving oneself as the star runs into problems. Difficulties in imagining something can occur for a wide range of reasons – both objective (something can be considered highly unlikely, thus rendering it difficult to imagine) and purely technical (as in the experiment of Petrova and Cialdini). All of them, however, can render the technique of activating the imagination an ineffective one.
Our attention is drawn by Shelley Taylor and her collaborators (Taylor, Pham, Rivkin & Armor, 1998) to another important issue related to the effectiveness of imagining various situations in the context of evoking behavioural changes. While the authors do this in the context of people ridding themselves of various problems in their lives and achieving their desired outcomes, as we will soon see, their work also turned out to have important implications for the psychology of social influ- ence and served to initiate a series of studies on that subject. Taylor and her collaborators drew attention to the fact that imagining a positive state of affairs is an extremely frequent recommendation made in popular self-help literature96 The role of wording the request designed to help people improve their lives.
The aforementioned authors undertook a critical review of studies addressing this issue and stated that giving ourselves up to our dreams does not always bring us closer to our goals. They therefore proposed drawing a distinction between two types of imagina- tion concerning desirable states of affairs. The first is imagination focused on the process of achieving a given state of affairs, while the second is imagination focused on an end result.
In respect of the former, people imagine themselves engaging in activities that lead to their dreamed-of result. This type of fantasizing contains a sequence of actions exhibiting a causal link with some desired objective. It serves to facilitate the development of plans and courses of action, and as a result leads one to believe that the likelihood of achieving the dreamed-of goal is relatively high, but on condition of engaging in very clearly-defined actions.
Such dreams focused on the process of achieving a goal are usually very constructive and do, in fact, increase the chances it will be accomplished. However, things look entirely different when considering dreams focused exclusively on an end result, where the imagination consists of only the desired final effect. This does not provide a foun- dation for mentally working out various means of achieving that goal and developing plans.
As a consequence, after being jolted awake from their dreams, people see only the contrast between the dull reality and the objective they wish to reach. Since the means of reaching the goal were not an element of the fantasiz- ing, the goal itself seems equally (in extreme cases even more) unreal as it did before the daydreaming began. This sort of imagination is not as effective at improving the likelihood of an individual achieving a desired goal.
To illustrate the idea, an alcoholic should imagine that he is capable of resisting the urge to lift a glass rather than being happy because he does not even feel drawn to alcohol. One who dreams of becoming a famous athlete, in turn, should imagine the difficult, day-to-day training, and gradually improving his personal bests rather than dream- ing of standing on the top of the podium listening to the strains of his national anthem over the applause of the crowd. This differentiation of two types of dreams quickly attracted the interest of researchers on social influence.
Jennifer Escalas and Mary Luce (2003) explored whether inducing people in a different way to dream could impact their readiness to purchase certain products. Students served as participants in their study, and the product was a non-existent vitamin formula – Millennium – whose formula was supposedly designed with students in mind. The students were asked to allow themselves to engage in fantasizing associated with the product; some of them were asked to think about how their health would improve while using the product, and the others were asked to focus on how they would incorporate taking the product into the rhythm of their everyday activities.
As it turned out, students from the latter group declared their desire to purchase Millennium more often than their fellow students from the former group. The researchers recorded similar results in later experiments during which they examined people’s readiness to purchase shampoo (Escalas & Luce, 2004). In conditions of concentration on the process, the participants were supposed to imagine how they would feel washing their hairThe role of wording the request 97 using the shampoo.
In conditions of concentration on the result, they were supposed to imagine how they would feel when using the shampoo improved their appearance. The authors also draw attention to the role of their discovery in marketing. While advertisements often appeal to the imaginations of their targets, it would seem that they order us to imagine final effects rather than the processes leading to them.
The aforementioned results demonstrate that the “Imagine that . . .” technique can prove effective in affecting people’s decision-making when making consumer purchases, but only in certain circumstances.
The real problem for practitioners, however, is not how to induce desire and make people imagine buying various, often utterly needless, items; it is also important that they do not spontaneously imagine how they will run out of money for the things they really need. Summary Words play a very significant role in social influence processes. Many studies have shown that seemingly unimportant differences in the wording of a message may have a serious impact on people’s readiness to carry out requests and orders addressed to them.
The results of some experiments flew in the face of conven- tional wisdom. While it is most certainly the case that adding the word “please” to a standard request will generally increase the chances of it being fulfilled, this is not an unconditional rule. Studies have shown, for example, that if a request for a donation to a charitable cause is made by a person who is only organizing the help (and is not a beneficiary of it), then adding the word “please” to the message may in fact weaken its effectiveness.
One of the most well-known techniques exploiting the power of the word is “even a penny will help”. We often refuse various requests to support charity cam- paigns, justifying the decision by saying that we can’t help everyone, or that we are not rich enough to support each worthy initiative. However, it turns out that if the phrase “even a penny will help” (or something similar) appears following a standard request, this manner of thinking is blocked and people are more likely to carry out requests being made of them.
Another technique discussed in this chapter is based on the fact that people often refuse to carry out small requests without justifying the reasons for such a decision. It turns out that if they are directly asked to explain why they have refused to help out, their desire to avoid becoming ensnared in embarrassing justi- fications boosts the chances that they will carry out the request. A similar increase in compliance is noted when emphasis is placed on the fact that the choice of whether to agree or not belongs solely to the addressee of the request.
Most likely, people feel more appreciated when they establish that it is solely dependent on them whether they choose to help, rather than when they think their decision results to a greater or lesser degree from external pressure. Many studies have been devoted to the phenomenon of labelling. Defining people using dispositional traits often leads to them behaving in a manner consistent98 The role of wording the request with the content of those labels.
This is especially likely when the source of the label is trustworthy, and the label itself refers to areas of an individual’s self-awareness in respect of which he is not entirely sure who he really is. This technique also has some interesting variations such as asking questions leading the individual to label himself, and the expert snare in which the competences of the individual in a given area are emphasized. The next technique discussed in this chapter was foot-in-the-mouth.
According to this technique, in order to increase the chances that a person we approach with a request to make a donation on behalf of a charity will react positively, we should first ask how he is feeling. After receiving a response that he feels good, we should express our satisfaction, and only then make our request for his support for charitable activity. Some believe that this technique’s effectiveness is based on the mechanism of commitment and consistency.
Someone who has publicly declared that he feels good should feel an obligation to act in a manner that will help others to feel good as well. An alternative interpretation of this effect refers to a relationship of intimacy and closeness that is formed when the question about well-being is asked. Yet another interpretation assumes that of key importance is not so much the question about mood, but questions themselves.
The answer to a question sets a conversation in motion. According to this interpretation, ensnaring our interlocutor in a dialogue about a neutral subject should boost later submissiveness. Another interesting social influence technique is inducing an individual to imagine particular circumstances.
In one related experiment it was demonstrated that people who were induced to imagine that they could keep tabs on social and political importance, while also being provided a rich selection of entertainment, were more likely to purchase a cable television subscription than people approached in a more traditional manner. Later research on the consequences of imagining various conditions demonstrated that the effectiveness of this technique is limited to conditions in which the individual does not experience any difficulties in imagining particular conditions or behaviours.5 INTERACTION DYNAMICS AND THE SURPRISE FACTOR The techniques discussed in this chapter are based on a particular course of events during an interaction between the requester and the person targeted with the request. We are not concerned here with a sequence of two subsequent requests, as in the case of the techniques discussed in Chapter 2, nor with a subtle appeal to the feeling of the target of a request’s self-worth, as in Chapter 3, but rather with the situation itself in which a dynamizing element is involved in the formulation of expectations.
There is always something exceptional taking place, something that removes the course of events from the sphere of the typical and routine. This unu- sual happenstance is, of course, no accident. The individual formulating the request is aware that without it, the chances that the request will be fulfilled would be significantly lower.
Underlying the effectiveness of such social influence techniques is the assump- tion that we quite often vacillate as to our decisions: Should we buy a particular car or not? Should we vote for one presidential candidate or another? Should we sign a petition supporting the introduction of the death penalty or not?
In the majority of such cases, our indecision results from weighing up the arguments “for and against”, with the scales failing to tip significantly in either direction. Even if we are inclined to follow one path over the other, the arguments in support of the remaining option are not so easily dismissed that we could take a decision with absolute certainty as to its correctness. The techniques described in this chapter are grounded in the common assumption that by introducing a particular dynamizing element into the structure of a situation we can ensure that, at least in the key moment during which the decision is taken, the individual targeted with the request will be convinced of the greater merit of the option that the requester would prefer to be chosen.
Let us examine some of these social influence techniques.100 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor That’s not all Although it would seem that the lower the price of a given product, the more people there are ready to buy it, salespeople know that quite often the opposite is the case. Indeed, customers often regard the price of a product as an indicator of its quality. They assume that “the more expensive, the better”.
This way of thinking is particularly typical of situations when estimating the quality of some item on the basis of measurable criteria is difficult, or when we lack sufficient knowledge in a given sphere. Discounts present us with a special kind of situation. For example, if we know that a washing machine nominally costs $800, but because the end of the year is approaching the store’s management is holding a sale and has reduced the price of the washing machine to $300.
We know that it is a device of good quality (the high initial price tells us so), while at the same time we are now able to afford it, because it is no longer expensive. From the psychological perspective, a discount draws its strength from the fact that the situation is initially characterized by arguments supporting the purchase of the aforementioned washing machine (it’s expensive, so it’s good), and by arguments against doing so ($800 is a lot of money for a washing machine). The exceptional opportunity created by the shop’s management results in the arguments “for” retaining their immediacy, while removing the arguments “against”.
If there were no discount and the washing machine’s price was always $300, people who were not well-versed in home appliances would have no idea that this particular washing machine was so good. Situations involving price cuts are generally static. The customer sees the old (higher) price and compares it with the new (lower) one.
The “that’s not all” social influence technique is even more effective than a simple discount; what differenti- ates it is its dynamic character. This technique was first described and subjected to empirical verification by Jerry Burger (1986). As in the case of many other tech- niques, the impetus came from observing a trick played by some salespeople.
Burger noticed that when asked about the price of a product, they gave customers an answer, but seeing that customers were wavering, they intervened and prevented them from saying “no” by immediately providing additional information that can be metaphorically represented as a sort of “that’s not all” statement. So, salespeople can say such things as “only today” or “for selected customers” a free gift comes with a purchased product. They can say that a “special offer” makes the price slightly lower, or that “until the end of the day” customers will get not one, but two pack- ages of product for the same price.
The application of the “that’s not all” technique can be easily spotted in TV commercials, where the main product is introduced first and additional bonus items are presented later using the “if you call now” format. In general, this technique is based either on leaving the base price untouched while offering an additional freebie, or by dropping the price of a given product. In the first experiment dedicated to examining the effectiveness of the “that’s not all” technique, those selected as participants were people who approached a stall where cookies were being sold and asked about their price.
The prospectiveInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 101 clients were randomly assigned to one of two groups. In the control conditions, they were informed that the cookies were being sold in a set composed of two packages, and the price of the set was 75 cents. In the experimental conditions, the salesperson said that the cookies cost 75 cents, then after a short pause added that this was the price for a set containing two packages.
As it turned out, while 40% of customers purchased cookies in the control conditions, this number jumped to 73% of customers in the experimental conditions. It was thus demonstrated that the “that’s not all” technique is effective when a potential customer, wavering as to whether to buy, is unexpectedly informed that an additional product will also be given. Will this technique be equally successful if the price of the article is unexpectedly lowered?
Burger decided to attempt to answer this question in his next experiment. This time, having asked about the price of cookies, participants from the experimental group were told they would have to pay $1. Next, the salespeople exchanged a few remarks with each other, and then the customer was told that since they were getting ready to close up shop, the cookies would be sold at a reduced price of 75 cents.
Participants from the control group were informed at the beginning that the price was 75 cents. The “that’s not all” technique was effective in this case as well. Cookies were purchased by 44% of the control group, but by 73% of the experimental group.
Why is this technique an effective social influence strategy? We may assume that the principle of reciprocity comes into play – a mechanism described previously during discussion of the “door-in-the-face” technique. In the case of the “that’s not all” technique, this principle provokes an intellectual reflection in the form of “if the salesperson makes a concession, I should buy the product”.
Burger’s next experiment was dedicated to confirming the correctness of the aforementioned interpretation. He assumed that if the technique under discussion is based on the principle of reciprocity, it should be particularly (and perhaps exclu- sively?) effective when the interaction between buyer and seller resembles a negotiation, as was the case in the two experiments discussed previously. A similar situation was created for one of the conditions in the following experiment.
The seller reduced the price from $1 to 75 cents, explaining that this resulted from the desire to finish work quickly. In another group, the price was also lowered from $1 to 75 cents, but the situation clearly involved no negotiating. Here it was the case that a misunderstanding had occurred: the seller was just beginning work, and had been told by a colleague that the cookies previously cost a dollar, but were now on sale for 25 cents less.
The control group was, of course, told straight away that the price was 75 cents. It turned out that more customers decided to purchase the cookies in the two experimental conditions (85% and 70%, respectively) than in the control conditions (50%). In another experiment the effectiveness of door-to-door sellers was tested.
In the control group, they offered to sell candles for $2. For the group in which a price cut of a negotiated character was applied, one of the sellers gave a price of $3, but the second partner loudly remarked that the real cost was a dollar lower because “(they) had agreed to sell them for $2 in order to sell more”. In the group for which the102 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor discount was not of a negotiated character, the partner of the seller who had given a price of $3 remarked that $3 was the price of some other candles, while the ones they were offering now cost $2.
In the control group the candles were offered at a price of $2 from the very beginning. While under the control conditions the candles were bought by only 14.3% of participants, the non-negotiated conditions saw this number rise to 37.1%, and in the negotiated conditions it jumped to as high as 57.1%. Before we proceed to other considerations, let us stop for a moment and examine the procedure followed in this experiment.
It is worth noting that, despite the intentions of the experiment designer, the conditions in which a $1 discount was provided differed not only in the level of negotiability. In the first group the participants were informed that they had the opportunity to purchase the very same candles that had been sold earlier for $3. In the second group, they were offered candles for $2 that had always been available at that price (it was other candles that cost $3).
Only in the first condition was the price an exceptional one. Regardless, we can easily see that, while the rates at which participants purchased cookies and candles were higher in groups involving a seller/client negotiation- style interaction, this was not a precondition for the technique’s success. These results thus indicate that the principle of reciprocity is but one of a number of mechanisms underlying the effectiveness of the “that’s not all” trick.
Burger, seeking an additional mechanism that would serve to explain this technique’s success, referred to a “changing the anchor” effect. In one classic study (Kenrick & Gutierres, 1980), men rated the attractiveness of a woman presented to them in a photograph quite highly. This score was lower, however, if just before they had watched an episode of Charlie’s Angels, in which unusually attractive and sexy actresses had appeared.
If we view this regularity through the lens of “that’s not all” technique and recall the experiments previously discussed, we can say that hearing a price of 75 cents just after having heard “$1” seems to be a more advantageous offer than 75 cents without the $1 “anchor”. In one simple experiment, participants were provided information about the price of cookies thus: some people were told that the price was 75 cents, others that the price was a dollar, while at the same time being asked how much they would be willing to pay for the cookies and what they felt was a “fair price”. Results indicated that people from the group informed that the regular price was $1 declared their readiness to pay more, and that they regarded a higher price as a fair one, in greater numbers than the group informed that the price was 75 cents.
During a subsequent experiment in which the sale of cookies for a price of $1 was accompanied by information from the seller that they had previously been mar- keted for 25 cents more, there was no greater interest exhibited on the part of buyers than in the group that was simply told the price was $1 (again, significantly greater numbers of participants purchased cookies when the “that’s not all” tech- nique was applied, reducing the price by 25 cents under the pretence of quickly winding up the day’s work). These results do not provide confirmation for the supposition that the mechanism responsible for the effectiveness of the analyzed technique results from supplyingInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 103 the targeted person with an anchor for judging the profitability of a decision to buy. To put it more precisely, such an anchor does not, in and of itself, increase one’s readiness to take advantage of an offer, which led Burger to conclude that the primary mechanism at work is the previously mentioned principle of reciprocity.
It is possible, however, that of key importance is the surprise with which the new anchor appears in the “that’s not all” technique and is linked with the removal of an argument that previously justified refusing the offer, occurring in the moment at which the wavering customer was mentally reviewing the reasons “for and against” the purchase. Ian Brennan and Kenneth Bahn (1991) drew attention to other problems in the search for the psychological mechanism underlying the effectiveness of the “that’s not all” technique. They observed that, in the interaction this technique assumes between the requester and the target of the request, there is no element of rejection by the target of the initial query (as was the case in the “door-in-the-face” discussed previously).
It is thus not the case that the person issuing the request makes some sort of clear concession benefiting the target of the request, which would in turn provide motivation for that person to offer some sort of concession. What is more, a reduction in price by the seller may be perceived by the client as being motivated by the seller’s own self-interest (i.e. desire to close the stall) rather than as a favour for the customer.
As a consequence, in conditions that Burger treats as reciprocity, essentially a mecha- nism of contrast takes the fore. The price of $1.25 acts as an anchor point against which $1 appears reasonable. In situations that Burger views as a contrast effect condition, the price of $1.25 is, in turn, a weaker and less-definitive anchor point, coming as it does only after the real price of $1 is given.
Brennan and Bahn (1991) thus conclude that the issue concerning the mechanism responsible for the effective- ness of this technique is not resolved. Yun-Oh Whang (2012) also feels that the mixed results recorded by Burger failed to provide a clear theoretical explanation for the process. Whang observes that, from the perspective of the contrast effect, the attrac- tiveness of the discount offered by the seller is not associated with the amount of the difference as much as whether the final offer consists of a price higher than the anchor point or lower.
If, for example, a customer feels that a particular television should cost $200, a discount from $240 to $210 fails to be attractive, while one from $220 to $190 renders the offer tempting. From the perspective of the principle of reciprocity, we can say that in both cases we are dealing with a concession – the price has been lowered by $30. In one experiment conducted by Whang, students were invited to participate in a computer simulation of a purchase decision-making task.
They were initially asked how much they would be willing to pay for a 27-inch LCD TV, and this figure was treated as the anchor point (Whang uses the term “reservation price”). Next, the participant’s computer screen displayed an offer to sell that very television at a price slightly higher than the declared reservation price. In the control conditions, information was simultaneously provided about a price change: the television could now be bought at a reduced price.
In the “that’s not all” conditions, the information about the price change appeared after 15 seconds. Independently of the conditions, the value of the bonus was constructed such that in half of the cases104 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor the final offer remained higher than the anchor point (or, as Whang calls it, the level of the reservation price), while in the remaining cases it was lower. At the end, participants were requested to indicate on a 7-point scale the likelihood of their taking the opportunity to purchase the television.
The effectiveness of the “that’s not all” technique will be confirmed if this declaration is stronger in conditions when the information about a drop in price appeared following a delay, as opposed to analogical conditions in which this information was provided alongside the regular price. As it occurred, in the case of the unattractive conditions (i.e. when the final price remained higher than the anchor point), the technique described here was effective (increase in declared inclination to buy from 3.92 to 5.00), while in the attractive conditions (i.e.
when the final price was lower than the anchor point), this technique was not effective (inclination to accept the offer remained at the same level: 4.77 and 4.82, respectively). In Whang’s opinion, these results offer little support for the contrast mechanism – indeed, contrast should bring the technique’s mechanisms to life in attractive conditions, not in unattractive ones. The author concludes that it is the principle of reciprocity that constitutes the psychological mechanism activating the technique described here.
Be that as it may, how can we explain the fact that it only functions in conditions viewed as unfavourable? It is worth noting that in the attrac- tive conditions, the participants had already declared a rather strong inclination to buy. The attractiveness of the offer itself was at work in this case.
The technique had no opportunity to improve the situation, it could not increase the likelihood participants would buy the television. These results, besides casting a certain light on the mechanism underlying the effectiveness of the “that’s not all” technique, would also seem to be of practical value: this sales trick should be applied first and foremost when the final asking price remains quite high. If the proposed discount proves to be truly attractive, it is sufficient to offer a traditional reduction in price without any dynamizing element.
The question arises, however, to what degree the effect achieved by Whang can be generalized and applied to all situations involving sales. We should keep in mind the fact that this researcher explored decisions by consumers related to the purchase of a television, which is a product used in the private sphere (at home), technologically advanced and quite costly. Carrie Pollock, Shane Smith, Eric Knowles and Heather Bruce (1998) observed that people behave in different ways when making the decision to purchase various types of products.
If we focus on the aspect of price, in the case of inexpensive items the customer does not carefully review all the information provided by the seller. It is sufficient that the interaction gives the impression of a price negotiation, and that the seller backs down from the original price, for the customer to be likely to purchase the article in question at the lower price. This would serve to explain why, in Burger’s experiments, situations in which a lower price was quoted follow- ing a higher one was sufficient to induce greater customer interest than conditions in which the sale price was given at the start.
The aforementioned researchers feel that the concept of automaticity developed by Ellen Langer (1978) can be helpful in understanding the behaviour of Burger’s research participants.Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 105 In many social situations we react automatically, limiting the volume of data processed and the complexity of the processing itself to a minimum, reducing our cognitive activity. The simplest way to convince ourselves of this truth is to ask people the time after they have just glanced at their watch. They will invariably look at their watch again, and this time they will do so for a bit longer.
As another example of mindlessness, we may cite the course of an experiment I conducted some time ago with my collaborators (Dolinski, Gromski & Szmajke, 1988). We were interested in judgements about the responsibility of the perpetrator of a bad act, more specifically, in the effect of being the person wronged by said perpetrator. The design of the experiment thus required that a portion of participants experienced the feeling of being harmed.
To achieve this aim, we decided to cheat the partici- pants out of some money (which we naturally returned to them after the experiment had finished). One of us came into a lecture hall occupied by first-year students, introduced himself as an employee of the university and announced that the students had paid too little during registration. The researcher then took out a plastic bag that already contained a small sum of money, as well as a clean sheet of paper, and began taking payments.
We did not present any documents to the students, nor did we issue any sort of receipts. As the design of our experiment was rather complex, we had to repeat the situation four times. In each case, we observed to our surprise that nobody expressed any concern; students who didn’t have any cash on hand borrowed some from their classmates, and all of them were careful to ensure that their names were written down on the piece of paper.
We collected money from several dozen students, and in half of the cases the sums were significant. While it may be debated whether automaticity is the product of our mind’s limitations, as suggested by Michael Posner and Charles Snyder (1975) and Shelley Taylor (1981), or rather from motivational deficits, as would argue Ulric Neisser (1976) and David Navon (1984), in a range of situations we apply ready schemes of behaviours learned and formulated in the past. Langer (1978) suggests that if a message targeted at us is structurally similar to ones we have reacted positively to in the past, it is highly likely that we will refrain from analyzing its content and the context in which it is transmitted; rather, we will mindlessly and automatically activate an established response pattern.
An example of this manner of functioning is supplied by Ellen Langer, Arthur Blank and Benzion Chanowitz (1978). In this study, individuals waiting for a copy machine were asked to give up their place in line. Depending on the experimental conditions, the person doing the asking either made only a simple request (“Excuse me .
. . may I use the Xerox machine?”), or added a fragment with only the grammatical and structural form of a justifica- tion for the request (“because I have to make a copy?”), or appended the request with a real justification (“because I am in a rush?”).
When the experimenter added that there were only 5 pages to be copied, participants gave up their place in the queue equally often in cases when the justification was a real one (being in a rush) as in those when it was spurious (needing to make copies), even though in the second situation the content of the remark provided absolutely no additional real explanation. It was obvious that the person addressing the participants wanted to106 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor make photocopies. Clearly, nobody would use a photocopier to fry pancakes.
At the same time, participants very rarely allowed experimenters to jump the queue when only a request without any sort of justification was provided. Because participants in the past had probably reacted to requests aimed at them and accom- panied with a justification on multiple occasions, in the situation described above they simply activated mindlessly the script for agreement to displaying politeness. The oddity and novelty of a situation involving a request with no justification at all, however, put them on their guard and shifted their reaction to a qualitatively higher level of reflection.
Participants also reacted in a reflective manner when the experimenter said that there were 20 (and not 5, as in the conditions described above) pages for copying. In this situation the experimenter was far more likely to receive consent to use the photocopier when the provided justification was a real one than when only an apparent one. Automaticity here would be too costly (significant loss of time).
Thus, the participants analyzed not only the structure of messages targeting them, but also their content. Langer et al. (1978) suggest that in these situations there is sufficient motivation to shift one’s attention from the simple structural characteristics of the message to its semantic elements, which results in processing of the actual information streaming in.
Pollock et al. (1998) suggest that the “that’s not all” technique exploits the fact that customers being offered inexpensive goods are in a state of automaticity. If this is essentially the case, it may be assumed that the technique will cease to be effec- tive when the item in question is expensive.
This should generate a shift in the individual’s functioning to a reflective level, as well as neutralizing the effect of information about circumstances making it cheaper to buy at the present moment. In addition, by applying the technique of Langer and her associates involving the use of real or apparent justifications for requests or propositions, it is possible to determine whether and when people are in a state of automaticity or are not. In one experimental study, the reactions of people given the chance to purchase sweets were observed.
In some conditions these were small bombonieres, sold for $1. In the version involving the application of the “that’s not all” technique, the initial price was $1.25; following a short conversation between sellers, it was announced that the bomboniere cost $1. In other conditions, the bombonieres were significantly larger, and their price was $5.
When the “that’s not all” technique was used, a price of $5.25 was first quoted, and after the sellers engaged in a brief conversation between themselves, a price of $5 was subsequently given. In addition, in some cases the sellers provided an additional remark designed to justify the purchase of the bomboniere. Similarly to the experiment by Langer et al., some- times this justification was real while in others it was spurious.
In the first case, it was said that the manufacturer was a recognized brand, present on the market for many years, and that the chocolates contained titbits hand-dipped in liquid choco- late mixed with cashews. In the case of the spurious justification, it was said that the chocolates were made of chocolate and were sold in that very box. Some participants were not provided with any additional justification for purchasing the bombonieres.
Analysis of the results showed that the “that’s not all” technique wasInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 107 only effective when the price of the bomboniere was not high. In these cases, 76% of customers purchased them as opposed to the 45% who did so in the control group. If, however, the bombonieres were expensive, the differences between the control group and the group on which the technique under analysis was applied was no longer statistically significant.
Additionally, it turned out that if the sweets cost $1, the spurious justification was equally effective in boosting customers’ readiness to buy them as the real justification. The opposite was the case, however, when the bombonieres were expensive. Without any justification at all provided for making the purchase, roughly the same number of participants decided to buy them compared to those receiving a spurious justification; the percentage of those buying the bombonieres was significantly higher when a real justification was given.
These results thus suggest that people stop behaving mindlessly in the case of relatively costly purchases. The “that’s not all” technique also ceases to be effective in these situations. It would seem, however, that a lone experiment is not a sufficient basis for claiming that the analyzed technique is never effective in such cases.
Perhaps, if the discount or additional product offered is of substantial value, the individual receiving the offer can make a more or less rational decision to take advantage of it. Although I have not conducted any empirical research in this area, I have been led to this conclusion by observing the behaviour of a knife salesman working in the main railway station in Wrocław, the city where I work and live. He offers passers-by a set of knives in a wood block for $50, and when he observes they are taking a moment to think, he adds that as part of a grand promotion every purchasing customer can receive a surprise gift worth $100.
Tempted by this highly exceptional opportunity, customers often purchase the knives and then receive their surprise gift of . . .
two additional sets of knives (each worth $50). It would seem that the essence of the “that’s not all” technique’s effectiveness consists primarily of the initial offer itself being rather attractive (for example, it is worth noting that in the aforementioned experiments, cookies were bought by around 40% of people in the control group, while the small bomboniere was purchased by 45% of participants). At the moment when someone is wavering and exploring the arguments for and against both potential decisions (buy/don’t buy), a new argument suddenly appears, which often tips the scales.
Unlike those researchers who refer to the theory of automaticity, I do not think that this argument proved decisive only in conditions involving the potential purchase of inexpensive goods. I would rather say that in the case of cheaper products, it is enough that the aforementioned argument is simply raised. In the case of expensive items, however, it must be of significantly greater weight.
Disruption-then-reframe The disruption-then-reframe (DTR) technique is based on the assumption that people of whom some request is made then experience an approach/avoidance conflict. The approach is associated with the desire to provide assistance to another108 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor person who needs and asks for it. It can also be linked with the desire to acquire particular goods.
Avoidance, however, is related to the necessary effort or loss of time and/or money. Individuals thus resist the thing others are encouraging them to do. Many social influence techniques are oriented on enhancing the incentive to do something, such as by highlighting the benefits that can result.
The best example of this may be the “that’s not all” trick discussed above. The technique to be discussed now consists of both reducing resistance and boosting incentive. What lies at its core?
The act of “knocking someone out of their comfort zone”, of making the course of an interaction a bit surprising and unusual, then presenting a new argument to encourage our interlocutor to accede to a particular request. Barbara Davis and Eric Knowles (1999) suggest that at least two psychological theories provide a foundation for the prediction that a cognitive reframing tech- nique will be effective. The first of them is based in the work of Erickson – the founder of modern hypnosis.
Erickson (1964) observed that people came to him in order to be subjected to a state of hypnosis, but at the same time they experi- enced a feeling of resistance. To overcome this recalcitrance, it becomes necessary to do something that will put them off balance, at least for a moment. For example, we may suddenly and forcefully squeeze a patient’s hand during our greeting.
This event will occupy the patient’s conscious thoughts, at the same time preventing the exercise of control over self in the face of hypnosis. This particular state of con- foundment results in an increased submissiveness to the efforts of the clinician/ hypnotist, maximizing the chances for successful hypnosis therapy. Of course, the content of the hypnosis itself is a new cognitive quality, and can be expressed in categories of cognitive reinterpretation.
The second concept mentioned by Davis and Knowles is action identification theory, which is the work of Robin Vallacher and Daniel Wegner (1985, 1987). These psychologists drew attention to the fact that not only do individuals func- tion rationally and assign meaning to their behaviours, but that they can also identify them cognitively on multiple levels. A handyman pounding a nail with his hammer can identify this activity in such ways as active recreation or building a shelf for books, but also as pounding in a nail or hitting a nail on the head with a hammer.
More general and abstract labels (e.g. active recreation) are viewed by Vallacher and Wegner as the equivalent of action identification on a higher level. Specific and detailed identifications (such as hitting a nail on the head with a ham- mer) are equivalent to identifying de facto the same action on a lower level.
From this perspective, of interest to us here is one particular element in Vallacher and Wegner’s theory: people generally prefer higher levels of identification (because they give their actions meaning and place them in the service of some objective), but various situations that disrupt their routine functioning generally cause this level of action identification to temporarily shift lower. One particularly suggestive illustration of this truth can be found in experiments by Wegner and his collabora- tors concerning consumption. In one of them, study participants were given a cup of coffee, and then asked to give a description of what they were doing.
Some of them were drinking coffee in normal coffee cups, while the remaining participantsInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 109 were served coffee in cups weighing 1 pound. People in the former group generally stated that they were drinking coffee, giving themselves a shot of energy, or satisfying their caffeine addiction. Those in the latter group generally identified their actions on a lower level, declaring that they were raising a coffee cup to their lips with some difficulty, that they were sipping, or that they were swallowing coffee (Wegner, Vallacher, Macomber, Wood & Arps, 1984).
Participants in another exper- iment were given snacks to eat, with some being allowed to grasp them normally (using their fingers), and others in an atypical manner (using chopsticks). People in the former group generally identified their actions with such designations as “I’m eating”, “I’m satisfying my appetite”, or “I’m filling up”. The latter group’s participants, in turn, applied such terms as “I’m placing food into my mouth” or “I’m chewing”.
Vallacher and Wegner emphasize that a disruption in routine behaviour results in people shifting their focus to details, which enables them to regain their bearings in the situation at hand. Only after this is accomplished can the individual engage in shifting action identification to a higher level. Davis and Knowles, concurring with this view, simultaneously draw attention to the fact that this level need not be the same high one as before.
In particular, if we engage in cognitive reframing then the probability is increased that this level will be a different one. Thus, as Davis and Knowles (1999) conclude – from both the perspective of Erickson’s work on the conditions for effective hypnosis as well as from that of the theory of action identification advanced by Vallacher and Wegner – that subjecting people to a sequence of disruption to the normal course of interaction, then cognitive reframing, should constitute an effective social influence technique. These psychologists present four research studies that are designed to establish that this is in fact the case.
The experiments involved the sale of either Christmas cards (study 1) or note cards (studies 2 and 3). They were sold by door-to-door salespeople, who declared that the income from the sale would go to support charitable organizations. Faced with the choice to buy or not to buy, those queried experienced the aforemen- tioned approach/avoidance conflict.
Why might one decide to purchase the cards? Doubtlessly, the desire to support a charitable organization and, in doing so, to help people in need. The cards themselves may also be of some benefit.
If we have yet to send out our Christmas cards, these will be “just the job”. Note cards can also be useful in some way. What reasons could we then have for not buying?
The necessity to engage in extended contact with an unknown door-to-door salesper- son, to open the door, to spend money and, perhaps, to deal later with the unpleasant feeling that we have succumbed to the pressure of a smooth-talker. The experimenters applied the following technique: after introducing them- selves, they announced the price of the cards in a very unusual way. They said “The price of these notes/Christmas cards is 300 pennies.” After a moment they added “That’s three dollars.
It’s a bargain.” The wholly unusual manner of giving the price in pennies disrupted the routine course of the interaction. The cognitive reframing here consists of providing an additional, previously unmentioned justification for why the purchase of the cards is a sensible one. This justification is the “bargain”.110 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor For the first experiment three groups were formed.
Participants from the first group were told of the charitable cause associated with the sale of the cards, and then were told only of their price. They were told that the cards cost $3. The second group was subjected only to cognitive reframing.
After giving the price in dollars, the experimenters waited around 2 seconds and then added: “It’s a bargain.” In the third group, the technique recommended by Davis and Knowles was utilized: first, jolt people out of their routine, then supply them with cognitive reframing. Participants were informed that the cards cost 300 cents, then after 2 seconds they heard “That’s three dollars. It’s a bargain.” In each of the first two groups the cards were bought by 35% of participants.
In the third, nearly twice as many (65%) did so. In the second study, the experimenters added yet another group to the experi- mental design: only a procedure jolting participants out of their routine was applied. In these conditions, potential customers were told that the cards cost 300 cents, and after 2 seconds it was explained that this was $3.
As it transpired, this measure was not sufficient. The percentage of people deciding to buy the cards was only slightly greater than in the group informed about their price in a more nor- mal manner (35% and 25%, respectively: a statistically insignificant difference). However, the technique recommended by Davis and Knowles again proved successful.
This time, 70% of participants decided to purchase the cards. Why is jolting people out of their routine not enough? The scholars refer to the concept of action identification.
If a cognitive reinterpretation is not performed, following the disorganization resulting from the destabilization of routine the individual in question will return to the previously applied framing of the issue. Such doubts come back into play as “What do I need these cards for?” If, however, a cognitive reframing is proposed in the form of “It’s a bargain”, this statement, in turn, becomes a new rallying point for the individual’s actions. This effect does not take place without disruption to a routinely proceeding activity: in such cases the person will remain focused on the first decision motive (“What do I need these cards for?”).
If this line of thought is correct, then the technique proposed by the authors should prove effective exclusively in the following sequence: first, a routine course of events, then supplying a cognitive reinterpretation. Not only would the presence of both elements be of importance, but their sequence would prove decisive as well. To determine if this really is the case, Davis and Knowles conducted further empirical study.
This time, aside from the control group informed of the price in the standard manner, and the group on which the scholars’ proposed technique was tested, the experimental design included conditions in which the sequence of elements constituting the technique was reversed. When offering the cards, the experimenter/seller said “It’s a bargain”, and after 2 seconds added “It costs 300 cents, that’s three dollars”. It turned out that this procedure was not enough to result in a higher number of people deciding to purchase the cards than in the case of the control group.
Again, however, the effectiveness of the technique consisting of disrupting the routine course of events followed by supplying cognitive refram- ing is demonstrated. The proportion of individuals who complied in the three aforementioned Davis and Knowles experiments are presented in Table 5.1.Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 111 TABLE 5.1 Percentage of targets who complied in each condition in Davis and Knowles (1999) experiments Condition Study 1 Study 2 Study 3 Disrupt-then-reframe (“They’re 300 pennies…that’s $3. It’s a bargain”) 65 70 65 Price only (“They’re $3”) 35 25 30 Reframe only (“They’re $3.
It’s a bargain” 35 30 – Disruption only (“They’re 300 pennies… That’s $3”) – 35 – Reframe-then-disrupt (“It’s a bargain… They’re 300 pennies. That’s $3”) – – 25 Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1999, vol. 76, p.
194. Copyright 1999 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. The effectiveness of the technique under discussion was also confirmed by Davis and Knowles in a fourth study.
In this experiment, it was decided to exclude the hypothesis that the effectiveness of the technique being tested is an artefact resulting from the occurrence of a self-fulfilling prophecy. Eight experi- menters/door-to-door salespeople were employed, each of whom received either the instruction to sell cards using the DTR system, or was additionally asked to give the standard price ($3) and to add “It’s a bargain” (cognitive reframing). It turned out that in the first of these conditions, 90% of those solicited purchased the cards, while in the second condition this number was 50%.
The methodological value of this experiment is diluted, however, by the fact that its design failed to include conditions involving disruption to a routine and the sequence of reframing-then-disruption. Bob Fennis, Enny Das and Ad Pruyn (2004) examined whether the DTR technique could be effective in convincing people to participate in a lottery. A female experimenter stood in the main square of a large city and approached passers- by, singing the praises of the Dayzers lottery, which had a structure different from traditional lotteries; instead of one lucky winner taking the whole prize pool, Dayzers gave a million people smaller prizes.
In the control conditions she informed people that one entry cost €3.50. In the experimental conditions she gave the price in cents (350 euro cents), and after a moment clarified that this was the equivalent of €3.50. In both cases, the lottery ticket sales pitch was concluded with the argu- ment that it was a bargain.
While in the control conditions every fourth person approached took the chance to purchase a ticket; when the DTR technique was applied the percentage of those acceding to the request jumped to 43%. The authors of the experiment also demonstrated that people subjected to the technique being analyzed here were less inclined to present arguments against buying the ticket. They treat this fact as a piece of indirect evidence that cognitive disorientation (resulting here from the reporting of the price in cents) disrupts the efficient pro- cessing of thoughts linked with the offer just received, and the additional argument (the bargain) functions as a cue for thinking to take a heuristic turn.112 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor We have also confirmed the potential for using the DTR technique in sales transactions during research in which one of my masters students (Katarzyna Selwant) sold jars of prepared soup at a bazaar.
Participants were drawn from customers at the bazaar doing their normal grocery shopping (they had been buying milk, cream, butter, etc.). The saleswoman also offered to sell them soup, producing a jar with its contents. In the standard conditions she said that it cost 2 zlotys and that it was very tasty.
In the DTR conditions she gave the price as 200 groszs, and after 2 seconds she explained that this was two zlotys, then provided the argument about the soup’s good taste. Results showed that the sales pitch including the ‘200 groszs’ induced roughly twice as many people to buy the soup (Dolinski, 2005). A similar effect was noted by Frank Kardes, Bob Fennis, Edward Hirt, Zakary Tormala and Brian Bullington (2007), selling candies in a supermarket for 100 euro cents while adding the argument “It’s a bargain”.
Of course, giving the price in an unusual manner is not the only use of the DTR technique in a sales situation. “Oddness” can also concern the very name of the product. Eric Knowles, Shannon Butler and Jay Linn (2001) sold cupcakes for 50 cents.
In the control conditions, they simply said “These cupcakes are 50 cents, they are really delicious”. In the DTR conditions, they only changed the word “cupcakes” to “halfcakes”, which was enough to boost sales. While Davis and Knowles (1999), Knowles et al.
(2001), Kardes et al. (2007) and Katarzyna Selwant (see: Dolinski, 2005) demonstrated that the DTR technique can be an effective tool of social influence during commercial transactions, and Fennis et al. (2004) provided evidence of its usefulness in convincing people to buy lottery tickets, Izabela Kubala (2002) showed the potential for it to be applied in an entirely different field.
It is well-known that the scourge of research companies carrying out surveys and opinion polling is the high rate of respondents who refuse to participate. This situation generates at least two types of difficulties. First, it renders the sample poorly differentiated, as people refusing to participate may exhibit a range of differences from those who consent to take part.
Second, it increases the costs of studies and the amount of time needed to conduct them. Refusal is obviously far more likely in conditions when respondents do not receive any gratification for their participation and spend a long time on it. Even in the case of a short telephone survey, the percentage of those refusing to answer a few questions can be very high.
With these considerations as a starting point, Kubala decided to examine whether the DTR technique could prove helpful in raising the percentage of people agreeing to participate in a telephone marketing study. In the control conditions, the canvasser called randomly selected residents of Wrocław and intro- duced herself as an employee of the (non-existent) Lower Silesia Social Research Centre. She then asked if her interlocutor would agree to answer a few questions concerning consumer goods, simultaneously confirming that the conversation would last around 7 minutes.
In the DTR conditions, instead of 7 minutes it was said that the survey would last “around 420 seconds”, and after about 2 seconds it was added that “that’s 7 minutes”, and then the argument “it’ll just take a moment”Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 113 was thrown in. The experimental design also included other conditions in order to see whether potential differences between the aforementioned groups did in fact result from the application of the disorientation–cognitive reshuffling sequence. Therefore, in another group the order of information given to respondents was reversed.
First, the argument that the conversation would be “short” was given, then the statement “around 420 seconds”, completed with the information “that’s 7 minutes”. In another group, only the effect of the additional argument itself was examined. Here it was said that the survey would last around 7 minutes and that “it’ll just take a moment”.
Finally, in the last group the effects of disrupting the routine without appealing to an additional argument were tested. The survey time was given in seconds, then after a moment it was explained that this was 7 minutes. It was tested whether the person called would agree to participate in the survey, or refuse (in the latter case, no attempt to change people’s minds was made and the interaction was concluded).
Analyses of results revealed that applying the DTR technique more than doubled the chances that respondents would agree to partici- pate in the survey. The numbers of people consenting to participate in a marketing survey in the remaining experimental conditions did not display significant statistical differences from the control conditions, while they were different from the levels of compliance recorded in the situation involving the DTR conditions. Izabela Kubala proved that the DTR technique is also effective when individu- als are targeted with a request by telephone, and fulfilling the request does not provide them with any benefit.
She thus demonstrated that the technique discussed here can also be applied in other spheres than those assumed by Davis and Knowles. The experiment by Kubala was replicated by Christopher Carpenter and Franklin Boster (2009a), who conducted their research, not by telephone, but rather face to face, asking students on campus if they would like to participate in a survey study that would last 20 minutes and would be very interesting. In the DTR version, the phrase “one thousand two hundred seconds” was used, followed by an explanation that this was 20 minutes.
In this case as well, more participants agreed to fill in the survey in DTR conditions than in control conditions. Fennis et al. (2004) decided to examine the effects generated by linking the DTR technique with another classic social influence technique already discussed in this volume: the foot-in-the-door technique.
In an experiment exploring this particular issue, a young man appealed to students on a university campus to sign a petition supporting an increase in tuition fees. In half of the conditions, the students were first asked to answer a few questions about studies and scientific research. This was treated as an application of the foot-in-the-door technique.
The remaining students were not asked these questions. Regardless of the aforemen- tioned, some of them were told directly that the matter concerned a tuition fee increase of €75, while others heard that the cost of education would go up by 7,500 euro cents . .
. €75, that is. In both cases, the message was rounded out by the argument that this was quite a small investment.
Analysis of the results showed that application of the DTR technique significantly increased people’s readiness to sign the petition (from 28% to 63%). Preceding the primary request with a series of114 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor questions also generated the expected result (an increase from 29% to 63%). The joint application of both of these social influence techniques, however, proved to be unbelievably effective.
The petition to increase tuition fees was signed by 90% of those queried! The DTR technique not only demonstrated its effectiveness, but when combined intelligently with the foot-in-the-door technique it became an extraordinarily successful technique for exerting influence on others. A meta-analysis of 14 empirical studies performed by Carpenter and Boster (2009b) confirmed the strength of the DTR technique.
It also demonstrated that this technique was more effective in a non-profit context than in a sales context. The psychological mechanism itself underlying the success of this technique is not entirely clear. Insofar as the authors of the pioneering paper on the DTR tech- nique referred to the assumptions girding Erickson’s hypnosis technique and the concept of action identification by Vallacher and Wegner, other scholars offer still more points of view on the mechanism explaining why people subjected to these influences comply with requests directed towards them.
Kardes and his collabora- tors (Kardes et. al., 2007) make reference to the concept of the need for cognitive cclloossuurree,, pprrooffffeerreedd mmaannyy yyeeaarrss aaggoo bbyy AArriiee KKrruuggllaannsskkyi ((11998899)).. HHee rreemmaarrkkeedd tthhaatt people are characterized by “the desire for a firm answer to a question and an aver- sion toward ambiguity” (Kruglanski & Webster, 1996, p.
264); this desire, however, displays different levels of strength in different individuals (individual difference), yet on the other hand, is greater or lesser depending on particular circumstances (situational factor). Kardes et al. (2007) observed a link between DTR and the so- called need for closure.
The DTR technique is grounded in creating ambiguity by giving a price in cents/euro cents instead of dollars/euros, or by using a strange word. The argument appearing at the end of the message, in turn, is an element associated with certainty and explicitness. It can be expected that this technique will be particularly effective on people exhibiting a strong need for cognitive closure.
On the one hand, they have a strong aversion to ambiguity, and on the other hand they are deeply interested in achieving a state of certainty as to a defined fragment of reality. The authors spent time on a university campus inviting students to become members of a student interest group, and to pay a related semi-annual membership fee. In the control conditions, they were told that the fee was €3, while in the DTR conditions a figure of 300 euro cents was given, then clarified as €3.
In both cases the proposition was concluded with the same argument: “That’s a really small investment”. Regardless of whether those approached expressed their desire to join the student interest group or not, they were also asked to fill in a questionnaire, which was a de facto measurement of their need for cognitive closure. The DTR turned out to be effective.
Compared to the control conditions (13%), the percent- age of students deciding to join the interest group and pay the semi-annual fees was clearly higher (30%). Of even greater importance from the perspective taken here is that in DTR conditions the membership fee was paid by 43% of those individuals who recorded a need for cognitive closure score above the median, while only 17% of those whose score was below the median did so. The role playedInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 115 by the need for cognitive closure in the disrupt-then-reframe technique was later confirmed in another experiment by the authors.
Carpenter and Boster (2009a) proposed, in turn, a very simple explanation for the effectiveness of this technique, referring to the Spinozan model of information processing in which comprehension and acceptance happen immediately and simultaneously (Gilbert, 1991). The disruption contained in the DTR technique can prevent someone from comprehending that the subsequent argument is unsound. This model predicts that people who are distracted when exposed to an argument will be more likely to believe it and comply, even if this argument is obviously flawed.
In their experiments the authors demonstrated that, indeed, the quality of the argument applied in the message and designed to induce participants to accede to a request or proposition is of no significance for the effectiveness of the DTR technique. The pique technique – requesting in an unusual manner While the DTR technique requires quite a complicated sequence of actions (initiating an interaction in a normal manner; doing something surprising and unusual; then presenting an argument after a few seconds designed to induce compliance in the interlocutor) the technique proposed by Michael Santos, Craig Leve and Anthony Pratkanis (1994), itself also based on the appearance of “something strange”, is far simpler. During an experiment conducted by the aforementioned authors, a young woman (around 21 years old) dressed in jeans and a t-shirt pretended to be a vagrant.
She asked passers-by for money, either using a typical expression (“a quarter” or “any change”) or in an unusual manner – for 17 or 37 cents. It turned out that the unusual request led experiment subjects to reach for their wallets with greater frequency. It was the authors’ view that if an automatic, habitual refusal of a request is expected, we are better off forming the request in a manner that will induce those to whom the request is made to behave in a less automated manner.
It may then turn out that they take a moment to think, and come to the conclusion that in this one particular case the offering of monetary alms is a worthwhile activity. The actual results would seem to confirm this interpretation, considering that when the request was formu- lated in a standard fashion (a request for “a quarter” or “some change”), people practically never asked any questions (only 0.7% of subjects did so), while when the request was non-standard, far more people did so (11% of participants). That said, it should also be observed that in the latter case asking questions was not a universal practice.
Perhaps this resulted from the fact that people did not wish to maintain contact longer than necessary with the vagrant, having their own comfort in mind, or maybe they did not wish to cause her embarrassment with additional questions. Santos et al. thus came to the conclusion that an examination of what people think in these typical and untypical situations would best be facilitated by a closely-monitored laboratory experiment.
Participants were presented one of four real situations from the first experiment (a young female vagrant on the street asking for 17 cents, a quarter, 37 cents or116 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor ‘some change’) and asked them to write down how they would behave in such a situation, as well as what would likely enter their mind. Contrary to the authors’ expectations, research participants who were expected to imagine themselves in a non-typical situation reported the same thoughts as those who were asked to imagine the vagrant making a request of them in a typical manner. The former, however, said with greater frequency that they would ask the woman what she needed the money for.
The question of whether an atypical or unusual request in fact shifts an indi- vidual’s functioning from a non-reflective level (mindless) to a more reflective one (mindful) was the theme of research carried out by Jerry Burger, Joy Hornisher, Valerie Martin, Garry Newman and Summer Pringle, 2007). The authors began from the assumption that an experiment patterned after that of Langer et al. (1978), discussed earlier in this chapter, would be useful in answering the question posed above.
Let us recall that if the experimenter asked an individual standing in a queue at a copy machine for permission to push in, adding that there were only 5 pages to be copied, participants let the experimenter go ahead with the same frequency as when the request was accompanied by a sensible explanation (“because I’m in a rush”) as when it came with an explanation that essentially didn’t explain anything (“because I have to make copies”). Thus in both conditions the study’s participants allowed the experimenter to go to the front of the queue with far greater frequency than when the request was not accompanied by any justification. The researchers explained this by claiming that participants asked to fulfil a minor request remained in a state of mindlessness and participants relied on a script that called for them to agree whenever a reason is given.
However, if the experimenter said initially that there were 20 pages to be copied, only would a request accompanied by a sensible justification (“because I’m in a rush”) lead to more frequent consent to go to the front of the queue compared to situations when the request came with no justifica- tion. Langer et al. (1978) suggest that the increased burden of the request (if someone has 20 pages to copy this will lead to a much longer wait) shifts the functioning of the recipient of the request into the reflective domain.
In this case the script for automatic consent upon hearing an explanation (of any kind) is not activated, but the content itself of the request is placed under examination. Burger and his collaborators thus concluded that if those who were asked by the vagrant for 37 cents ceased to function mindlessly and began to think about just what was going on, they should react in the same way as participants in the experiment by Langer et al. who were told that someone had 20 pages to copy.
Put differently, they should agree more frequently when the atypical request for a handout comes with a realistic justification compared to situations in which the explanation does not provide any real information. As in the experiment by Santos et al. (1994), a young person asked passers-by for a handout in either a standard manner (“Excuse me, can you spare any change?”) or an atypical one (“Excuse me, can you spare 37 cents?”).
In conditions when the addressee of the request asked the “vagrant” what the money was needed for, either a concrete response was offered (“Because I need to buy a stamp”), or an answer that in fact failed toInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 117 clarify anything (“Because I need to buy some things”). It should be emphasized here that no questions of that type came up in conditions when the “beggar” asked for “any change”, but in conditions when a request for 37 cents was made, 29.9% of request addressees posed that question. As for the results of this experiment, in the main the effect generated by Santos et al.
(1994) was replicated: in conditions of an atypical request, participants decided with greater frequency to give money than in conditions of a typical request. The former circumstance also led to greater sums being given. In addition, it turned out that both the frequency and the average value of handouts were higher in conditions when, in the course of the interaction between the participant and the “vagrant”, questions were asked regarding the purpose for which the money was being collected, compared to when the participant did not pose such questions.
However, the content of the response given by the “beggar” turned out to be irrelevant. The generousness of research subjects was nearly identical when they heard “because I need to buy a stamp” (a specific reason), when compared with a situation in which the word “stamp” was replaced by the content-free expression “some things” (a vague reason). Table 5.2 shows the amount of money given and compliance percentage in particular conditions of this experiment.
In a second study, Burger and his collaborators swapped a request for “any change” with entreaties for 25 or 50 cents. The result was that an atypical request (for 37 cents) was more effective in increasing both the frequency of giving and the average sum given, and it again turned out that experiment participants were more likely to reach for their purses when they first asked why the vagrant needed the money and then received an answer to their query. Again, however, the content of the answer was immaterial.
This pattern of results suggests that while an unusual request disrupted some participants’ refusal scripts, there is no confirmation for the thesis that the atypical request also led these individuals to consider the request mindfully. If, however, an atypically-formulated request does not lead to the addressee of that request functioning in a more mindful manner, how can the increased pliability in these conditions be explained? Burger and his collaborators offered two explanations.
The first of them assumes that individuals in these condi- tions apply the heuristic “I will help acquaintances, particularly when they ask for a small favour” rather than one such as “I don’t give money to beggars”. This acquaintance script is not, however, restricted to real acquaintances, but is also TABLE 5.2 Money given and compliance percentage in Burger et al. (2007) experiment Condition Amount given (M) Compliance (%) N Control $0.07 18.8 117 Pique/no question $0.10 25.9 143 Pique/specific reason $0.38 87.1 31 Pique/vague reason $0.37 70.0 30 Source: Journal of Applied Social psychology, 2007, vol.
37, p. 2090. Copyright 2007 John Wiley and Sons.118 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor activated when people unknown to us act as if they were acquaintances.
One such situation is a simple conversation. It has been demonstrated in a range of studies that when a request directed at a stranger is preceded by even a brief conversation on an anodyne topic, the chances that the request will be fulfilled are greater (Dolinski et al., 2001; Dolinski, Grzyb, Olejnik, Prusakowski & Urban, 2005) – for more on this topic see the deliberations contained in Chapter 4. We may observe in this context that Burger and his collaborators demonstrated that a strange request in and of itself does not cause a rise in compliance.
This effect is only observed when the request for a handout was followed by the subjects asking what it was needed for – thus, in conditions in which they initiated a dialogue. An alternative interpretation presented by the authors of the article under discussion is based on the assumption that the question about what the 37 cents would be spent on was given by people who had already decided they would give out the money. However, it remains unclear “why disrupting a refusal script with an unusual request led some people to comply, but not others” (Burger et al., 2007, p.
2095). In summary, it may be said that the experiments by Burger provide a clearer demonstration of what mechanism does not underlie the effectiveness of the pique technique (i.e. not an increased mindfulness on the part of the addressee resulting from the atypicality of the request) rather than of what mechanism is responsible.
Further research is thus necessary to explain this phenomenon. It would also be worth conducting studies in another context than that of begging. Indeed, it may be supposed that the unusual formulation of a request may increase the effectiveness of measures intended to induce fellow humans to help in many other situations in which they are accustomed to being constantly asked for some- thing and have already developed the habit of saying “no”.
The opposite would, of course, be true if the standard, automatic response to a given request were to accept it. In these circumstances, the unconventional formulation of a request would increase the risk of its going unfulfilled. Gaze The norms in place in particular cultures provide more or less strict guidelines concerning whom we may address in respect of what matter and in what fashion.
At times these norms are very strictly defined, such as in the army, where a private should directly and verbally address his corporal whenever he has any doubts at all. The same private must not, however, disturb the army’s generals with the excep- tion of absolutely exceptional situations. In the “civilian” world there is also a wide range of diverse regulations governing this aspect of social life.
The greater the difference in the status of an individual wishing to broach a subject and the status of the individual who is to be addressed, the greater the asymmetry in respect of the most appropriate form of contact. There are, however, situations (particularly when there is no evident difference in status) when the choice of form of address is a matter for the individual wishing to make a request. Of greatest significance from the perspective that interests us in this book is whether the greatest successInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 119 will be had by a request submitted directly in face-to-face circumstances, by telephone, or in writing (letter or e-mail).
During a normal conversation we are faced with a situation in which communication takes place via all available channels, and both participants in the interaction are located in the same place. In the case of a telephone communication, the only means of communication is through the use of the faculty of hearing. Although the interaction’s participants engage each other at the same time, a spatial divide exists between them.
As for a letter or e-mail, the degree of directness in the communication is severely limited. The people engaged in communication are not only to be found in different areas, but they exchange information at different times. As a rule, they also have a significant amount of time to think their decisions over.
Which communication channel is the most effective? In one experiment dedi- cated to this issue, holidaymakers were invited to take an anonymous psychological examination that would take around 15 minutes (Dolinski, 2005). Some of them were visited in their hotel rooms, others were contacted by telephone, and the rest were issued with a written invitation wedged in their room door.
It transpired that as contact became less direct, the frequency with which people decided to accede to the request of the psychologists also decreased. The percentage of individuals meeting the request was the greatest in the case of invitations submitted during a face-to-face conversation (56%), lower in the case of a telephone invitation (28%), and the lowest when invitations to participate were left in doorframes (6%). These results led to simple conclusions about how best to maximize the chances of get- ting the agreement of others in matters of importance to us, as well as how to arrange situations so as to allow us to behave optimally when confronted with a request that we do not necessarily want to fulfil.
Thus, if we would like to turn to someone with a request that is important to us, but we are not sure if we can count on a positive decision, the best course of action is to meet with this person directly and ask directly for consent. On the other hand, if we expect that someone would like to ask us for a favour that would run contrary to our interests, and we have reason to doubt in our capacity to refuse directly, we should attempt to direct the course of events so that the request comes to us in writing, or – at a minimum – limit the contact to a telephone conversation. Why is this so?
Why is it that the more direct the form in which a request is submitted, the greater the chances of compliance? It would seem that directness of contact leads to difficulties in refusing someone asking us for help. Indeed, when we refuse, we risk receiving verbal or non-verbal signals that we have caused some- one grief.
It is far easier to say “no” when someone asks us for something in writing. We can refuse in writing, or we can leave such a request unanswered. The particularly high effectiveness of requests submitted in conditions of direct interac- tion may be closely linked with eye contact.
A large body of research in social psychology has indicated that people fulfil requests with greater frequency when such contact is maintained by the individual making the request. For example, it has been shown that if an experimenter deliberately leaves a coin in a pay phone, exits the booth, waits for someone to enter then opens the120 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor door and asks the person inside to return the money, the chances of the coin being returned are greater when the experimenter looks that person in the eyes (Brockner, Pressman, Cabitt & Moran, 1982). Similarly, if someone leans out of a telephone booth and asks a passer-by for a coin because of an urgent need to call someone, the chances of receiving the money grow when the request is made while looking the person in the eyes (Ernest & Cooper, 1974).
Chris Kleinke and David Singer (1979) demonstrated that when a person handing out flyers looks in the eyes of passers-by, more flyers are taken. This effect was observed when the person handing out the flyers politely encouraged people to take them (“Excuse me. Would you like one?”), when a categorical tone accompanied the distribution of the flyer (“Take one”), and when the flyer was simply placed before passers-by without saying anything.
Further experiments led to the conclusion that volunteers making eye contact with those being asked for a charitable donation received llaarrggeerr ssuummss ((BBuullll && GGiibbssoonn--RRoobbiinnssoonn,, 11998811; ; LLinindsskkoolldd, , FFoorrttee, , HHaaaakkee && SScchhmmiiddtt,, 1977). Eye contact may also help people who have had the misfortune of dropping their change (Valentine, 1980) or a pile of surveys (Goldman & Fordyce, 1983), or when they have injured themselves while jogging (Shotland & Johnson, 1978). The beneficial impact of eye contact has also been observed in studies on the effective- ness of hitchhikers.
They were picked up more often by drivers if they looked them squarely in the eyes while waving their hands than if they looked off to the side (Morgan, Lockard, Fahrenbruch & Smith, 1975; Snyder, Grether & Keller, 1974). “Eye contact” is a rather imprecise phrase. Nicolas Gueguen and Celine Jacob (2002) decided to compare a situation in which the requester maintained constant eye contact with the person being asked for something to one in which eye contact was broken off and returned to at intervals.
Their experiment consisted of asking passers-by on a city street to participate in a marketing research survey. When eye contact was constantly maintained, 66% of participants consented to fill in the questionnaire, while in conditions when the experimenter’s eyes “danced around”, only 34% did so. Why does eye contact increase the chances that a request will be fulfilled?
The simplest interpretation of the link between looking in the eyes of people we are directing a request to and their compliance refers to studies suggesting that more desirable personality traits are assigned to those who look their interlocutors straight in the eyes (e.g. Brooks, Church & Fraser, 1986; Droney & Brooks, 1993) and they also benefit from greater affinity (e.g. Cook & Smith, 1975; Scherer, 1974) than those who avoid eye contact.
Because there is an assumption that the perception of people’s personalities as “better” and greater affinity towards such people are accompanied by a greater readiness to comply with their requests, it should come as no surprise that those who maintain eye contact with their partners in conversation get what they want more often than those who do not establish such contact. A more nuanced alternative explanation of the connection between eye contact and compliance was offered by Phoebe Ellsworth and Ellen Langer (1976). Their proposed model even attempted to predict situations in which eye contact wouldInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 121 enhance pliability and when this effect should not be expected.
Ellsworth and Langer observed that emotional excitation increases when we conclude that someone is looking at us. In interpersonal situations, this is usually a signal that some behaviour should be performed. If nothing in particular happens to indicate what behaviour is desired, an unpleasant tension will continue until the moment when the looked-upon individual is able to get away and by doing so terminate the inter- personal contact giving rise to that tension.
However, if the feeling that “someone is eyeing me” is accompanied by a clear signal of what reaction is expected from the person doing the looking, a reduction in the uncomfortable tension may be effected simply by engaging in the desired behaviour. The researchers conducted a very clever experiment to examine this assumption. The first of them engaged individuals coming up to the entrance of a shopping centre, informing them that on the other side there was a woman in need of help but that the experimenter herself was in a hurry to catch a train.
In addition, half of the experiment’s participants were informed specifically that the woman on the other side of the door was behaving as though looking for her lost contact lenses, while the other half were given ambiguous information – they were told that the woman “looks like she’s not feeling well”. Just behind the door, the second experimenter waited for participants in a rather unusual position – half crouching and leaning against the wall. This position is, obviously, helpful when searching for something that has gone missing, but may also be associated with an individual who has begun to feel ill (e.g.
experiencing stomach pain). Regardless of what a given participant said to the first experimenter, the second either avoided eye contact or looked the participant straight in the eyes. As it turned out, looking participants in the eyes enhanced their altruistic tendencies but only when the situation was unambiguous and it was obvious what needed to be done in order to help the woman (look together for her contact lenses).
When the situation was left vague, looking participants in the eyes did not increase the likelihood that they would render assistance. A similar view on the mechanism underlying the connection between eye contact and compliance is held by Chris Kleinke (1977), who suggests that gaze performs the function of a non-specific activator. The conclusion that someone is looking us in the eyes leads to a slight physiological stimulation of the body, and our attention (at least initially) is directed towards the person looking at us.
The ascertainment that we are being observed leads in turn to increased public self- consciousness, and we start paying at least slightly more attention to the situation we are in while attempting to ensure that our behaviour complies with social norms and internalized value system (Duval & Wicklund, 1972; Morin, 2011; Wicklund & Gollwitzer, 1987). Extensive experimental data demonstrates that a mere photograph of human eyes “looking at us” can make us more honest. Melissa Bateson, Daniel Nettle and Gilbert Roberts (2006) examined the effect of an image of a pair of eyes on contributions to an honesty box used to collect money for drinks in a university coffee room.
University employees tossed three times as much money into the box than in the control conditions where the eyes were not “checking them out”. In another experiment, conducted at a supermarket, the122 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor FIGURE 5.1 Eye (left) and control (right) images in situ in the supermarket Source: Ethology: International Journal of Behavioural Biology, 2012, vol. 118, p.
1098. Copyright Blackwels Verlag GmbH. researchers displayed either eye images or control images on charity collection buckets for 11 consecutive weeks (Powell, Roberts & Nettle, 2012).
Charitable contributions were greater in conditions when they “looked customers in the eyes” – see Figure 5.1. In accordance with the assumption that the conclusion that someone is watching us sharpens our focus on social norms and activates our readiness to engage in activities consistent with those norms, it may be supposed that gaze will increase compliance only when associated with socially desirable, or at least socially approved, behaviours. (We should note that it was just these types of behaviours present in the experiments described above).
What will happen if the request is of a different nature? Kleinke (1980) conducted a pair of studies examining this ques- tion. In the first of them, young women approached people walking around an airport.
In half of the cases they asked for a 10-cent coin, justifying this by saying that they had no money on them and urgently needed to make a phone call. In the other cases, they said the 10 cents was necessary to buy a chocolate bar. Regardless of the justification, in half of the cases the experimenters made eye contact with the participant while presenting their request, and in the other half they did not.
It transpired that directing one’s gaze towards a person to whom a request is being issued only increased the chances of that request being fulfilled when it was socially justified. Thus eye contact increased the chance of obtaining the 10 cents needed for using the phone, but it failed to make a difference when the money was for a chocolate bar. In the second experiment it turned out that making eye contact (this time coupled with touching the arm of the person being addressed) actually reduced the chance that change intended to be spent on chewing gum would be received.Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 123 Touch Both animals and people mark their territory and defend it against those who would encroach upon it.
Dogs urinate on trees and bushes in the vicinity of their lairs and try to scare off other dogs that enter that area. People erect fences around their homes, build walls or put up signs that read “Private property” or “Entry forbidden”. They also have a tendency to defend their territory, but as a rule people are more elastic than animals in matters of territorialism.
We eagerly invite guests into our home, or slightly less eagerly permit an unknown letter carrier with a large package to enter our abode. A meter reader from the electricity company is allowed in with still less enthusiasm, but neither do we shut the door in his face. For people, territory is not inevitably linked with a specific and constant space.
Indeed, a group of people conducting a conversation also acquire the status of territory. This group is surrounded by a consensual and invisible border that others who are not members of that group will not violate without a clear need to do so (Lyman & Scott, 1967). A good illustration of this border is to be found in studies analyzing the behaviour of passers-by towards a group standing on the pavement near a shop window.
If the members of the group were speaking among themselves (thus establishing a territory of interaction), passers-by avoided the entire group. However, if the members of the group were not communicating with one another, but rather examining the window display, passers-by were far more likely to walk between members of the group (Lindskold, Albert, Baer & Moore, 1976). From the perspective of greatest interest to us here, research concerning the territory directly linked with the human body is particularly important.
Individual cultures are characterized by clear preferences regarding what is referred to as per- sonal space. If two Americans or Europeans engaged in conversation and standing up are not familiar with each other, they will assume a face-to-face position. How far apart do they stand?
Setting aside particular situations such as a crowded bus, this distance will typically be the equivalent of an outstretched arm from the shoul- der to the fingertips, measuring around 90 centimetres. In Latin American cultures this distance will be reduced by about a hand’s length, measuring around 70 centimetres. Thus, if an American is engaged in conversation with a Haitian, the former will attempt to increase the distance between them while the latter will try to reduce it.
As a result, the American may come to the conclusion that the Haitian is a boor without manners, while the Haitian may perceive the American as cold, distant or even calculating (Hall, 1969). The need to maintain at least a minimal distance between one’s own body and that of another person depends on a very large number of factors. The most obvi- ous of them concerns the parts of the body one wishes to keep away from others.
As a rule we have no problem shaking hands with a stranger. European and American politicians shake millions of potential voters’ hands in the hope of get- ting their support, in spite of the absence of direct evidence that such activity really helps them. There is, however, evidence related to the acquisition of donations for charitable causes.
Nicolas Gueguen (2013b) examined the reactions of people124 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor visited in their homes by volunteers who asked them for a donation of €1 for children from Madagascar. It occurred that when the greeting was accompanied by a handshake, the proportion of people supporting the charitable campaign rose dramatically (from 53.3% to 95.5%). Mutual contact of the inside portions of hands is a gesture with a long tradition in our culture, both in situations involving two people familiar with each other and in conditions where they are not acquainted.
What would happen, however, if someone touched a part of a stranger’s body other than the inside of the hand? This would obviously contradict the rules in place in our culture, but would it influence that person’s compliance with a request addressed to him/her? A large number of studies have demonstrated that people are more disposed to fulfilling requests made by strangers when those requests are accompanied by a gentle touch on the arm or forearm.
The first experiments exploring this area were conducted by Chris Kleinke (1977). In his research a scenario was set up in which a female experimenter exited a phone booth at the moment another person walked up to it. The individual approaching the phone booth thus automatically became a participant in the study.
After a moment, the experimenter came back and asked for the return of 10 cents that she had left in the pay phone. When this request was accompanied by a light touch of the participant’s arm, the chances of recovering the coin increased. Indeed, in these conditions 96% of participants gave the money back, compared to 63% who returned the 10-cent coin in the control conditions.
In a second study, a female experimenter attempted to borrow a 10-cent coin from a stranger, ostensibly needing it to make a phone call. She succeeded in receiving the coin with greater frequency when the request was accompanied by a gentle touch on the arm. When she did so, the experimenter received money in every second case (51% to be precise), while in control conditions she only received money in 29% of cases.
In another study dedicated to the role of touch (Smith, Gier & Willis, 1982) shoppers at a supermarket were offered a piece of pizza. In some instances this request was coupled with the shopper’s arm being held for a brief moment. It turned out that this simple act increased not only the chances that shoppers would agree to test the quality of the product on offer, but also that they would buy it.
Frank Willis and Hellen Hamm (1980) demonstrated that an individual asked to sign a petition would do so more readily when gently held by the arm while the request was being made. A personality test was also more likely to be completed by those who were asked to do so while their arm was gently held at the moment the request was submitted (Patterson, Powell & Lenihan, 1986). Other studies con- ducted in a department store showed that customers whose arm was grasped by those conducting a survey were more likely to accede to the request that they answer a series of questions (Hornik, 1987; Hornik & Ellis, 1988).
Interestingly, those touched on the arm also expressed more favourable opinions about the structure of the survey itself, declared with greater frequency that they would par- ticipate in similar studies, and also were more likely to place their signatures on their survey.120 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 125 door and asks the person inside to return the money, the chances of the coin being Research has also shown that the effect on compliance that results from a touch returned are greater when the experimenter looks that person in the eyes on another person’s arm can also appear following a certain period of time. Nicolas (Brockner, Pressman, Cabitt & Moran, 1982). Similarly, if someone leans out of a Gueguen and a group of collaborators (Gueguen, Meineri & Charles-Sire, 2010; telephone booth and asks a passer-by for a coin because of an urgent need to call Gueguen & Vion, 2009) demonstrated that if a doctor touches the arm of a patient someone, the chances of receiving the money grow when the request is made leaving the surgery, that patient will be more likely to adhere to the medical advice while looking the person in the eyes (Ernest & Cooper, 1974).
Chris Kleinke and given. This was determined by reviewing how many of the recommended pills had David Singer (1979) demonstrated that when a person handing out flyers looks in not been swallowed after a few days by those patients who were touched on the the eyes of passers-by, more flyers are taken. This effect was observed when the arm in comparison with those who were given a standard farewell (meaning with- person handing out the flyers politely encouraged people to take them (“Excuse out being touched).
me. Would you like one?”), when a categorical tone accompanied the distribution MMoorrttoonn GGoollddmmaann,, OOddeettttee KKiiyyoohhaarraa aanndd DDoororotthhyy PPfafannnneensstteeiill ((11998855)) mmaaddee aa of the flyer (“Take one”), and when the flyer was simply placed before passers-by rather simple request of study participants. Just in front of the entrance to a uni- without saying anything.
Further experiments led to the conclusion that volunteers versity library they asked people how to get to the education faculty building. In making eye contact with those being asked for a charitable donation received some conditions, they touched the forearm of the individual to whom their ques- larger sums (Bull & Gibson-Robinson, 1981; Linskold, Forte, Haake & Schmidt, tion was posed. Of course, those (unknowingly) participating in the study gave 1977).
Eye contact may also help people who have had the misfortune of dropping their assistance and explained the easiest way to get there. Inside the library another their change (Valentine, 1980) or a pile of surveys (Goldman & Fordyce, 1983), or experimenter waited and invited these individuals to participate in a charitable when they have injured themselves while jogging (Shotland & Johnson, 1978). The campaign to help disabled children.
This participation was to consist of a two-hour beneficial impact of eye contact has also been observed in studies on the effective- shift at a phone bank. Among those who had been touched on the arm, 40% gave ness of hitchhikers. They were picked up more often by drivers if they looked them their consent to participate while only 5% of those who were just asked about the squarely in the eyes while waving their hands than if they looked off to the side way to the education faculty building agreed to man the phone.
(Morgan, Lockard, Fahrenbruch & Smith, 1975; Snyder, Grether & Keller, 1974). Other interesting studies are those conducted by Jane Nannberg and Christie “Eye contact” is a rather imprecise phrase. Nicolas Gueguen and Celine Jacob Hansen (1994), who examined whether touching another person on the arm (2002) decided to compare a situation in which the requester maintained constant would affect the quality of work done on a task that person had previously agreed eye contact with the person being asked for something to one in which eye contact to do.
They approached students of both sexes with the request to fill in a question- was broken off and returned to at intervals. Their experiment consisted of asking naire, which they did in a conventional manner, maintaining a certain physical passers-by on a city street to participate in a marketing research survey. When eye distance.
Individuals who agreed to complete the questionnaire were given a bundle contact was constantly maintained, 66% of participants consented to fill in the of papers containing 150 questions, then were asked to sit down somewhere in the questionnaire, while in conditions when the experimenter’s eyes “danced around”, vicinity, familiarize themselves with the instructions and answer the questions in only 34% did so. the survey. In half of the cases this information was given as the forearm of the Why does eye contact increase the chances that a request will be fulfilled?
The participant was gently touched (for approximately 2 seconds). The questionnaire simplest interpretation of the link between looking in the eyes of people we are itself generally focused on controversial issues (e.g. assisted suicide, homosexuality, directing a request to and their compliance refers to studies suggesting that more abortion, death penalty) or the private life of the respondent.
The instructions desirable personality traits are assigned to those who look their interlocutors given at the beginning stated that every response was valuable, but that it wasn’t straight in the eyes (e.g. Brooks, Church & Fraser, 1986; Droney & Brooks, 1993) necessary to answer every single question. It turned out that those whose forearms and they also benefit from greater affinity (e.g.
Cook & Smith, 1975; Scherer, had been grasped answered 25% more questions on average than those who were 1974) than those who avoid eye contact. Because there is an assumption that the not touched. However, the subtle social influence technique being analyzed here perception of people’s personalities as “better” and greater affinity towards such was not helpful in distinguishing the manner in which participants responded to people are accompanied by a greater readiness to comply with their requests, it the questions they had answered.
should come as no surprise that those who maintain eye contact with their What is the mechanism underlying the effectiveness of such a simple device as partners in conversation get what they want more often than those who do not grasping someone by the arm while addressing a request, or even afterwards, as establish such contact. done in the last of the experiments described above? The relevant literature offers A more nuanced alternative explanation of the connection between eye contact two competing explanations.
First, attention is drawn to how touch is associated and compliance was offered by Phoebe Ellsworth and Ellen Langer (1976). Their with not only the physical dimension of interpersonal closeness, but also its proposed model even attempted to predict situations in which eye contact would psychological aspect. This may also lead us to perceive an individual who delicately126 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor touches us as friendly and likable, enamouring that person to us and making us more likely to help (e.g.
Patterson et al., 1986). This results primarily from the individual biographies of nearly every person. In the vast majority of cases people have positive experiences associated with being touched by someone.
This assump- tion would also concur with the results of research demonstrating that hospital patients more favourably rated nurses that touched them frequently, and also were also more eager to engage them in conversation (Algulera, 1967), and that psycho- therapists touching the hands and arms of their patients succeeded in motivating them to more quickly open up and discuss their pressing problems (Paulsell & Goldman, 1984). The second interpretation refers to the social privilege motive (e.g. Henley, 1973).
If someone grabs us by the arm, a signal is sent at the same time that this individual is authorized to address certain demands and expectations to us. Nancy Henley showed study participants photographs of pairs of people between whom there was a clear difference in status (e.g. master–slave, police officer–suspect).
The participants’ task consisted of indicating the person in the photograph who would initiate any sort of touching behaviour. The decisive majority of participants declared that it was the higher-status individual who would do so. The potential that the lower-status individual would engage in this behaviour was perceived as untact- ful (see Henley & LaFrance, 1984).
In another study Brenda Major and Richard Heslin (1982) showed participants a series of slides containing pairs of individuals (some of the same sex, some of different sexes). Sometimes one of them was touch- ing the other, sometimes there was no touch involved. The study participants were supposed to determine what kind of people were on display.
It turned out that the estimation of individual figures’ assertiveness and domination went up when they were shown touching others, and decreased when they were presented as being touched by others. Gueguen (2002) demonstrated in his study, during which men asked passers-by to participate in a brief research survey, that touch was particularly helpful for those men whose clothing suggested high status (suit and tie). If an experimenter who was dressed in this manner touched the hand of a passer-by, the chance that he would receive agreement for participation in the survey increased by more than twofold.
When the experimenter was dressed in jeans and a t-shirt, the positive effect of touch on gaining compliance was clearly reduced. Unfortunately, psychologists have demonstrated unusually deep reluctance to conduct research directly examining the question of which of the aforementioned factors (interpersonal closeness vs social privilege) is actually at the core of this simple social influence technique’s efficacy. During one of our attempts at grap- pling with this problem (Dolinski, 2005) we assumed that certain verbal messages can be viewed as coherent or incoherent with these mechanisms.
An unambiguous order would seem more consistent with the social privilege motive than with the interpersonal closeness motive, while the opposite would be true of a polite, sincere request. In our experiment we turned to participants with a request to help find a gold earring ostensibly lost on the sidewalk, either with an order (“Help me look for this!”) or a polite request (“Would you be so kind as to help me look for this?”);Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 127 regardless of the form of the message, we either simultaneously touched their arm/ forearm or did not do so. We assumed that if the efficacy of touch as a social influence technique rests in the social privilege motive, this technique should be more effective in condi- tions where an order is given rather than in conditions of a request, while if the mechanism responsible is interpersonal closeness then the pattern of results should be reversed.
Results indicated that, while touching passers-by increased the possibility that they would help search for the lost object, there was no association demonstrated between touch and the manner in which the message was formu- lated. This experiment also failed to resolve the issue of which of the hypothesized mechanisms plays the fundamental role in the touch technique. Studies by Jack Powell and his collaborators proved equally inconclusive (Powell et al., 1994), as they confirmed neither the mechanism associated with affinity nor the one linked with signalling the authority to formulate expectations and requirements.
Patterson et al. (1986) performed an experiment in which they examined whether people felt greater affinity towards an individual who touched their arm while addressing a request to them. If this were the case, the result would suggest that the social closeness motive came into play.
However, there were no differences observed in judgements on the experimenter depending on whether he touched a study participant or not. The experiment’s authors thus conclude that the social privilege motive is, in their view, a more likely mechanism for explaining the effectiveness of touch as a social influence technique. The problem is that such a conclusion would seem to be unjustified.
Indeed, as of yet nobody has succeeded in demonstrating convincingly that this motive in fact plays a key role. There are, however, results indirectly indicating that an unobtrusive touch enhances affinity. During an experiment conducted in a university library, the library employees sometimes (ostensibly by accident) touched students’ arms while returning their library cards.
As they exited the building, students were asked to take a survey in which they were to assess the functioning of the library and its employees. It turned out that those students who had been touched on the arm by a librarian expressed more favourable opinions than those served in a standard manner (Fisher, Rytting & Heslin, 1976). Perhaps the inconclusivity in the patterns of results discussed above derives from the co-occurrence of the two mechanisms.
On the other hand, we also cannot exclude the conclusion that neither of them is involved. Indeed, it is possible that the essence of the technique consisting of touching the arm or forearm of an indi- vidual approached with a request is grounded in something else. A situation in which a stranger grabs us by the arm may shake us out of our routine, much as in the case of the pique and DTR, which have already been discussed earlier in this chapter.
We should observe that this is a rather unusual situation, one which disrupts the course of a routine situation involving a request made of us by an unfamiliar individual. To a certain degree this interpretation would be in line with the pattern of results attained by one experiment in which it was examined whether touch would be an effective social influence technique when asking someone for help in128 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor tabulating the scores achieved by others in a questionnaire. The results proved less than clear-cut.
Those individuals who were held by the arm during the addressing of the request then sacrificed more of their time counting scores on questionnaires than those who were not touched by the experimenter. However, the average num- ber of questionnaires reviewed in both conditions was nearly the same (Patterson et al., 1986). It can therefore be said that those who were grabbed by the arm did work longer, but when converting their work into time units they were less efficient.
Perhaps their functioning was disrupted by being knocked off balance. Participants who were held by the arm while having a request made of them may have been thinking (at least from time to time) about this odd situation while counting scores, which would have led to reduced intellectual efficiency. This assumption would also be consistent with the results of another experiment involving an examination of the efficiency of people who were touched during the course of performing tasks.
Nan Sussman and Howard Rosenfeld (1978), the study’s authors, came to the conclusion that the efficiency of an individual’s functioning does not proceed from the mere fact of being touched by someone, but rather from the justification for such activity. A portion of participants were told that an individual keeping track of time would be seated next to them, and if that person felt that the task was being performed too slowly, an indication of this would be given by gently squeezing their arm and telling them how many seconds remained for completion of the task. The other participants were not given this information.
In all cases, the woman whose purported task was to keep an eye on the time either held the study participant by the arm or did not. The task involved perception and its proper completion required the focus of one’s concentration. As it turned out, male participants performed the task worse in conditions when they had not been told the reason for being touched by the experimenter than when they had been informed of why she was doing so.
An analogous effect was noted in a second experiment conducted following a similar procedure. Thus the question arises of whether holding someone by the arm while addressing a request is a separate social influence technique, or rather a variation of techniques based on strange or surprising situations (DTR, the pique). This ques- tion can only be answered through empirical research, and presently remains an entirely open one.
Chris Kleinke (1977, 1980) proposes an entirely different interpretation of the dependencies being discussed here. He suggests that touch functions in a similar manner to eye contact, and performs the role of a non-specific activator. If we are touched on the arm or forearm by a stranger, our state of physiological arousal is enhanced, our attention is directed towards the “here and now”, and we adopt a more reflective approach to the matter of our behaviour and its compliance with our attitudes and value system.
The conviction that touch and the maintenance of eye contact are based on the same mechanism of the non-specific activator would seem to be shared by a large number of researchers, as both of them are employed jointly in the course of some experiments. Presenting a request, the experimenter touches the arm or forearm of a participant while simultaneously looking thatInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 129 person in the eyes (e.g. Hornik, 1987; Hornik & Ellis, 1988; Kleinke, 1977).
Unfortunately, while Chris Kleinke’s theory – that touch operates as a non-specific activator – seems an interesting idea, in light of the lack of sufficient empirical evidence it remains merely an intriguing hypothesis. Another issue concerns the sex of the people touching and being touched when the former is making a request of the latter. Experiments have typically accounted for the factor of sex.
In a clear majority of published studies, a touch of the hand or arm of the addressee of a request increased the chances that the request would meet with acceptance in all possible configurations (and thus without regard to the sex of the person asking or the sex of the person being asked). Discrepancies across research results only concerned the strength of the effect in particular condi- tions. The most common results pattern observed was one indicating that touch is most effective if the participants in the interaction are of different sexes (e.g.
Heslin, Nguyen & Nguyen, 1983; Stier & Hall, 1984) or when both are women (Patterson et al., 1986). However, in Poland we recorded a different pattern of results. The experiment (Dolinski, 2010) was conducted in the vicinity of a railway station.
The experimenter (depending on the conditions this was either a young woman or a young man) asked a lone pedestrian – who appeared to be an adult – for a favour. Both women and men were addressed. The experimenter requested that the study participant send a letter for him/her, explaining that he/she was in a hurry to catch a train.
In half of the cases the experimenter held the forearm of the individual with whom the interaction was taking place. Every letter was appended with the same address, and a stamp was already stuck to the envelope. The envelope contained a piece of paper with a description of the experimental conditions (e.g.
experimenter – woman; participant – man; condition – no touch). This facilitated the application of two indicators of compliance – verbal expression of consent to send the letter and actual sending of the letter (which was of course identified later). The results of this experiment are presented in Figure 5.2.
As we can see, the technique of touching a person to whom a request is addressed turned out to be effective in both the conditions in which a woman formulated the request, and when a man addressed the request to a woman. However, it was entirely ineffective when a man asked another man to send the letter. To be more precise, in these conclusions we observed a clear decline in the frequency of request fulfilment.
We observed a similar pattern of results in a subse- quent experiment involving the sale of incense sticks on the street to passers-by. Why is it that in Poland a man touching another man not only fails to increase the chance that he will fulfil his request, but in fact reduces it? Our conclusion was that the root may lie in this country’s strong male homophobia.
A typical (heterosexual) Polish man may react with aversion to the touch of another, unknown man and perceive the gesture in sexual terms. We confirmed the correctness of this inter- pretation in an additional study (Dolinski, 2010). Concluding these deliberations over touch as a social influence technique, we should note that certain issues of a technical, or perhaps practical, nature are in need of clarification.
First, an important parameter of touch is its strength. “Touch130 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 F-F F-M M-F M-M No Touch Touch FIGURE 5.2 Percentage of compliance with the request to mail a letter in each of the experimental conditions. N = 40 in each condition.
F-F: Female asking female; F-M: Female asking male; M-F: Male asking female; M-M: Male asking male Source: Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 2010, vol. 34, p. 183.
Copyright Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2010. someone on the arm or forearm” can signify a very delicate laying of the arm on that part of the body, a clear hold, or a squeeze of the hand with such force as to cause pain. Chris Segrin (1993), the author of a meta-analysis of studies addressing the link between touch and compliance, draws attention to this factor in stating that it may be of significance but that there is no clear criterion for determining what strength of touch is optimal in enhancing the compliance of study partici- pants.
The authors of experimental studies generally do provide information in that regard, but they use vague terms such as “delicate” or “light” touch, which can mean something entirely different to two different researchers. Second, we should observe that the experiments concerning the efficacy of touch as a social influence technique discussed above most frequently involve touching either the arm or forearm of the addressee. Which part of the body should we touch for the greatest effect?
Or, to put it more precisely, which part of the arm should we touch for the greatest effect? Shari Paulsell and Morton Goldman (1984) posed just this question. Shoppers in a large mall were used as study participants, and they were asked to respond to four questions concerning literature.
Depending on the experimental conditions, they were either not touched at all, or were touched while being asked to agree to a short interview; the touch was either on the arm above the elbow, between the elbow and the hand, or on the hand. Generally the mere fact of being touched was sufficient to spur compliance on the part of the addressee of the request, but this effect was clearlyInteraction dynamics and the surprise factor 131 moderated by the sex of the person touching and the person being touched, as well as by the particular part of the body that was touched by the experimenter. A woman’s touch raised to a much greater degree the chances that shoppers would agree to participate than did the touch of a man.
A woman submitting the request was particularly effective when she touched the addressee of the request either above or below the shoulder, especially if she was touching a man. It should be recalled, however, that this is the result of only one study, and in addition it involved only two experimenters (one man and one woman), which may have facilitated unwanted specific effects. For example, one may imagine that the different consequences of touching particular parts of the arm may result from the fact that the individual making the request was moving his/her hand up, down, or held it level.
In this situation the experimenter’s height could be the key factor. In studies concerning touch, the physical attractiveness of the experimenter may also play a significant role, and this factor may in turn interact with the portion of the arm being touched, etc. When several experimenters are performing a study, the absence of interaction effects with the variable of the experimenter him/her- self is an argument in support of the claim that we are dealing with a real rule.
The studies being discussed here obviously do not fulfil this condition. Summary In many decision-making situations, we waver. It is no different in situations involving social influence, in which one person wants to induce another to engage in some defined behaviour.
Certain arguments make the person being cajoled likely to give in, while other factors make this less likely. The two techniques described in this chapter are designed to break through this resistance. The first of them is rather simple, while the second is exceptionally sophisticated.
The origins of the “that’s not all” technique are to be found in the classic idea of the sale. A normal discount is static in nature. The customer sees the old (higher) price and compares it with the new (lower) one.
The “that’s not all” social influence tech- nique, in contrast to the previously described discounts, has a dynamic nature. Its essence consists of the initial offer being so interesting that the customer deliberates whether to take advantage or not. Then, an additional argument is supplied, offering something beneficial.
This argument tips the scales, and the person targeted takes the decision. Research conducted by J. Burger, who was the first to describe this tech- nique in the literature, demonstrated that when selling goods this technique is effective, both when a reduction in price is suddenly offered and when an additional product is proposed as a gift.
Further studies on this technique generated results suggesting that it is only effective in the sale of less expensive goods, and a condition of its effectiveness is inducing a state of automaticity in people targeted with it. The “disrupt-then-reframe” technique is based on the assumption that people who are asked for something experience an approach/avoid conflict. Approaching is associated with the desire to provide aid to a person in need and who asks for it, or with the desire to take advantage of an offer presented by someone.
Avoidance, how- ever, is linked with the attendant effort and loss of time or money. People resist doing132 Interaction dynamics and the surprise factor what someone else encourages them to do. Many social influence techniques are aimed at increasing others’ desire to do something by highlighting the benefits that may result (the perfect example of which may by the “that’s not all” trick discussed earlier) or by minimizing the losses resulting from it.
The “disrupt-then-reframe” technique, however, is aimed simultaneously at reducing resistance and boosting incentive. This operation consists of finding a way to “jolt people out of their routine”, making the course of the interaction a bit surprising and unusual (e.g. by giving a price in cents instead of dollars), and then supplying a new argument encouraging them to concede to a given request.
In the light of what is now a very extensive body of research, this technique has proved itself effective not only in sales transactions, but also (perhaps first and foremost) in such areas as getting respondents to agree to participate in a telephone survey or encouraging people to sign a petition. While the DTR technique requires a quite complex sequence of actions, the pique is far simpler. The idea is to present a request that people usually reject out of hand in an unusual manner (for example, asking for 37 cents instead of a quarter).
While the experiments did demonstrate the effectiveness of this technique, its psychological mechanism remains unclear. There is no codification of cultural norms determining the permissible (and optimal) physical distance that should exist between two people interacting directly with each other. The issue of physical distance is also important from the perspective of social influence.
In this chapter we have considered two issues within this area in particular: eye contact and touch. A significant number of studies have demonstrated that people are more apt to fulfil requests directed to them when the person making the request looks straight into the eyes of the individual receiving it. Eye contact most likely performs the role of a so-called “non-specific activator”.
Awareness that someone is looking us in the eyes serves to increase our body’s level of physiological stimulation, and our attention (at least initially) is drawn to the person looking at us. This leads us to engaging in a more careful analysis of the situation, and we begin to take care that our behaviour is consistent with our attitudes. The second issue analyzed in this chapter concerns the role of touch.
Many studies have demonstrated that people are more inclined to fulfil requests made by strangers if the request is accompanied by a delicate touch of the arm or shoulder. It has also been shown that touching someone on the shoulder or arm leads to that person improving the performance of a task taken up earlier. What is the mechanism underlying the efficacy of such a simple device as grasping someone by the arm while addressing a request, or even after the request has been expressed?
The subject literature generally presents two competing explanations. One of them draws attention to association between touch and interpersonal close- ness, not only in the physical sense but also the psychological aspect. This leads to us perceiving a person touching us as nice and affable, which leads to affinity, and in turn increases the likelihood that we will provide assistance to that individual.
The alternative interpretation refers to the social privilege motive. While being held by the arm, we simultaneously receive the signal that the person doing so is authorized to address certain expectations and demands to us. Research done on the subject has yet to establish which of these interpretations is closer to the truth.6 TECHNIQUES OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE USING MOOD AND EMOTION On an almost daily basis, each of us experiences a myriad of affective states – some lasting longer, some shorter, some more intense, some less, with a colourful diversity of content.
What, if any, is the impact of such states on our willingness to fulfil requests made of us? Does it increase, or perhaps reduce our compliance? Why are we inclined to react positively or negatively?
This chapter is an attempt to answer these and other questions. First, I will address the role of the physiological stimulation experienced by individuals making a request or having a request addressed to them. Next, I will present studies that demonstrate the importance our mood has in affecting our susceptibility to social influence techniques; I will close the chapter with an analysis of the role played in social influence by specific (discrete) emotions.
Emotional arousal is a temporary state existing in the human body that is characterized by somatic energy and changes in consciousness, consisting of a narrowing of its field. This condition facilitates the body’s engagement of adaptive behaviours under conditions of increased demands imposed either by the external environment or by the individual concerned. In this state of arousal the heart beats quickly, blood is directed to muscles as well as to the brain, whose bioelectric activity increases.
It is assumed that arousal is a non-specific affective state in the sense that it may exhibit a sign (which may be perceived as pleasant or unpleasant), but it does not have the particular content possessed by emotions (Frijda, 1986). Insofar as emotional arousal is treated in psychology as a non-specific state, emotions are specific. For example, while sadness and fear are both negative emotions, we clearly perceive the differences between them.
In turn, what links emotional arousal and emotions is the latter’s intensity (high) and duration (short – usually seconds, rarely minutes). It is precisely these parameters that differentiate the two emotional states mentioned above from moods. A mood is low-intensity, but may last longer (hours, days, even weeks at a time).
And while emotions are directed at an object (“I’m sad because”, “I’m furious with”), moods are often objectless and undirected (Niedenthal, Krauth-Gruber & Ric, 2006).134 Techniques using mood and emotion We shall begin our analysis of the role played by affective states in social influence processes by examining some matters concerning physiological arousal. Physiological arousal Research conducted over half a century ago (Back, Bogdonoff, Shaw & Klein, 1963), during which the initial stage of the experiment involved measuring participants’ levels of physiological arousal, demonstrated that this arousal is associ- ated with the conformity later observed in their behaviour. Conformity in this study was tested using the Asch procedure, in which other experiment partici- pants (de facto confederates of the experimenter) uniformly provide an erroneous answer in order to observe whether the “true” participant adopted their opinion.
It turned out that the greater the real participant’s physiological arousal at the very beginning of the experiment, the more likely he or she was to engage in conform- ist behaviour. Similarly enhanced conformist tendencies were observed by John Darley (1966) among study participants who were initially informed that they could expect to experience electric shocks. Information about the threat of expe- riencing a jolt of electricity naturally led to a significant increase in physiological arousal.
The role of arousal has also been examined in experiments on susceptibility to persuasion. In one of them, several of the participants were induced to engage in physical activity, which led to their physiological arousal (Sanbonmatsu & Kardes, 1988). It turned out that this state led them to attach less importance to the content of messages and the quality of the arguments contained in them, at the same time increasing their tendency to make use of peripheral cues (such as the authority of the individual issuing the communique).
Vera Corfield (1969) observed that the majority of situations involving social influence are accompanied by an increase in physiological arousal. The simple pres- ence of other people (often strangers to us) evokes arousal. It may be further enhanced by the physical attractiveness of those people, or by the fact that they are famous.
People attempting to exert influence over us often stand very close, touch us, look us in the eyes (see Chapter 5), additionally increasing the levels of arousal we experience. Another source of enhanced arousal may be the content of verbal messages that reach us. Someone collecting donations for a charitable cause may, for example, tell us graphic stories of people suffering pain or hunger.
Various sensory experiences may also serve as stimulants of physiological arousal. Alternatively, it could be a black patch over the eye of a vagrant, or the perfume of a salesperson encouraging us to sample some cheese in the supermarket. Still another source of arousal may be the very object at the centre of our attention during a situation in which social influence is being applied to us.
Thus, if we are expected to buy a new car, the very presence of that car and all accompanying information about its qualities will perform that role. If, however, we are in the process of selling our own used car, arousal may be generated by the sight or even the mere imagination of the pile of cash we may obtain.Techniques using mood and emotion 135 Among people who have already experienced one source of arousal and then find themselves in another situation that gives rise to emotions, a synergistic effect from the accumulation of stimuli may occur. If the arousal is perceived as an unpleasant thing, this condition is obviously very disagreeable for such an individual, and in extreme cases may even be aversive.
Acquiescence, the fulfilment of a request, consent to a proposal or performance of a task often become a means of reducing arousal. It thus comes as no surprise that, as a general proposition, high arousal levels are conducive to compliance. A good demonstration of this effect can be found in a study whose participants were students exiting a public toilet facility in a university building.
An experimenter waited for prospective participants by the exit, and made an unexpected request of them. He said that he was in a hurry, and that a friend of his was waiting in another part of the building for some notes that he urgently needed. The request, obviously, concerned delivering the notes.
An analogical request was made to students who were simply walking down the hallway. It was assumed that, because a public toilet and its surroundings are an area in which people experience a particularly salient need for privacy, contact with a stranger in such a place will generate unpleasant physiological arousal. This state of arousal should, however, be much weaker in a corridor, where contact with another person, even a stranger, is nothing out of the ordinary.
Significantly, it turned out that while only 45% of people approached in the corridor agreed to pass the notes along to the other student, this figure rose sharply (to 80%) when the request was lodged in front of the door to the public toilet (Cann & Blackwelder, 1984).The question thus arises of why emotional arousal induced individuals to give their consent to the request of an experimenter whose very presence and behaviour served as the source of that arousal. In other words, could participants be unable to minimize this unpleasant emotional state by refusing to accede to the request and be quickly retreating from the place in which they were approached? It would seem that the key factor is that refusal to fulfil the simple, polite request may have served to addi- tionally enhance the unpleasant arousal, as it could have led to unpleasant internal reflections by the participants as to their own person (“As it turns out, I’m disobliging and rude”, “I behaved rudely for no good reason”).
An alternative explanation for the compliance of individuals approached by the toilet may be based on the assumption that their capacity for processing informa- tion was at that moment slightly disrupted. A situation in which we are subjected to social influence often requires the engagement of our cognitive instrumentation in order to adequately assess the circumstances. For example, we must properly judge whether the fulfilment of a given request or agreement to some proposal is compliant with our system of values, or whether it runs contrary to our own inter- ests.
A significant body of empirical data (see e.g. Baron & Moore, 1987; Bodenhausen, 1993) allows us to assume that a high level of emotional arousal is not conducive to such rational analysis. Indeed, it is an exemplification of a general principle that assumes that while medium-intensity arousal optimizes the functioning of an individual, strong arousal leads to inhibited functioning (Lacey & Lacey, 1978; PPrriibbrraamm && MMccGGuuiinnnesess, s1, 1997755).).136 Techniques using mood and emotion There is essentially universal agreement among psychologists that arousal evokes neurophysiological processes that induce disruption in the processing of information.
However, there is no such agreement as to just which processes those are. Robert Baron (2000) offers three competing explanations for this phenomenon. Supporters of what has assumed the mantle of the classic interpretation feel that physiological arousal leads to activation of certain areas of the cerebral cortex, but the consequence of stimulation of these areas is a reduction in the activity of neighbouring areas.
It is the suppression of these areas of the brain that leads to reduced cognitive efficiency. Supporters of another interpretation make reference to data suggesting that strong physiological arousal reduces the volume of blood flowing into the brain. The presence of insufficient “power” leads to the brain behaving in the manner of a car on its last drop of petrol.
Indeed, the car continues to move forward, but the engine splutters without a break. While these two approaches suggest that we are dealing with an automatic process that is com- pletely independent of the individual concerned, those who subscribe to a third interpretation suggest that arousal, rather than impairing, actually induces thinking. The problem is, such thinking is not always directed towards the issue presented by the matter at hand.
Thus a physiologically aroused customer in a shop may, for example, begin to wonder intensely about the sources of said arousal, but not about whether she really needs a pair of light-yellow trousers. Presently there is insufficient empirical evidence to definitively support any particular one of those three interpretations. The role of positive and negative mood In the early 1970s, Gordon Bower began studying the effect of mood on memory processes (e.g.
Bower, Monteiro & Gilligan, 1971). In 1981 he published a widely- discussed article in which he described the numerous consequences of hypnotic induction on individuals experiencing joyful or gloomy moods. In one experi- ment, participants were requested to recall various episodes from their childhood.
The following day, they categorized each of them as pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. The day after that, a positive or negative mood was induced among the partici- pants, and they were then again asked to recall as many episodes as possible. Individuals experiencing a positive mood easily recalled pleasant episodes, but had difficulty in remembering unpleasant ones.
The opposite was observed among participants experiencing a negative mood – they had an easier time recalling episodes that they had previously labelled as unpleasant. Attempting to explain this effect, the author formulated a rule known as “mood-state-dependent retention”. According to this rule, one’s mood (as well as – it may be assumed – other affective states) activates memories of those experiences that are affectively congruent with the mood.
The obvious consequence of this is that it becomes easier to recall con- tent that is consistent with a given affective state rather than inconsistent content. Symmetry in the relation between mood and cognitive processes does not apply only to memory. Bower observed that people attend to and learn more aboutTechniques using mood and emotion 137 events that correspond to their emotional state, and labels this as the mood-congruity effect (Bower, 1981).
As in the case of determinants of the course of cognitive processes, psychologists have devoted considerable attention to the role of mood in their work on the determinants of social behaviours. Results of exploratory research indicate that the mood-congruity effect concerns not only the relationship between emotional states and cognitive processes, but also with behaviours of a social character. A positive mood, evoked by various experimental procedures, led to increased readi- ness to help others.
In one experiment it was demonstrated that individuals who have unexpectedly received a refund of 10 cents after a conversation in a phone booth were then more inclined to provide assistance to an individual who had dropped a pile of papers (Isen & Levin, 1972). Predisposition to altruism also rose during sunny days (Cunningham, 1979; Gueguen & Lamy, 2013), after listening to a pleasant piece of music (Wilson, 1981), and after receiving a cookie (Isen & Levin, 1972). A good mood also induced customers in shops to spend more money (Baker, Levy & Grewal, 1992; Sajjad & Tausif, 2012).
Other research, however, has demonstrated that people do not always react in a manner consistent with the emotional state they are experiencing. In one experi- ment, people in a good mood provided assistance to another person only sporadically. This help consisted of reading fragments of a book.
When the partici- pants were told that the contents to be read were cheerful in nature, and that reading and listening to them would improve one’s mood, those who were in a positive mood were especially inclined to engage in such activity. However, when it was mentioned that the contents were sad, and that reading them would lead to a worse mood, it was precisely those people who were in a positive mood that very rarely agreed to perform the suggested actions (Isen & Simmonds, 1978). Similar eeffffeeccttss wweerree aallssoo oobbsseerrvveedd iinn aa nnuummbbeerr ooff ootthheerr s stutuddieies s( e(e.g.g.
.C Cuunnnniningghhamam, S, Stetienibbeerrgg & Grev, 1980; Rosenhan, Salovey & Hargis, 1981). This led Alice Isen (1984; Clark & Isen, 1982) to formulate a rule according to which – since one of the motiva- tions for human activity is the desire to maintain a good mood – people avoid behaviours that may lead to its worsening. This concerns not only engagement in emotionally costly forms of aiding others.
People in a positive mood are, for example, unlikely to undertake serious financial risks (Isen & Geva, 1987). Obviously, financial loss may impair one from achieving the desired positive mood. If the experience of positive emotional states is something that people fight to protect when it is happening to them, do people experiencing negative emotional states engage in activity that will help them feel better?
Clark and Isen (1982) claim that this is often the case. Good examples of strategic improvements in mood are supplied by studies in which individuals experiencing depressive states eagerly engage in altruistic behaviour that has been presented as pleasant and attractive (Cunningham, Schaffer, Barbee, Wolff & Kelley, 1990). However, it is not always the case that negative emotional states lead to increased readiness to help others.
Particularly, this is not the case when these states are intense, and people are focused on their own difficulties and problems (Berkowitz, 1993).138 Techniques using mood and emotion Research conducted by the Australian psychologist Joseph Forgas (1998) is important for understanding the role of mood in proclivity to accede to the requests of others. This researcher focused on the manner in which people react to a request for help and how they evaluate that request, as well as the manner in which they process the information that is reaching them. Forgas adopted the assumption that particular requests differ in their degree of complexity and pecu- liarity.
At one extreme we may locate routine requests – generally polite requests concerning small favours; at the other – requests concerning unusual things, which are formulated in a highly atypical manner. It may be assumed that typical, con- ventional requests meet with automatic reactions, and that individuals don’t “worry their heads too much”, quickly forgetting about their content. The situation is different in the case of uncommon requests, and also those formulated in an unu- sual way (e.g.
not very polite, or just the opposite: extraordinarily elaborate). In this event, the individual being approached with the request will process information more attentively, subject it to extensive analysis, and will, as a result, remember the content of the request and the circumstances in which it was lodged. The application of an automatic or deliberative mode of processing information also facilitates distinct affective states.
The experience of positive states is conducive to the application of intuitive formulae and “mental shortcuts”. Experiencing nega- tive emotional states, however, leads people to apply more systematic, and one may even say rational, cognitive strategies (Clark & Isen, 1982; Schwarz & Bless, 1991). The affective state one feels also exerts an influence on the perception of various events.
The mood-congruity effect discussed above suggests that viewpoints of such events will be “filtered” through the affect an individual is going through at the time. Forgas therefore concluded that individuals in a positive mood will generally for- mulate more positive interpretations of requests directed at them in comparison to those experiencing a negative emotional state. People experiencing a good mood should, as a result, be more inclined to fulfil requests made of them than those in a negative mood.
The eventual fulfilment of a request depends (often primarily) on the subjective interpretation of the entire event. What is more, he assumed that a request of a conventional nature (e.g. formed in a polite, standard way) should be accepted more or less automatically.
Performance of a request should therefore not be directly dependent on the mood experienced by its addressee. However, things should be different in respect of untypical requests (e.g. formulated in a manner inconsistent with established tradition).
In these cases the processing of information should be more systematic rather than automatic. Thus, in such a situation – according to Forgas – the affective state being experienced by the individual has a significant impact on the processing of information, even determining to a certain degree the assessments made and judgements reached. Assessment of a situation associated with being the addressee of another person’s request will therefore be influenced by the affective state being experienced.
Thus, concludes Forgas, the type of mood felt should exert a minimal impact on assessment of conventional requests and tendency to fulfil them, whereas the impact will be much stronger in respect of unconventional requests and decisions about their fulfilment.Techniques using mood and emotion 139 In the first experiment dedicated to this issue, large envelopes were placed on desks in the reading room of a university library. Some of them contained sets of humorous cartoons, while the others contained pictures of automobile accidents. Library patrons were observed as they sat down at their desks and became unwitting participants in the experiment; they were given a few moments to familiarize them- selves with the contents of the envelope.
It was assumed that viewing a series of humorous cartoons would induce a good mood among the majority who saw them, while images of automobile accidents would result in experiencing a bad mood. After a few moments, an experimenter approached the subject and asked to borrow a piece of paper for the purpose of taking notes, or – in other conditions – ten pages of paper. Sometimes the request was formulated in a pleasant, conventional manner, while in others it took a direct and almost rude tone, contrary to convention (“Give me .
. .”). Several minutes after that incident, another experimenter approached the participant and explained that the request for a piece of paper is part of a psycho- logical experiment.
Participants were then asked to evaluate the request that had been addressed using several different criteria (e.g. how unusual the request was, how polite, etc.), and also to evaluate their own mood. In line with expectations, it turned out that those who had seen the humorous drawings were in a better mood than those who were exposed to images of car accidents.
The former were also more likely to fulfil the request for note-taking paper than were the latter. Participants also responded more positively to a request for one piece of paper than for ten pages. However, the most interesting data was that concerning the impact of mood in con- ditions differentiated by the politeness of the request as formulated.
Consistent with Forgas’s hypothesis, mood had practically no significance with respect to conditions in which the request was formulated in a pleasant, conventional manner. However, when the request was direct and inconsistent with custom, it was much more often met with acceptance by those in a positive mood than by participants experiencing negative emotions. Interestingly, an analogical pattern was observed regarding evalu- ation of the request itself.
The conventional request was viewed as equally polite by both participants in a good mood and those in a bad mood. The unconventional request (“Give me . .
.”), however, was clearly viewed with greater lenience by those in a good mood compared to those whose mood had been influenced negatively. In the second experiment, these dependencies were successfully replicated while applying a different manner of mood induction. This time, the envelopes prepared for reading-room patrons contained either humorous short stories, or descriptions of the deaths of people ill with cancer (there was also a control group that read emotionally neutral texts with information about the library).
The degree to which participants remembered the precise content of the request addressed to them was also examined. This last element facilitated the determination that polite, conventional requests are not remembered very accurately (which is entirely consistent with Forgas’s assumptions that such situations are not analyzed with great attention to detail). Recollection of direct, unconventional requests, however, was significantly higher (which, obviously, is consistent with the assumption that people apply a more deliberate and systematic information processing strategy).140 Techniques using mood and emotion Generally, it can be said that the experiments conducted by Forgas allow us to understand the subtle differences in the reactions of people in different moods, but on the other hand their results concur with the theory that it is positive emotional states, rather than negative ones, that facilitate submission to requests.
It should be added here that there are three points of view concerning research demonstrating an association between mood and tendency to fulfil various requests. The first of them holds that the mood an individual is experiencing has a direct influence on compliance. One supporter of this approach is Alice Isen, who assumes that people are motivated to attain and maintain a positive mood, and a decision about engaging or not engaging in a particular activity may be a means of achieving those objectives Clark & Isen, 1982; (Isen & Simmonds, 1978).
A supporter of a second approach is Forgas, who suggests that mood may modify the very assessment of politeness and appropriateness of a request, and may alter the manner in which information concerning that request is processed. Under the third approach, however, mood induces associated cognitive states, such as thought, imagination and recollection (e.g. Niedenthal & Setterlund, 1994).
In many cases, they may be consistent in content with the decision to provide assistance to a person asking for it. If we in fact are encountering the following sequence: positive mood – activation of positive cognitive elements – fulfilment of requests made by others, then the question arises of whether compliance can be induced by the mere activation of the aforementioned positive cognitive elements. Perhaps what comes into play here is not so much the content of such elements, but rather their positive or negative valence.
The question of whether positive cognitive states alone are sufficient to induce compliance was asked by Bruce Rind (1997), who operated on the assump- tion that positive cognitive states are composed primarily of elements such as curiosity and interest, which in turn are mainly manifested in the response to a particular type of stimulus. Indeed, curiosity and interest are strongly intertwined, as it is generally the case that curiosity is the foundation of interest. Both of these states are rewarding for the individual, and in the subject literature they are contrasted with such states as boredom and monotony.
This is particularly well put (albeit metaphorically) by Sudhir Kakar (1976), who says “what the libido is to sexuality, curiosity is to cognition” (p. 197). In an experiment by Rind, the interest of participants selected from among students sitting alone in a university library was generated in such an original man- ner that I would like to describe it in detail here.
Imagine, dear Reader, that you are participating in an experiment conducted by this researcher. Someone approaches you, apologizes for disturbing you, and shows you a white piece of paper containing the following message: FINISHED FILES ARE THE RE- SULT OF YEARS OF SCIENTIF- IC STUDY COMBINED WITH THE EXPERIENCE OF MANY YEARS.Techniques using mood and emotion 141 Your task is to count the number of times the letter ‘F’ appears in the text. Have you done it already?
I’m curious how many ‘F’s you’ve found . . .
People generally declare that the letter ‘F’ appears in the text three times. However, the correct answer is six. In solving this exceptionally simple task, people generally do not take into consideration the letter ‘F’ that appears in the word “of”, which appears in the text three times.
If you, dear Reader, were a participant in Rind’s study, you would certainly be surprised that you had made such a “serious” mistake, and you would be interested how this had occurred. That is precisely Rind’s point. He then explained to his participants that the error results from the fact that ‘F’ in the word “of” sounds like ‘V’, and this is why the ‘F’ goes unnoticed when reading the text.
These participants were treated as those exhibiting the element of interest. Another group was asked by the experimenter to review the same text, but rather than counting occurrences of the letter ‘F’, they were asked to find the letter ‘R’. This task was also quite simple, and participants did not make any mistakes.
However, there was no element that would induce interest among them. Regardless of which letters participants had been asked to count, the experi- menter then requested them for their participation in a survey. He informed them that the questionnaire was quite long, comprising 80 questions.
It was not, however, necessary to respond to all of them. Participants were then asked how many of the questions they would agree to answer. The experimental design also included a control group, which was not asked at the beginning to perform any task.
It turned out that the participants who had counted the letter ‘F’ declared that they would answer more questions than the remaining two groups. The problem is, however, that the pattern of results recorded in this study may result from other factors than stimulation of cognitive interest. Above all, it is dif- ficult to exclude the possibility that self-assessment of participants was impacted under the influence of information that they had performed poorly on such a seemingly simple task.
Such a state is conducive to inducing compliance with regard to the requests of others. Doing something for them, insofar as it does not violate one’s own moral principles, may aid in rebuilding one’s self-image. Indeed, it supplies the conditions necessary for engaging in positive thinking about oneself in the form of “I’m an altruistic person” (e.g.
Carlsmith & Gross, 1969; Cunningham et al., 1980). It can also not be excluded that participants experienced a feeling akin to guilt resulting from their poor execution of the task. A feeling of guilt – as many studies have shown, including those later on in this chapter – facilitates pliability in the face of requests.
The mechanism that underlies this truth is, however, quite complex, and is discussed more broadly in a further section of this chapter. Rind thus conducted another experiment based on a similar plan (this time, however, he eliminated the group that did not seek any letters in the text). Participants did have to complete a short questionnaire, in which they offered their views on how much their interest was sparked by the task involving a search for certain letters in the text, as well as the degree to which they felt performance of that task impacted their self-assessment, and of their feeling of guilt following the task.
This experiment replicated the results indicating that after failing in their142 Techniques using mood and emotion search for the letter ‘F’, participants were more inclined to provide answers to the questions in the survey, and regression analyses demonstrated that both interest and the experience of a feeling of guilt exerted an influence on compliance; the former element, however, was slightly more significant. Unfortunately, Rind did not take account of two alternative explanations for the results he received. First, he failed to notice that the enhanced subservience of the participants who had been asked to find the letter ‘F’ may have resulted from the desire to show their gratitude to the experimenter for giving them the oppor- tunity to have a very interesting experience.
Thus the mechanism of reciprocity, universally acknowledged as one of the primary forces governing social influence, would come into play (Cialdini, 2001). Second, there is an even simpler explana- tion, the truth of which may not be excluded: participants may have felt that if the experiment involving searching for the letter ‘F’ was so fascinating, then the survey questions may also be interesting and original. Obviously, those who were tasked with looking for the letter ‘R’, a boring job, had no reason to think that way (more precisely, they had reason to believe that the survey would be equally boring).
In order to exclude these two interpretations, it would be necessary to create an experimental situation in which the request to fulfil the key request would be advanced by an entirely different person than the one who aroused cognitive interest. Together with Tomasz Grzyb and Slawomir Spiewak I’m currently con- ducting such research, but there is still some time before the results come in. In any event, reliable evaluation of the theory that generalized positive cognitive states can generate compliance requires much more research.
Let us return to the issue of the relationship between the experience of affective states and submissiveness in the face of requests. We have already discussed the consequences of feeling physiological arousal and experiencing moods. Now it is time to proceed to analysis of the role of discrete emotions.
Among the various emotions familiar to all of us from personal experience, we may distinguish those whose occurrence (or even the potential that they might occur) provoke individuals to behaviours compliant with the norms and princi- ples which they or their social surroundings find acceptable. These emotions primarily include fear, guilt, shame and embarrassment. Of particular interest in the area of social influence is how the experience of such emotions (or at least the anticipation that they will occur) impacts people’s compliance with requests, orders and commands.
Fear and anxiety Most likely owing to the obviousness of the fact that people under the influence of fright or fear are often prepared to fulfil all sorts of threats and commands, researchers have engaged this issue extremely infrequently, focusing rather on the impact of the concentration of such emotions on the effectiveness of persuasive messages. In other words, psychologists have been interested in the way that fear induced by those messages influences changes in the attitudes of those to whomTechniques using mood and emotion 143 the messages are addressed. In these studies a range of interesting truths have been uncovered concerning the mechanisms of changes in attitudes (see e.g.
Gass & Seiter, 2011; O’Keefe, 2002). Because this book is focused on techniques that directly lead to changes in behaviour, it must be said that there are very few studies that have trained their fire at precisely the issue of the link between the degree of fear experienced by individuals and their tendency to submit to commands, requests and appeals addressed to them. Interestingly, the majority of research carried out in this area was done in the relatively distant past.
In the 1950s, Irving Janis and Seymour Feshbach (1953) conducted an experiment in which the dependent variable was human behaviour. The experiment began by unsettling the participants with information that teeth infections might migrate to other parts of the body: the eyes, heart and joints. This information was accompanied by suggestive, revolting slides showing rotten teeth.
By reducing the number of such slides as well as the volume of information about the negative consequences of dental illness, the researchers created two more versions of the same message. A portion of the participants was presented with a message inducing moderate fear, while another received a message evoking merely slight disquiet. It occurred that in the week following receipt of the message, those who had been frightened to a moderate degree had most frequently visited the dentist’s office.
The curvilinear association between the saturation of a persuasive message with threatening elements and its effectiveness is described by Janis and Feshbach (1953) as being a result of a very weak fear being insufficient to pique an individual’s interest, never mind to motivate people to change their beliefs. However, an exces- sively strong fear results in the occurrence of defensive reactions: information received by the individual is considered unreliable, or it is immediately subjected to interpretation and the assumption is made that, for example, while a particular threat does indeed concern the majority of people, the individual in question is not one of those at risk. In natural conditions such messages may, considering their aversiveness, prompt individuals to ignore them – for example, by turning off the TV or by putting down the newspaper mid-article (Wood, 2000).
The majority of psychological studies, however, have recorded a straight-line relationship between fear and effectiveness of a persuasive message (see Boster & Mongeau, 1984; O’Keefe, 2002). Lijiang Shen & James Dillard (2014) argue convincingly that this is exclusively due to their failure to account for the degree to which participants are scared. If this factor is taken into consideration, the analyzed dependency becomes curvilinear.
It would seem that an analogical truth operates in respect of the link between fear and behavioural docility towards persuasive messages. This is the precise effect observed in an experiment conducted by Clive Skilbeck, James Tulips and Philip Ley (1977), in which they examined the link between fear felt by obese people and their long-term actions aimed at reducing their body’s fat content. Study participants were visibly overweight women aged 20–60.
They were randomly allocated to various experimental conditions. Initially,144 Techniques using mood and emotion all of the women listened to a 20-minute lecture on various dangers associated with obesity, but the content of the lecture was different for each group. In the condition of weak fear induction, the lecture focused on how obese people at older ages are more frequently at risk of various diseases, and that they have problems getting around.
In the condition of moderate fear induction, the focus was on information about rather minor problems with the heart and arthritis. Strong fear induction conditions involved the lecturer discussing the very high risk of dangerous heart diseases and serious problems associated with arthritis. A special survey was used to assess how much the information had unsettled each participant.
The participants were also weighed, and given special instructions concerning the diet they should follow in order to shed excess kilograms. The women participants were weighed four more times, at 2, 4, 8 and 16 weeks after the beginning of the experiment. What is of particular interest and importance to us here is the drop in weight among particular groups of participants.
It turned out that the degree of saturation of the introductory lecture with fear-inducing information had no influence on the number of kilograms lost by the women undergoing therapy. However, a large role was played by the extent to which a given person was scared by the information contained in the lecture (after all, it is known that some people may be made more upset by the information that in 20 years they will have diffi- culty moving compared to others who have been told they may experience serious heart disease). This dependency is presented in Figure 6.1.
18 FIGURE 6.1 Fear exposure and weight loss Source: European Journal of Social Psychology, 1977, vol. 7, p. 229.
Copyright 1977 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. )sbI( ssol tw naem 20 16 single exposure 14 12 multiple exposure 10 8 6 4 2 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 follow-up periodTechniques using mood and emotion 145 The feeling of guilt and shame The feeling of guilt is an averse experience. It is associated with the feeling of unpleasant tension and arousal, as well as the experience of regret and contrition (Baumeister, Reis & Delespaul, 1995).
The feeling of guilt is frequently accompa- nied by the experience of shame (Izard, 1977; Tangney, 1995). The emotions of shame and of guilt are associated with an individual’s feeling of violating a norm or a rule. The primary difference is that the first of these emotions is primarily of a public nature, while the second is private.
In respect of the feeling of shame, the individual sends signals to those around informing them it is understood that a social norm has been violated, and that the very person responsible for the viola- tion disapproves of it. This signal is a blush – men display it on their faces, while women show it along the neck and upper chest. Guilt, however, does not result in any obvious signal being sent to the external environment.
In the cases of both guilt and shame, it generally takes quite a long time for people to stop entertaining negative thoughts about themselves. These thoughts endanger one’s feeling self-worth. The feeling of one’s self-worth can be recovered by doing something considered socially acceptable.
Fulfilment of the requests of others can therefore sometimes be a means of regaining the feeling that one is a positive and valuable individual (e.g. Konoske, Staple & Graf, 1979). If this requires sacrifice on the part of the individual – a significant engagement of time, effort or material resources – it can become a form of “penance”.
In many cultures (e.g. Catholic), people have internalized the belief that such a “penance” can cleanse a person, erasing a previous sin. People experiencing guilt or shame may also be inclined to punish themselves.
This particular emotional state may induce individuals to think badly of themselves, which in turn may lead to inwardly-directed punitive behaviour (Freedman, Wallington & Bless, 1967). Fulfilling the requests of others when experi- encing guilt or shame may also be a chance to engage in a cognitive escape from the unpleasant focus on oneself. Getting involved in any activity at all allows individuals to extricate themselves from negative reflections on themselves and their actions, and to focus on the new activity.
We may assume that people generally aim to avoid experiencing negative emotions and seek opportunities to experience positive ones. Engaging in an activity that assists people in freeing themselves from the feeling of guilt or the experience of shame will thus be far more attractive (Cialdini, Darby & Vincent, 1973). The feelings of guilt and shame may also be associated with the conviction that one has lost control over the course of events.
These emotions appear when we are subjected to conditions in our surrounding environment that we ourselves do not accept. Commencing an intentional behaviour aimed at achieving a specific, positive objective may be a means of recovering the desired feeling of control, on the condition that this activity proves successful (McMillen, 1971). In the past, the general consensus was that while the feeling of guilt led to increased compliance, shame did not do so; currently, a different position dominates the subject literature.
Because the feeling of shame is a public emotion, submissiveness only becomes a consequence of it when it is witnessed by others. Only then can the feeling of shame be reduced (Whatley, Webster, Smith & Rhodes, 1999).146 Techniques using mood and emotion It is likely that the first researchers who conducted empirical research on the consequences of experiencing shame and guilt were John Wallace and Edward Sadalla (1966). In their experiment, participants worked on completing a Thematic Apperception Test (TAT test).
In the meantime, an experimenter examined – in a quite ostentatious manner – the condition of various laboratory instruments, and then left the laboratory under the pretext of needing to transport some question- naires. In his absence, the participants either waited passively for him to return, or they were egged on by another participant (in fact a confederate of the experi- menter) to play around with one of the laboratory instruments. Inevitably, this led to damage to the device.
The participant saw a flash of light and smoke rising up over the machine, and could clearly smell the odour of burning electrical cables. Upon the experimenter’s return, his confederate either confessed that he and another participant wanted to test the device out but unfortunately damaged it, or said that something strange had happened to the device while he and the other participant were working on completing the TAT test. The experimenter then examined the equipment, and depending on the experimental conditions either said that the participants had damaged the unit, or that he completely accepted their explanation that the device had failed on its own.
In the control conditions (i.e. those in which the participant was not induced to play with the equipment), the experimenter examined the device after his return, and declared that it was mal- functioning. In all three conditions this led to the cancellation of the next portion of the experiment for the same reason: damage to the instrument.
After that, the experimenter thanked participants for taking part, at the same time requesting that they agree to participate in another study during which they would, at times, be given an electric shock (the study was supposed to concern physiological determi- nants of reactions to stress). As it turned out, participants who had previously broken the device were more often willing to participate in the new experiment than those in the control group. The variable of informing the experimenter about who the real culprits of the device’s failure were did not have a statistically significant impact on the tendency to accept the proposal to engage in the unpleasant experiment.
Similar effects, indicating an association between pliancy and the experience of shame and guilt, were also reported in later experiments. In one of them (Carlsmith & Gross, 1969), participants were encouraged to submit other people to suffering. In half of the cases, this suffering consisted of giving them jolts of electricity of increasing strength.
In the others, the suffering was far less serious – the electrical current was replaced with sounds of increasing loudness. After this experiment was completed, the individuals who were the purported recipients of the unpleasant stimuli approached the participants with a request for help in a campaign to save Californian sequoia trees. As it turned out, participants who had administered elec- tric shocks agreed to participate in the campaign more frequently than those who had administered the loud sounds.
In addition, the study demonstrated that this effect did not result from increased sympathy towards the people who had suffered as the result of experiencing the shocks. Other participants who merely observed the experiences of people being shocked were not eager to join in the campaignTechniques using mood and emotion 147 to save the sequoia. Thus, the most likely factor contributing to the fulfilment of the request to take part in a social campaign was the experience of guilt or shame on the part of participants.
In other experiments (Freedman et al., 1967), the emotions being discussed here were evoked in a different manner. Participants were provoked into lying to the person conducting the study, or they were induced to make a mistake that was difficult to repair and rendered the work of another person pointless. It turned out that in both cases, participants in the experimental conditions more frequently agreed to fulfil requests addressed to them than in control conditions.
The study’s authors demonstrated that, at least in some cases, an increase in submissiveness only occurred when fulfilling the request was not associated with the necessity of meeting the person who had been harmed. It may be said that contact with a wronged individual serves as a constant reminder to people of their earlier inappropriate behaviour. The prospect of this manner of spending time is thus subjectively very unpleasant.
Helping someone else, however, is very attractive: it both facilitates “erasing the guilt” and eliminating negative thoughts about oneself. This “someone else” can even be an entirely anonymous person. For example, Richard Darlington and Clifford Macker (1966) demonstrated that people among whom a feeling of guilt had been induced were more likely to donate blood for their local hospital.
Another interesting experiment is one conducted by Nicolas Gueguen (2001), in which participants were approached by a female experimenter who asked them to assist her by keeping watch over a heavy bag. She explained that she wanted to purchase a magazine in a bookstore around the corner. If the participant agreed, the experimenter then walked away.
On the surface of the bag, there was a package with the phrase “horse meat” visibly written on it. After a short while another female experimenter appeared, who looked disapprovingly at the woman guarding the bag and said that consumption of horse meat was vile, and that people who eat it should be ashamed. Without waiting for a response, she walked away.
After 20 seconds the owner of the bag reappeared, thanked the participant, then left. The participant, left alone, was shortly thereafter asked by yet a third female experi- menter to sign a petition. Depending on the experimental conditions the petition either concerned protection of animal rights, or reducing air pollution in large cities.
Of course, participants in control conditions were also asked to sign petitions. While in the situation where the petition was associated with greater care for the fate of animals, the tendency to sign it was clearly greater among those from the experimental group (70%) than the control group (40%); in the case of the petition regarding pollution there was practically no difference (35% in the experimental group, 37.5% in the control group). It could be said that signing a petition on the matter of protection for animals was a better means of erasing guilt than was signing a petition concerning something entirely unrelated to the relationship between man and horse.
In another experiment, Paul Konoske, Sandra Staple and Richard Graf (1979) engaged in a more direct examination of the psychological mechanism that leads people burdened by guilt to accede to the requests and suggestions of others. These148 Techniques using mood and emotion authors took as their starting point the assumption that if such a request or sugges- tion involved participation in a laudable goal to the benefit of society, people affected by the emotion of interest to us here would consent to it both in order to punish themselves, and to recover their feeling of self-worth or to create the opportunity to feel positive emotions. If, however, such a request exhibits a clearly different and non-altruistic character, the increased compliance of individuals experiencing the feeling of guilt could not be explained in terms of maintaining self-worth or seeking positive emotions.
If compliance actually occurred in such a situation, it could be explained only by the tendency to inflict punishment on oneself. Conditions for the experiment were created in which a portion of par- ticipants accidentally knocked over a pile of perforated computer cards, which led to their being scattered about and to the inability to restore the order in which they had been sorted. Participants were then asked to place a call to potential suc- cessive participants.
Some of them were told that this was to remind them of the time and place in which the experiment would be held. The others were informed that they were assisting in recruiting for research concerning reactions to fear- inducing stimuli. Because it was difficult to acquire participants for this particular experiment, the researchers requested those making the phone calls to mislead the people they would be speaking to.
The participants were to inform their inter- locutors that they themselves had taken part in the very same experiment, and that it was not at all unpleasant. Similar requests (i.e. to remind others of the time and place of an experiment, or to lie to them by saying that the planned experiment is not unpleasant) were also made of participants from the control group.
The number of people whom each participant agreed to call was recorded. It turned out that the feeling of guilt only enhanced the tendency to fulfil requests made by others when they were of a purely pro-social nature, and thus served as an opportunity to experience positive emotions and recover their positive self-image. If an attempt was made to induce experiment participants to lie to others, their experiences of the feeling of guilt did not have any influence on their behaviour.
By the same token, we may reject the hypothesis that people experiencing the emotions being analyzed here fulfil the requests of others so as to punish themselves by engaging in activity that is a source of discomfort and unpleasantness. Discovering the psychological mechanism underlying the susceptibility to social influence of people experiencing the emotions discussed here was the objective of research by Brad Kelln and John Ellard (1999). Participants in the experiment conducted by these authors worked on a task associated with memory.
They used a special device in the course of the experiment that – allegedly – was damaged. The cause of the damage, which had of course been planned as a part of the experimental design, was supposedly due to a mistake committed by the partici- pant. In some cases, the experimenter only stated that the experiment had to be stopped owing to the failure.
In other conditions, the experimenter declared that he had forgiven the participant for the error. He said not to be worried about what had happened. In further conditions, participants were told that since the failure required the involvement of more people in the experiment, they would notTechniques using mood and emotion 149 receive the compensation they had been promised for taking part in the experi- ment ($4).
The experiment plan also included conditions in which the experimenter both forgave participants and cheered them up, and informed them that they would not receive any money. All of the participants were asked to do the experi- menter a favour. He said that he needed to deliver 50 envelopes to various individuals working at the university campus, and asked participants to help him in that task: every quantity of envelopes that a given participant agreed to deliver to the addresses on them would be of invaluable assistance.
An analogous request was made of participants from the control group, who had not experienced the situa- tion with the supposed failure of research instrumentation. It turned out that in “pure” conditions of experiencing the feeling of guilt and shame (i.e. when the experimenter did not comment on the causes of the device’s failure), participants on average delivered more envelopes than in control conditions.
An even higher degree of compliance was recorded in the group of participants whom the experimenter forgave and cheered up. When participants were informed that they would not receive the promised sum of $4, the level of compliance was the same as in the “pure” conditions of experiencing guilt and shame. The mere withdrawal of payment of the $4, however, led to participants taking fewer envelopes than those from the control group.
How should these results be interpreted? Kelln and Ellard refer to the concept of striving for equity in interpersonal relationships (see e.g. Walster, Walster & Berscheid, 1978).
The assumptions of this concept state that the majority of people prefer situations in which their relations with others are equitable. Thus, people do not want to be in debt to anyone, nor have anyone in their debt. This rule is not limited to money, but rather has a far broader reach.
From the perspective that is of interest to us here, we may say that participants who believe that it was their mistake that led to the device’s failure and resultant problems felt that they were in debt to the experimenter. This is why they were eager to accede to his request to deliver envelopes. This assistance served as an opportunity to do something for him and to restore equity in the interpersonal relationship that had been disrupted by the participants’ own mistake.
If the experimenter reacted with empathy, assuring the participant that it was no big deal, then the equity of the relationship became even more imbalanced. The experimenter’s pleasant behaviour is a sort of unde- served “present” received by the participants. From this perspective it is not surprising that these were the conditions in which participants took the largest number of envelopes.
However, if the experimenter did not behave empathetically, but rather took a participant’s money away, equity was by the same token restored to the relationship between the experimenter and the participant. The arrangement became equitable: while the participant had indeed damaged the instrument, this was balanced by the loss of the remuneration. The balance present in the exchange results in participants being not particularly inclined to assist the experimenter.
If the retention of the money is accompanied by cheering up of the participant, the arrangement becomes inequitable, but only to a limited degree. The participant’s loss of $4 is balanced out by the problems that the experimenter experiences.150 Techniques using mood and emotion The pleasant behaviour of the experimenter towards the participant requires reciprocity, but it need not be particularly elaborate. In this case, the submissiveness of participants is thus higher than in the control conditions, but it does not exceed the level recorded in conditions of a “pure” feeling of guilt.
It would seem that the theory of equity under discussion here may, in some conditions, be a good predictor of behaviour by people experiencing the feeling of guilt or shame. However, its utility is limited to one particular class of situations. Above all, it does not facilitate an explanation of the readiness of people experienc- ing the emotions analyzed here to execute the requests and orders of people whom they had not previously harmed in any way.
Embarrassment Embarrassment is an emotion that we experience relatively infrequently, but also one which practically every adult person has undoubtedly experienced. The majority of psychological experiments concerning the consequences of experienc- ing this state have been oriented towards demonstrating that it gives rise to a tendency to avoid others and to isolate oneself (e.g. Jankowski & Takahashi, 2014).
The issue of whether the state of embarrassment enhances submission to requests, suggestions or orders of others has been relatively rarely examined in empirical studies. Among the few exceptions are two experiments conducted by Robert Apsler (1975). In the first of them, two students came to a laboratory, of which only one was an actual study participant; the other was a confederate of the female experimenter, which was, of course, a secret to the participant.
The experimenter explained that the study was focused on the process of forming impressions about other people, and that one of the invited participants would perform certain tasks, while the other would observe through a one-way mirror. Next, the experimenter tossed a coin and asked the “real” participant to choose a side. Whether the choice was heads or tails, it “turned out” that the real participant would remain in the laboratory and perform some tasks.
The experimenter’s confederate went into the neighbouring room to engage in observation. Depending on the experimental conditions the participant performed either four relatively neutral tasks (turning on a radio and listening to a song; walking around the room for 1.5 minutes; counting out loud to 50; reading a fragment of a book out loud), or tasks which, if per- formed in public, would result in embarrassment (turning on a radio and dancing alone; laughing for 30 seconds as though a very funny joke had been told; singing a particular song; and imitating the hysterical reaction of a child who desperately refuses to go to preschool). After performing the last task, the participant again met with the experimenter’s confederate, who then asked for help in performing a certain task.
The confederate explained that he had to conduct research on the mood of a large group of people as a class assignment. Participants in this research undertaking had to complete a survey taking around 30 minutes. It would be best if they completed the questionnaire for the next 20 days, but even a shorter period would also supply valuable information.
The experimenter’s assistant askedTechniques using mood and emotion 151 participants to agree to participate in the experiment, and to declare in how many days they would be willing to complete the questionnaire. This request was also addressed to participants from a control group in which the students did not work on any specific tasks, but rather just completed a standard psychological survey. It turned out that in conditions in which the participants were embarrassed by the tasks they were asked to perform, the average number of days for which they declared their readiness to complete the mood survey was greater than in the remaining conditions.
Of course, the question arises of why the state of embarrassment facilitates compliance. Apsler looks primarily at two possibilities. First, it may be thought that the motivation to “recover one’s lost face” may be present.
Participants are aware that another student observing them through the one-way mirror was a witness to their idiotic activity. Consent to engage in beneficial and desirable behaviour may be a way of making a good impression on that witness, a means of proving that we are far more valuable as people than would result from the activity we engaged in during the experiment. An alternative possibility refers to an intrapsychic mecha- nism.
Involvement in helping another person who not only needs but asks for that help may be a vehicle for achieving a positive mood or for recovering positive self-image. Both mood and self-image suffered while “making an idiot of ourselves” during the experiment. Apsler arrived at the conclusion that a situation in which the request for assistance in psychological experiments was formed by person other than the witness to the performance of “stupid” tasks by the partici- pants would settle the matter.
If increased compliance were to also appear in those conditions, it would mean that intrapsychic mechanisms were at the heart of the matter (i.e. the desire to improve mood or self-image). If, however, no such jump in compliance were recorded, this would serve as support for the motivation to “recover face”.
In Apsler’s second experiment, study participants were female students and the experiment was conducted by a male experimenter. The experiment was based on the same plan, with three exceptions. The first of them concerned the dependent variable.
This time it was determined that the maximum time for completing the mood survey was the following 30 days. The second difference concerned the person who asked for help in conducting the study. The person requesting participation in the experiment was either a person about whom participants knew had witnessed their behaviour during part of the experiment, or an entirely different person who, as the participants were aware, had no idea about their previous behaviour.
The third difference was associated with the elimination of the control group. The results of this experiment are presented in Table 6.1. As we can see, in conditions under which the students were experiencing embarrassment, their compliance with the request was greater than in conditions in which they performed neutral tasks.
Importantly, it was of no significance who (witness to their behaviour vs an individual with no knowledge of it) requested help in their research. In Apsler’s opinion, this reflected the presence of an intrapsychic152 Techniques using mood and emotion TABLE 6.1 Means of the transformed compliance measure as a function of embarrassment and person making the request in Apsler (1975) experiment Embarrassment Requester Observer Nonobserver High 53.8 52.2 Low 47.7 46.3 Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, vol. 32, p.
151. Copyright 1975 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. mechanism.
Without excluding the foregoing in any way, I am rather inclined to think that the motivation to recover face can also not be excluded. The point, however, is not about making a good impression on precisely the very same person who had cause to think poorly about the individual, but rather about “people in general”. Put differently, what may come into play is a general motivation to make a good impression on others.
Of course, the mechanisms being analyzed here need not necessarily be considered alternatives. It is not excluded (in fact, it is even rather likely) that all of them lie at the foundation of the relationship between the experience of embarrassment and submissiveness. Whether, in fact, this is the case, can only be determined by future experiments.
Emotional see-saw Ryszard Nawrat and I (Dolinski & Nawrat, 1998) examined the functioning of an individual who experiences strong fear, then encounters a situation in which the stimulus evoking that emotion suddenly and unexpectedly disappears. One example of this kind of situation is an interrogation conducted according to the “good cop/ bad cop” script. As we know from books and action films, the interrogee first experiences exceptionally brutal treatment – he is threatened with death, yelled at and humiliated.
However, everything suddenly and unexpectedly changes. The phone rings, and the bad cop leaves the interrogation room. He is replaced by another – kind, polite, calm.
He offers the interrogee a cup of coffee and a cigarette, and conducts a normal conversation. In films and books it is often the case that the person being questioned, previously refusing to cooperate, begins to testify and incriminates himself and his associates. It would seem that books and films do a good job of presenting the situation.
This was in fact the way that statements from political prisoners were obtained in the Soviet Union (Herling-Grudzinski, 1965). Of course, the sudden withdrawal of a source of fear does not necessarily apply to a situation as specific as a police interrogation, and compliance need not be associated with making statements and admitting one’s guilt. Let us imagine a situation in which we are jaywalking, and when we are in the middle of the street we hear the sound of a police whistle.
We would naturally be frightened. We also feel a similar emotion when we leave our car in a forbidden place, then uponTechniques using mood and emotion 153 returning we see a small piece of paper placed under the wiper blade. What, however, happens when we turn around on the street and discover that the whistler is not a police officer, but rather a smiling jokester, and after we pick up the paper underneath our wiper, it turns out to be not a fine but rather an advert for a hair formula or an appeal to donate blood?
At this moment we experience a sudden feeling of relief. The dynamics of emotions experienced in such situations are similar to those that occur in the case of a person being interrogated by a bad cop followed by a good cop. These are precisely the situations that we created in our experiments.
In one of them, the participants were drivers parking their cars in a forbidden spot. We placed pieces of paper behind their windscreen wipers that had the appearance of a fine issued by the police. At the moment when a driver returned to his car and picked up the paper, it turned out to be an advert for Vitapan – an incredible (supposedly, for it did not actually exist) substance for stimulating hair growth, or an appeal to donate blood.
In other situations, the same pieces of paper were stuck on doors using adhesive tape. Because the police never issue fines to drivers by sticking them to car doors, participants treated in this manner had no reason to experience fear. The experiment plan also included an additional control group in which the car owners were not given any papers.
At the moment when the driver/participant was preparing to leave, an experi- menter approached him, presented himself as a student conducting an experiment for his MA thesis, then asked for the completion of a survey concerning possibili- ties for improving vehicle traffic in the city. We treated consent to the request as an indicator of compliance. As can be seen in Table 6.2, individuals who had occasion to experience the condition of “fear-relief” more frequently agreed to participate in that study than did people from the remaining groups.
In later experiments we succeeded in demonstrating that compliance to such requests does not result from the simple fact of experiencing fear (we intro- duced a group in which participants did in fact receive a police fine for parking in an unauthorized place), nor from the experiencing of positive emotions resulting from the state of relief (we measured the level at which positive emotions were experienced in particular experimental conditions). Thus, it is a specific situation involving the experience of fear-then-relief that leads to people TABLE 6.2 Percentage of subjects who complied with a request in Dolinski and Nawrat (1998) experiment Behind a wiper/Advert for Vitapan 56 28/50 Behind a wiper/Appeal for blood donation 68 34/50 Car door/Advert for Vitapan 34 17/50 Car door/Appeal for blood donation 40 20/50 Control (no card) 36 18/50 Source: Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1998, vol. 34, p.
31 Copyright 1998 Academic Press. Reproduced by permission of Elsevier.154 Techniques using mood and emotion subjected to such an influence demonstrating pliancy towards requests and commands addressed to them. Why is this the case?
Every emotion experienced by an individual sets into motion a unique plan of action characteristic to that individual (e.g. Frijda, 1986; Niedenthal et al., 2006). For example, a feeling of happiness emerges under the influence of achievement of a milestone in some activity, which in turn activates a programme directed at continuing the action plan and introducing any necessary modifications.
Sadness appears as a consequence of failure in achieving an impor- tant goal, or missing a milestone, and leads to the inception of a programme consisting of passivity, the creation of another plan, or perhaps a search for assis- tance. Anger is the result of frustration resulting from the inability to carry out one’s intentions, and leads to a redoubling of efforts to achieve that goal, or to aggression. Contempt, in turn, appears when one individual meets with another who hails from a social milieu that the former does not accept and considers to be worthless.
The programme initiated by this emotion involves treating the other person with a total lack of respect. The emotion of fear that interests us here initiates a reaction consisting of sus- pending our current activity coupled with a simultaneous increase of wariness towards the surrounding environment, immobility or flight (e.g. Denny, 1991; Tomkins, 1991; Tuma & Maser, 1985).
Because fear, in the majority of cases, appears in conditions of threat to an individual or conflict between an individual’s chosen objectives, such a reaction is usually sufficient. However, if the sources of fear sud- denly disappear, the programme of action activated by that emotion becomes inadequate in relation to the transformed circumstances. A new programme, appro- priate for the new situation, still remains to be initiated.
Thus we find ourselves in a specific (and surely short-term) state of being “between programmes”. The execu- tion of one of them has been suspended by the sudden absence of the stimulus giving rise to the experience of fear, while a new programme in response to the evolving situation has not yet been activated. It would also seem very likely that when the source of an emotion suddenly disappears, an individual may engage in retrospective reflections concerning the events that have taken place, or which could have taken place.
Both concentration on the past and engaging in hypothetical thinking may lead to insufficient cognitive resources for dealing effectively with the task at hand. The absence of free cognitive resources that could be devoted to analysis of the current situation in turn leads to automatic and mindless reactions to external stimuli. These automatic and mindless behaviours are unusually frequent in our everyday lives.
People undertake a number of everyday decisions without reflec- tion, they communicate mindlessly, and they learn and teach mindlessly (Langer, 1989, 1992). However, while it is generally assumed that the state of mindlessness is induced by a routine situation that has occurred frequently in the past, and thus one which is accompanied by a low level of physiological arousal (Langer & Moldoveanu, 2000), we feel that a similar state may also be evoked by a sudden and unexpected source of arousal and the equally sudden and unexpected withdrawal of the stimulus evoking this condition; in other words, the fear-than-relief sequence.Techniques using mood and emotion 155 In one of our studies (Dolinski & Nawrat, 1998) we applied the aforementioned paradigm of using a whistle on people crossing the street in an unauthorized place. The experimenter then held out a collections box and asked for a donation.
Similarly to the original 1978 study by Langer et al. (see also Chapter 5 of this book), the experimenter either formulated a simple request (“Madam/Sir, would you please give us some money?”), a request accompanied by a superficial (placebo) justification (“Madam/Sir, we are collecting money. Would you please give us some money because we have to collect as much money as possible?”), or a request accompanied with a real justification (“Madam/Sir, we are members of the ‘Students for the Handicapped’ organization.
Would you please join our charity campaign, because we have to collect as much money as possible to cover the cost of a holiday camp for mentally handicapped children?”). It turned out that in emotionally neu- tral conditions (e.g. those in which participants crossed the street without being disturbed by the whistle), people behaved in a rational, mindful manner.
Only very infrequently did they place money in the donation can when the request had no justification or when it had a superficial justification, but they did so with far greater frequency when the request was accompanied by an explanation of who was gath- ering the money and for what purpose. People experiencing an emotional see-saw, however, reacted in an entirely different manner. In this case it was enough to have any kind of justification at all for participants to be more likely to reach into their wallets when compared to conditions in which the request was made without any accompanying justification (see Table 6.3).
It also transpired that in conditions of fear-then-relief, people to whom an unusual message was addressed (i.e. a request accompanied by an entirely superficial justification) extremely rarely decided to ask any questions at all concerning the TABLE 6.3 Percentage of people who offered money, mean amounts of money given, and a tendency to seek additional information under each condition in Dolinski and Nawrat (1998) experiment Jaywalkers with whistle Jaywalkers Request only Placebo info Real info Request only Placebo info Real info Percentage of 38.7 76.0 71.9 11.3 15.1 58.5 participants offering money spontaneously (without asking any questions) Mean amount of money .80 1.65 1.48 .31 .55 1.53 given (in Polish zl) Percentage of 20 8 – 49 57 – participants asking for additional information Source: Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1998, vol. 34, p.
44 Copyright 1998 Academic Press. Reproduced by permission of Elsevier.156 Techniques using mood and emotion purpose and the organizers of the campaign. Such a reaction was nearly universal among people in a neutral emotional state.
This pattern of results concerning both the frequency of request fulfilment and the verbal expression of doubts is therefore entirely consistent with the assumption that conditions of relief occurring after the experience of fear induce a condition of mindlessness, which in turn facilitates compliance. We have also demonstrated in other studies that a sudden feeling of relief puts people into a condition of com- promised intellectual functioning, such as a study in which participants were required to solve simple mathematical tasks, or point as quickly as possible to a face in a picture that displayed a different emotion from all the others presented in it (Dolinski, Ciszek, Godlewski & Zawadzki, 2002). Results of a study on drivers were also consistent with this assumption.
In experiments conducted using driving simulators (Dolinski & Odachowska, 2015), we demonstrated that drivers who had avoided a collision (and thus were in a state of relief) very frequently committed a simple mistake in the period immediately following the first incident, leading to an accident. If compliance with requests and propositions is undergirded by a sudden with- drawal of the source of emotions, one should expect that we will encounter such a truth not only in the event of withdrawal of a source of fear, but also when the causes of other emotions are suddenly removed as well. Is this, in fact, the case?
In one of the experiments I conducted jointly with Ryszard Nawrat (Nawrat & Dolinski, 2007), a female experimenter called randomly selected people and pre- sented herself as an employee of a telecommunications company. In one condition she informed her interlocutor that the computer indicated a large overpayment, and that he would soon be refunded a significant sum of money (evoking a positive emotion); in another, she said that the computer indicated a significant underpay- ment, and that the interlocutor would soon have to make up the difference (evoking a negative emotion). In half of the cases, participants were left in the induced emotional state, while in the remaining cases the experimenter “in order to make sure there was no mistake” asked participants for their address, and after a moment explained that the matter in fact concerned another customer with the same surname.
Regardless of the type of manipulation, the experimenter then said “Polish Telecom is testing the sound quality of the telephone transmission using the new TELPOCOL system. Would you put the receiver to your other ear, please?” After 3 seconds she asked “Have you done so already?” In the control group where no emotional states were induced among partici- pants, this message was communicated by the experimenter immediately after introducing herself as an employee of the phone company. Confirmation by par- ticipants of shifting the receiver to their other ear was treated as mindless compliance with a senseless request.
While such a reaction occurred sporadically in both the control group and in groups where only negative or positive emotions were induced, it was recorded with far greater frequency (a statistically significant difference) in conditions involving the unexpected withdrawal of information justifying the experience of both negative and positive emotions.Techniques using mood and emotion 157 Other research we have conducted (Nawrat & Dolinski, 2007) also indicates that compliance may be induced not only by the sudden withdrawal of sources of the emotion of fear, but also of entirely different ones – positive emotional states. It should, however, be emphasized that these effects were generally weaker than in conditions involving the application of the fear-then-relief sequence, while in the case of withdrawal of sources of some emotions (e.g. disgust), we were entirely unsuccessful in achieving increased compliance.
Summary The majority of social influence situations are associated with increased physiological arousal. Just the simple presence of other people is a source of arousal. It may be additionally enhanced by the physical attractiveness of such people, by the fact that they are famous people or otherwise authorities, and by many other factors.
A synergetic effect involving the accumulation of stimuli may occur among individuals who are emotionally aroused for some reason and then find them- selves in another situation giving rise to emotions. If such a state is perceived as unpleasant, the individual aims to reduce the level of arousal. Compliance, acceding to a request, proposal or demand is often the most readily-available means of achieving that desired state.
It is thus no surprise that the majority of studies devoted to this question generated results indicating that increased arousal was conducive to compliance. Because one of the natural human motivations is the desire to attain and maintain a positive mood, people avoid behaviours that may lead to a worsening of mood, and strive to engage in those which lead to that very state. It is often the case that improving and maintaining a good mood may be achieved by agreeing to the requests of others.
This is particularly true when fulfilling the request is not associated with actions that themselves would cause discomfort. On the other hand, in some situations fulfilling the request of another person may lead to a worsening of one’s positive mood. This happens, for example, when the activity involved in fulfilment of the request is time-consuming or boring.
In such cases the positive mood being experienced by the individual reduces (rather than increases) the chances that the request will be fulfilled. In many cases, the potential for fulfilment of a request depends not so much on its level of difficulty, but rather a subjective interpretation of the entire event. This, in turn, may remain under the influence of the affective state being experienced.
Studies have shown that the type of mood one experiences has a minimal impact on evaluation of conventional requests and the tendency to fulfil them, but has a relatively large influence on the assessment of unconventional requests and on the decision to carry them out. Among the emotions well known to all of us, we may distinguish those whose occurrence motivates us to behave in a manner consistent with the norms and rules accepted internally and by our social surroundings. These emotions include fear, guilt and shame, and also embarrassment.
It has been demonstrated that the experience of158 Techniques using mood and emotion these emotions (or even the mere anticipation of their emergence) often influences people’s submissiveness towards requests, recommendations and commands. Psychologists have rarely studied situations in which an individual experiencing some emotion is faced with the sudden and unexpected withdrawal of the stimulus that evoked it and was responsible for its continuation. In the meantime, this type of situation occurs quite frequently in the daily life of every person.
The studies presented in this chapter demonstrate that in these situations, given the label “emotional see-saw”, individuals’ tendency to comply with requests, orders and suggestions addressed to us is increased. The most likely mechanism at the heart of pliancy in such conditions is associ- ated with the manner in which every emotion generates a specific programme of action. When one is in a situation where this programme suddenly becomes utterly inadequate in the face of altered external circumstances, individuals begin func- tioning mindlessly.
This gives rise to automatic reactions that do not take into account the particulars of the situation at hand. This assumption was confirmed by an experiment that applied the classic paradigm of studies on the mindless fulfilment of requests. The results of other research, presented in this chapter, are also consistent with this assumption.
They demonstrate that the emotional see-saw leads to the individual experiencing disruptions in cognitive functioning.7 A FEW MORE ISSUES AND FINAL REMARKS Academic researchers vs practitioners of social influence While those who research techniques of social influence are interested in their effectiveness and the psychological mechanisms underlying their success, practi- tioners of social influence are, for obvious reasons, interested (exclusively, or at least primarily) in only the former of these two issues. This does not, however, mean that practitioners take into account fewer factors than researchers do. A beggar may be very interested in knowing the part of the city and the time of the day when people toss the most change into a hat, as well as when and where they do it the least.
His thinking can also take on an interactive character: entirely different tech- niques and tricks may prove effective in neighbourhoods inhabited by people of average wealth compared to those populated by richer individuals. An employee of a real estate agency might, in turn, apply completely different techniques of persua- sion on a student looking to rent a small apartment for nine months compared to a businessman looking to purchase a large house with a pool. Arnie Cann and Jill Blackwelder (1984) correctly observe that in order to fully grasp the mechanisms leading to effectiveness of a social influence technique in real social life, we must consider who is addressing whom, at what time, in what place, and with what objective.
At times it may be the case that seemingly insignificant details are of key significance. For example, it is known that women pick up hitchhikers far less often than men. However, if a male hitchhiker is holding a bouquet of flowers in his hand, there is an eight-fold greater chance that a female driver will pick him up (Gueguen, Meineri & Stefan, 2012).
Also of importance is that a practitioner of social influence must frequently select the people he will approach with a request or a proposition. Let us imagine, for example, that we are collecting donations in the city centre for some charitable cause. There are so many people that we have no chance of approaching all of them160 A few more issues and final remarks with our donation boxes; we have to decide who will be asked for a gift, and who will not.
In such situations it seems unlikely that people simply leave things to chance; rather they assess the subjective likelihood that a given passer-by will agree to their request. Jaroslaw Kulbat (2003) asked his study participants to imagine that they worked for a charitable organization, then showed them films presenting adults walking along the sidewalk. The participants were asked to assess the prob- ability that the person being shown to them would toss money into a donation can.
It turned out that, regardless of the sex of the person making the judgement, higher estimations of the likelihood of making a donation were made when a woman appeared on the screen than when a man was shown. Practitioners may also be very interested in the results of studies concerning long-term campaigns, as is the case with the majority of collections taken up for charitable purposes, or for marketing campaigns. The effectiveness of particular efforts to exert influence may depend on whether the campaign is just getting underway, in progress, or approaching its conclusion.
One example of this can be found in the experiments of Jakob Jensen, Andy King and Nick Carcioppolo (2013). These researchers observed that behaviourists conducting studies on rats had previously recorded increased motivation in individual rats when they were close to achieving a goal (laboratory rats ran faster as they got closer to food). The organizers of various collection drives could provide not only information about the objective (e.g.
“We’re trying to raise $20,000 for a wheelchair for our paralyzed friend”), but also about the progress of the campaign (e.g. “We’ve already got $2,000” or “We’ve already got $18,000”). The first piece of information indicates that there is a long way to the goal, while the second shows how close it is.
In accordance with the goal-gradient hypothesis, people approached for a donation and hearing the latter piece of information should be more motivated to give money than in the first case. While the experiments conducted by the aforemen- tioned researchers did not provide entirely definitive results, it would seem that this dynamic approach to social influence techniques is worthy of close attention. Publicizing information about sums collected can at times benefit a charity drive, while at times it can be detrimental.
Also of potential importance for the practitioner of social influence is the amount of time and the level of effort necessary to apply particular tech- niques. Adding the phrase “even a penny will help” (see Chapter 4) is, from this perspective, far more tempting than using the time-and energy-consuming “foot-in-the-door” technique (see Chapter 2). This does not mean, however, that those practising social influence always seek to expend the minimum amount of effort.
Quite the opposite, if they see there is a real chance of achieving their objectives, they may not stop at applying time- and resource-intensive influence techniques, but may even go so far as to combine them in chains of complex techniques (Howard, 1995). Are such “chains of techniques” more effective than applying individual techniques? The issue is far more complicated than it might appear at first glance and, interestingly, has already been studied quite extensively by social psychologists.
Morton Goldman (1986) posed questions about theA few more issues and final remarks 161 effectiveness of the combined application of the classic foot-in-the-door and door-in-the-face sequential techniques. His starting point was the assumption that the main limitation in the former technique’s effectiveness is associated with the difficulty of the introductory request. If it is too easy then nearly everyone will agree, but the fact that it is so easy means that the addressee does not analyze the reasons why he carried it out.
As a result, self-perception does not occur, and the technique is ineffective. On the other hand, if the request is overly difficult, a large percentage of people will refuse to accede (and thus they will – even more so – refuse to carry out the second, target request). Thus, the technique also fails in this case.
What can be done? There are two potential remedies. One is to ensure that people think about why they have fulfilled the easier request and that they do not find simple explanations that refer to external factors, or another is to make them more inclined to fulfil a relatively difficult request.
Goldman focuses on the second of those possibilities. He suggests using three requests rather than two. The third request should be the most difficult one, and it should serve as the initial request in the interaction with the person whom we wish to influence.
It will most likely be rejected but, as with the door-in-the-face technique, it is now time to submit the easiest request of the three. When this request is fulfilled (which is quite probable in light of what we know about this technique), we should then, in accordance with the foot-in-the-door technique, submit the target request. Goldman therefore proposes applying a chain of techniques consisting of door-in-the-face + foot-in-the-door.
His experimental design included conditions designed to measure the effec- tiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique, door-in-the-face, and a sequence consisting of door-in-the-face + foot-in-the-door, as well as control conditions in which the target request was directly formulated. The experimenter called study participants and introduced himself as a member of an organization supporting the local zoo. The individual requests concerned various activities benefiting the zoological gardens (such as an easy request consisting of answering survey questions, or conducting individual surveys with 150 people in the case of the very difficult request).
The target request concerned the study participant addressing 75 envelopes to various people and institutions containing letters with a request to provide financial support to the zoo. Both foot-in-the-door (first the request for a response to the survey, then the request to address the envelope) and door-in-the-face (first the request for conducting 150 interviews, then – after hearing a refusal – the request to address the envelopes) techniques proved successful. In both conditions more people agreed to carry out the target request than in the control conditions.
However, the most effective technique was one based on the sequence of door-in-the-face + foot-in-the-door, in which the very difficult request was first issued (conducting an interview with 150 people), then after the refusal the easy request was lodged (giving answers to survey ques- tions), and then after the easy request was fulfilled, the target request was made (addressing the envelopes). In these conditions the target request was agreed to by 57% of participants compared to 46% in door-in-the-face conditions, and162 A few more issues and final remarks 42% in foot-in-the-door conditions. In the control conditions 22% of participants agreed to address the envelopes.
Jacob Hornik, Tamar Zaig and Dori Shadmon (1991) linked the foot-in-the-door technique with low ball, also described in Chapter 2. People who work profes- sionally conducting public opinion surveys by telephone are aware that the high percentage of people who refuse to answer questions is a frequent source of difficulty. This percentage goes even higher when the questions are of a personal nature and touch on private issues.
The high proportion of people who refuse to speak to those conducting surveys renders the sample far from representative, which can frequently undermine the entire sense of such studies. Hornik et al. examined whether using the foot-in-the-door technique, low ball, or a sequence containing those techniques would increase people’s readiness to respond to inter- view questions.
In the foot-in-the-door conditions a respondent was called and then asked three questions concerning personal matters; these did not, however, involve sensitive issues the respondent would be unlikely to discuss with a stranger. Next, an appointment to conduct a longer interview at a convenient time for the respondent was made. In the case of the low-ball technique, an appointment for an interview on various personal issues was first made, then the respondent was called and told that the subject matter would be slightly broader as the organization designing the survey had added some questions about intimate mat- ters to the survey.
Further conditions involved combining the two techniques while changing their order. It turned out that all of the techniques proved effec- tive. In every case, the percentage of people responding to questions in the primary interview was greater than in the control group, to which the request to answer intimate questions was made directly.
The most effective technique, how- ever, was one based on the sequence of low ball + foot-in-the-door (in these conditions 83% of study participants consented to give the interview). When the order of the aforementioned techniques was reversed, their effectiveness was slightly reduced (77.4% compliance). It also turned out that, similarly to many other studies (e.g.
Burger & Petty, 1981; Joule, 1987), the low-ball technique was more effective than foot-in-the-door. The former technique achieved 70.1% compliance, while the latter only 59.7% (in the control group 46.7% of respondents agreed to the interview). A similar pattern of results was recorded by those authors in their other studies, which concerned obtaining agreement to a 20-minute interview concerning behaviours associated with a healthy lifestyle (Hornik & Zaig, 1991).
The sequence of low ball + foot-in-the-door again proved the most effective in these studies. A range of other studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of such techniques as touch and gaze (Hornik, 1987), touch and vocal intensity (Rembland & Jones, 2001), labelling and foot-in-the-door (Goldman et al., 1982), and dialogue involve- ment and even a penny will help (Dolinski et al., 2005). It is worth devoting a bit more attention to the combined effects of dialogue involvement with other social influence techniques.A few more issues and final remarks 163 Catalysts of social influence Chemists use the term “catalyst” to define a substance that speeds up a chemical reaction.
One may posit the theory that the establishment of dialogue by an individual with a person whom he is seeking to influence is a sort of psychological catalyst. As I have already discussed in Chapter 4, dialogue is a typical element of our conversations with acquaintances, and social norms demand that we help those we know, particularly when such assistance is of little cost to us. Taken by surprise by a stranger who involves us in a dialogue, we automatically activate the “dealing with an acquaintance script”.
It could be assumed that a social influence technique being applied after engaging someone in dialogue finds fertile ground, and by the same token should prove exceptionally effective. To put it differently, the dialogue serves as a catalyst for the workings of that technique. One example of this can be found in studies we conducted involving a charity drive held for victims of leukaemia (Dolinski et al., 2005).
In these studies we tested the effectiveness of the legitimizing a paltry contribution technique, which you are familiar with from Chapter 4. In asking for a donation, we placed a collection box in front of a passer- by and in half of the cases we said “even a penny will help”. Before the request to make a donation was formulated, however, we informed participants about the purpose of the charity drive.
In half of the cases we did this in the form of a monologue, describing how leukaemia is a serious problem and how important it is to support institutions that work to treat it. A dialogue was used in relation to the other participants. We asked if they felt leukaemia was a serious social problem, and what they thought about institutions engaged in the fight against it.
We recorded both the number of people in each condition who placed money in the box, as well as the average sum of money donated. The technique of legitimizing a paltry contribution was particularly effective when participants had previously been engaged in dialogue. A similar pattern of results was noted in our other studies, including one where the request was not to donate money, but rather to distribute flyers.
Much would seem to indicate that connecting dialogue with various social influence techniques is often a natural thing to do, and at times even difficult to avoid. Let us observe that the initial phase of interaction with a person applying some technique to exert social influence (in psychological research this person is the experimenter) usually involves posing a question to the person being influ- enced, then listening to his answer. However, in the control conditions of studies on influence techniques we are dealing with a situation in which the experimenter addresses the participant directly (without engaging him in dialogue).
For example, the door-in-the-face technique assumes that a difficult request should first be made, then rejected by the participant, after which the easier target request should be immediately presented. It is impossible to even conceive of a situation in which the interaction between the researcher and participant would not take on the form of a dialogue. In the control conditions, the experimenter begins at once with the164 A few more issues and final remarks target request, and the monologue format is not only possible, but simply natural.
I am not making the suggestion that the techniques described in this book are simply variations of the dialogue engagement technique – this is most certainly not the case! For example, the door-in-the-face technique requires that the second request be easier than the first. If the rejection of the initial request is followed by another one which is very similar and equally difficult, the technique ceases to be effective (Cialdini et al., 1975).
Dialogue engagement can thus be both a stand- alone social influence technique (as you have read about in Chapter 4) and a catalyst for the workings of other techniques. Phenomena that can serve as such catalysts are explored in even greater detail by Jerry Burger together with his collaborators (Burger et al., 2001; Burger et al., 2004; for review see Burger, 2007). They treat dialogue engagement as one of the means of evoking fleeting attraction towards a stranger.
Engaging in dialogue with another person leads us to begin liking that individual. This, in turn, pro- vides an obvious boost to the chances that we will agree to requests he makes of us. Another means of increasing one’s own attractiveness in the eyes of our partner may be simply being present in the same space.
Here we are taking advantage of the phenomenon of mere exposure, which consists of being more favourably disposed to stimuli (including social stimuli, and thus people) we are familiar with than ones that are unknown to us. Thus if a request is addressed to a study participant by someone he already knows in some way (he has seen or heard him), the chances are greater that the request will be carried out. Yet another way of boosting one’s own attractiveness in the eyes of a partner in an interaction is to discreetly draw his attention to the fact that we share some similarities (as I have already discussed in Chapter 3, these need not necessarily be real simi- larities, they can be made up by the individual seeking to exert social influence).
Interestingly, the similarity may even relate to matters that are trivial and of no consequence from the perspective of the request, such as a supposedly excep- tional fingerprint. In such conditions people are more inclined to fulfil the request of a student to take part in a research project he needs to get a grade (Burger et al., 2004), as well as to purchase various products presented to them (Jiang et al., 2010) . Another particular catalyst of social influence techniques is the condition of cognitive exhaustion that can be experienced by an individual to whom we are addressing a request.
Bob Fennis, Loes Janssen and Kathleen Vohs (2009) present results of research that indicate the depletion of cognitive resources leads to less attentive and less critical acceptance of information, which in turn makes the indi- vidual more susceptible to social influence (see also Fennis & Aarts, 2012). That said, the issue of the link between ego-depletion and susceptibility to social influ- ence techniques seems to be a complex one. Slawomir Spiewak (2002) demonstrated that some techniques (door-in-the-face and fear-then-relief) become ineffective in conditions of cognitive resource depletion.
This is an area which undoubtedly requires further exploration.A few more issues and final remarks 165 Unethical social influence Readers of this book have most certainly noticed that I have primarily addressed how to convince people to make a donation to a charitable cause, to complete psychological questionnaires, to attend a laboratory experiment, give blood or sign a petition to improve road traffic safety. It would be difficult to find something immoral in any of these activities. In essence, psychologists examine social influence primarily as it relates to the possibility of convincing people to behave in ethically positive or neutral ways.
This does not, however, mean that the psychological literature is totally devoid of research concerning the effectiveness of social influence techniques involving an attempt to convince people to do things that are clearly unethical. Examples are delivered by experiments on the “Imagine that . .
.” technique described in Chapter 4. Let us recall that many studies have shown how successfully inducing people to imagine certain events with their participation (e.g. leaving for a holiday to another continent), we increase the chances that they will behave in that manner (in this case, they go on holiday).
What happens if we convince someone to imagine engaging in an unethical manner? In two of her experiments Barbara Weigl (1990) demonstrated that if one suggests to children that they imagine cheating, and then they are exposed to the temptation to do so, they will engage in this moral transgression with far greater frequency and intensity than children exposed to an analogical temptation but without being previously induced to imagine themselves behaving unethically. However (thankfully!), we can use social influence techniques to achieve the opposite effect, meaning a reduction in the likelihood of cheating.
Eric Spangenberg and Carl Obermiller (1996) asked their study participants if they could resist the temptation to cheat. As we remember from Chapter 4, people asked to state the probability of their engaging in a par- ticular behaviour demonstrate a tendency to overestimate the likelihood of acting in a moral and socially desirable manner, while underestimating the frequency of immoral and undesirable actions. It thus comes as no surprise that in this case they estimated the likelihood of their own dishonesty as very low.
The subjective certainty of overcoming temptation then led to participants less frequently taking advantage of the chance to cheat on a quiz compared to those in the control group. Very interesting studies exploring means of influencing the likelihood of unethical behaviours, described in Chapter 2 of this book, have also been conducted by Magdalena Paska (2002). How to study social influence techniques.
A short guide for students and novice researchers A key element in all psychological experiments is randomization – the chance assignment of study participants to particular experimental conditions. Of course, this is equally crucial in research on social influence techniques. In studies that166 A few more issues and final remarks involve addressing people with a request (which is the case with social influence techniques) it is very important to eliminate the influence of the researcher’s expectations regarding the reaction of the participant.
If someone operates under the theory that people will be more inclined to agree to requests addressed to them than in other circumstances, at times the researcher can – entirely unintentionally – behave either more or less pleasantly, look straight into the eyes of participants in certain situations while avoiding their gaze in others, etc. In professional experiments the standard procedure is to engage people who are blind to the hypotheses tested, and to practise the course of the interaction with study participants beforehand so as to make their behaviours as similar as possible in comparable conditions. What if an experiment of this nature is to be conducted by students of social psychology as part of their course work?
And what if everyone knows the hypoth- esis that is being tested in that experiment? There is a way around this as well. Let us use a certain example.
We may assume that the experiment concerns certain aspects of the sequential techniques you have read about in Chapter 2. We wish to explore a situation in which the first (initial) and second (target) requests are for- mulated by different people. In order to exclude the undesired effects described above, we should organize the experiment so that the individual formulating the target request does not know if he is addressing someone from the control group (i.e.
people who did not hear the initial request) or from the experimental group (people who have already been exposed to a request). Of course, if the experiment plan is more complicated, such a person should not know which condition he is involved in. How to do this?
The simplest way is to find the right place. Let us imagine that we are in the hallway of a building shaped like the letter ‘L’, or on a path of a similar shape. The experiment can be conducted by three people.
Let us assume that they are occupying the positions shown in Figure 7.1 This allows person X to maintain eye contact with person A and person B, but persons A and B do not see each other. Let us assume that there is relatively little foot traffic along the hallway or the path, and we have decided to engage every fifth person passing by who appears to be an adult and is walking in such a way that he first passes person A, and then person B (but not B then A). Only experi- menter X possesses a piece of paper with the results of the randomization determining which conditions a given participant will be assigned to; when experimenter X sees that a participant is approaching experimenter A, he gives him the appropriate signal.
This signal could be something like removing his glasses, taking off his hat, or touching his hair using either his left or right arm. Every gesture is a different command issued to experimenter A. X can also communicate with A by mobile phone, giving him the necessary instructions.
When a participant completes his interaction with person A, he heads towards person B (passing X along the way). X now communicates with B, telling him to approach the study participant. B does not know if this person is from the control conditions (thus already approached by A) or from one of the experimental conditions.A few more issues and final remarks 167 B X A FIGURE 7.1 A, X, B – experimenters Source: Image by author Let us consider for a moment what experimenter B will ask the participant for.
If it is money for a charitable purpose, then we may interrupt the experiment in the moment when the participant reaches for his wallet and explain that he is in a psychological experiment designed to examine if people in such conditions are inclined to help those in need. However, it seems to me that it would be better to make contact with some charity and really collect money for it. We can enrich our knowledge of psychology while directly helping people who can benefit from it.
And what if the target request involves completing a long survey? From our perspective, the only important thing is whether participants agree to complete it and how many questions they respond to. But perhaps one of our colleagues is in the process of a survey-based study?
Maybe we could help him gather some important data? And maybe – in exchange – he will agree to help us with our experiment? He says that he has no idea what we’re exploring?
He’s not familiar with such studies? He’s never done it before? That’s even better!
* Just a moment ago I received a phone call from a radio journalist. He wanted to discuss social influence techniques. He began by asking how many such techniques have been discovered by social psychologists.
When I told him that I didn’t know, he was surprised. After all, I should know. In reality, there is no way to answer this question.
Human ingenuity is virtually unlimited. Practitioners of social influence are constantly inventing new tricks; psychologists are constantly engaging168 A few more issues and final remarks in experiments and presenting their results in scientific journals. Unfortunately, there is not a large amount of empirical studies dedicated to social influence, nor articles and books on the subject.
Research by psychologists on people’s real behaviour – as I wrote in the Introduction – is becoming less and less common. In writing this book I wished to acknowledge those psychologists who go against the grain conducting incredibly time-consuming and unfashionable experiments (computer and neuropsychological experiments are all the rage now). It is my hope that you will agree with me: what is unfashionable can, however, be interesting.REFERENCES Abrahams, M.F.
& Bell, R.A. (1994). Encouraging charitable contributions: An examination of three models of door-in-the-face compliance.
Communication Research, 21, 131–153. Algulera, D.C. (1967).
Relationships between physical contact and verbal interaction between nurses and patients. Journal of Psychiatric Nursing, 5, 5–21. Apsler, R.
(1975). Effects of embarrassment on behaviour toward others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 145–153.
Argyle, M. & Henderson, M. (1984).
The rules of friendship. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 1, 211–237. Aronson, E.
(1969). A theory of cognitive dissonance: A current perspective. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (vol. 4, pp. 1–34).
New York: Academic Press. Aronson, E. (1997).
The theory of cognitive dissonance: The evolution and vicissitudes of an idea. In C. McGarty & S.A.
Haslam (Eds), The message of social psychology (pp. 20–36). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Aronson, E., Fried, C. & Stone, J. (1991).
Overcoming denial and increasing the use of condoms through the induction of hypocrisy. American Journal of Public Health, 81,1636–1638. Aune, R.K.
& Basil, M.D. (1994). A relational obligations approach to the foot-in-the-mouth effect.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 546–556. Back, K.W., Bogdonoff, M.D., Shaw, D.M. & Klein, R.F.
(1963). An interpretation of exper- imental conformity through physiological measures. Behavioral Science, 8, 34–40.
Baek, T.H. & Reid, L.N. (2013).
The interplay of mood and regulatory focus in influencing altruistic behavior. Psychology and Marketing, 30, 635–646. Baker, J., Levy, M.
& Grewal, D. (1992). An experimental approach to making retail store environmental decisions.
Journal of Retailing, 68, 445–460. Baron, R.S. (2000).
Arousal, capacity, and intense indoctrination. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4, 238–255. Baron, R.S.
& Moore, D.L. (1987). The impact of exercise induced arousal on social cognition.
Social Cognition, 5, 166–177. Bateson, M., Nettle, D. & Roberts, G.
(2006). Cues of being watched enhance cooperation in a real-world setting. Biology Letters, 2, 412–414.170 References Baumeister, R.F., Reis, H.T.
& Delespaul, P.A.E.G. (1995). Subjective and experiential correlates of guilt in daily life.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1256–1268. Baumeister, R.F. & Tice, D.M.
(1990). Anxiety and social exclusion. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 9, 165–195.
Baumeister, R.F., Vohs, K.D. & Funder, D.C. (2007).
Psychology as the science of self-reports and finger movements: Whatever happened to actual behavior? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 2, 396–403. Beaman, A.L., Cole, C.M., Preston, M., Klentz, B.
& Steblay, N.M. (1983). Fifteen years of foot-in-the-door research: A meta-analysis.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 181–196. Bell, R.A. & Cholerton, M.
(1994). Encouraging donations to charity: A field study of competing and complementary factors in tactic sequencing. Western Journal of Communication, 58, 98–115.
Bem, D.J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance phenomena.
Psychological Review, 74, 183–200. Bem, D.J. (1972).
Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (vol.
6, pp. 1–62). New York: Academic Press.
Berkowitz, L. (1993). Aggression: Its causes, consequences, and control.
New York: McGraw-Hill. Bodenhausen, G.V. (1993).
Emotions, arousal, and stereotypic judgments: A heuristic model of affect and stereotyping. In D.M. Mackie & D.L.
Hamilton (Eds), Affect, cognition, and stereotyping: Interactive processes in group perception (pp. 13–37). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bolkan, S. & Andersen, P.A. (2009).
Image induction and social influence: Explication and initial tests. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 31, 317–324. Boster, F.J.
& Mongeau, P. (1984). Fear-arousing persuasive messages.
Communication Yearbook, 8, 330–375. Boster, F.J., Shaw, A.S., Hughes, M., Kotowski, M.R., Strom, R.E. & Deatrick, L.M.
(2009). Dump-and-chase: The effectiveness of persistence as a sequential request compliance- gaining strategy. Communication Studies, 60, 219–234.
Bower, G. H. (1981).
Mood and memory. American Psychologist, 36, 129–148. Bower, G.H., Monteiro, K.P.
& Gilligan, S.G. (1971). Emotional mood as context for learning and recall.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 573–585. Bowerman, W.R. (1978).
Subjective competence: The structure, process and function of self- relevant causal attributions. Journal of the Theory of Social Behavior, 8, 45–57. Bradley, G.W.
(1978). Self-serving biases in the attribution process: A reexamination of the fact or fiction question. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 56–71.
Brehm, J. W. (1966).
A theory of psychological reactance. New York: Academic Press. Brennan, I.
& Bahn, K.D. (1991). Door-in-the-face, that’s-not all, and legitimizing a paltry contribution: Reciprocity, contrast effect and social judgment theory explanations.
Advances in Consumer Research, 18, 586–590. Brockner, J., Pressman, B., Cabitt, J. & Moran, P.
(1982). Nonverbal intimacy, sex, and compliance: A field study. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 6, 253–258.
Brooks, C., Church, M. & Fraser, L. (1986).
Effects of duration of eye contact on judgments of personality characteristics. Journal of Social Psychology, 126, 71–78. Bull, R.
& Gibson-Robinson, E. (1981). The influence of eye-gaze, style of dress, and locality on the amounts of money donated to charity.
Human Relations, 34, 895–905. Burger, J.M. (1986).
Increasing compliance by improving the deal: The that’s-not-all technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 277–283. Burger, J.M.
(1999). The foot-in-the-door compliance procedure: A multiple-process analysis and review. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3, 303–325.References 171 Burger, J.M.
(2007). Fleeting attraction and compliance with request. In A.R.
Pratkanis (Ed.), The science of social influence: Advances and future progress. (pp. 155–166).
New York and Hove: Psychology Press. Burger, J.M., Hornisher, J., Martin, V., Newman, G. & Pringle, S.
(2007). The pique technique: Overcoming mindlessness or shifting heuristics? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 37, 2086–2096.
Burger, J.M., Messian, N., Patel, S., del Prado, A. & Anderson, C. (2004).
What a coincidence! The effects of incidental similarity on compliance. Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 35–43.
Burger, J.M. & Petty, R.E. (1981).
The low-ball compliance technique: Task or person commitment? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 492–500 Burger, J.M., Soroka, S., Gonzago, K., Murphy, E. & Somervell, E.
(2001). The effect of fleeting attraction on compliance to requests. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1578–1586.
Campbell, J.D. (1990). Self-esteem and clarity of the self-concept.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 538–549. Cann, A. & Blackwelder, J.G.
(1984). Compliance and mood: A field investigation of the impact of embarrassment. Journal of Psychology, 117, 221–226.
Cann, A., Sherman, S.J. & Elkes, R. (1975).
Effects of initial request size and timing of a second request on compliance: The foot in the door and the door in the face. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 774–782. Cantrill, J.G.
& Seibold, D.R. (1986). The perceptual contrast explanation of sequential request strategy effectiveness.
Human Communication Research, 13, 253–267. Carli, L. (1990).
Gender, language, and influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 941–951. Carlsmith, J.M.
& Gross, A.E. (1969). Some effects of guilt on compliance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 11, 232–239. Carpenter, C. J.
& Boster, F. J. (2009a).
A cognitive processing explanation of the disrupt-then-reframe compliance gaining technique. Paper presented at the International Communication Association Convention, Chicago, IL. Carpenter, C.J.
& Boster, F.J. (2009b). A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of the disrupt- then-reframe compliance gaining technique.
Communication Reports, 22, 55–62. Carroll, J.S. (1978).
The effect of imagining an event on expectations for the event: An interpretation in terms of availability heuristic. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14, 88–96. Chaiken, S., Liberman, A.
& Eagly, A.H. (1989). Heuristic and systematic processing within and beyond the persuasion context.
In J.S. Uleman & J.A. Bargh (Eds), Unintended thought (pp.
212–252). New York: Guilford Press. Chaiken, S.
& Stangor, C. (1987). Attitudes and attitude change.
Annual Review of Psychology 38, 573–630. Chartrand, T. & Bargh, J.A.
(1999). The Chameleon effect: The perception-behavior link and social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893–910.
Cialdini, R.B. (1980). Full-cycle social psychology.
Applied Social Psychology Annual, 1, 21–45. Cialdini, R.B. (2001).
Influence. Science and practice (4th edn). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Cialdini, R.B. (2009). We have to break up.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 5–6. Cialdini, R.B., Borden, R.J., Thorne, A., Walker, M.R., Freeman, S. & Sloan, L.R.
(1976). Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 366–375.172 References Cialdini, R.B., Cacioppo, J.T., Bassett, R.
& Miller, J.A. (1978). Low-ball procedure for producing compliance: Commitment then cost.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 463–476. Cialdini, R.B., Darby, B.L. & Vincent, J.E.
(1973). Transgression and altruism: A case for hedonism. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 9, 502–516.
Cialdini, R.B. & Sagarin, B.J. (2005).
Interpersonal influence. In T. Brock & M.
Green (Eds), Persuasion: Psychological insights and perspectives (pp. 143–169). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Press.
Cialdini, R.B. & Schroeder, D. (1976).
Increasing compliance by legitimizing paltry contri- butions: When even a penny helps. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 599–604. Cialdini, R.B., Trost, M.R.
& Newsom, J.T. (1995). Preference for consistency: The develop- ment of a valid measure and the discovery of surprising behavioral implications.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 318–328. Cialdini, R.B., Vincent, J.E., Lewis, S.K., Catalan, J., Wheeler, D. & Darby, B.L.
(1975). Reciprocal concessions procedure for inducing compliance: The door-in-the-face technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 206–215.
Clark, H.H. (1985). Language use and language users.
In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds) Handbook of social psychology (vol.
2, pp. 179–231). New York: Random House.
Clark, H.H. & Schunk, D. (1980).
Polite responses to polite requests. Cognition, 8, 111–143. Clark, M.S.
& Isen, M. A. (1982).
Toward understanding the relationship between feeling states and social behavior. In A. H.
Hastorf & A. M. Isen (Eds), Cognitive social psychology (pp.
73–108). New York: Elsevier. Cook, M.
& Smith, M.C. (1975). The role of gaze in impression formation.
British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 14, 19–25. Corfield, V.K. (1969).
The role of arousal and cognitive complexity in susceptibility to social influence. Journal of Personality, 37, 554–566. Cornelissen, G., Dewitte, S.
& Warlop, L. (2007). Whatever people say I am that’s what I am: Social labeling as a social marketing tool.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 24, 278–288. Crano, W.D. & Sivacek, J.
(1982). Social reinforcement, self-attribution, and the foot-in-the- door phenomenon. Social Cognition, 1, 110–125.
Cunningham, M.R. (1979). Weather, mood and helping behavior: Quasi experiments with sunshine Samaritan.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1947–1956. Cunningham, M.R., Schaffer, D.R., Barbee, A.P., Wolff, P.L. & Kelley, D.J.
(1990). Separate processes in the elation and depression to helping: Social versus personal concerns. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 26, 13–33.
Cunningham, M.R., Steinberg, J. & Grev, R. (1980).
Wanting to and having to help: Separate motivations for positive mood and guilt-induced helping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 181–192. Czapinski, J.
(1993). Polski Generalny Sondaz Dobrostanu Psychicznego. [Polish General Survey of Well-Being] Warszawa -Olsztyn: Pracownia Wydawnicza Polskiego Towarzystwa Psychologicznego.
Darley, J. (1966). Fear and social comparison as determinants of conformity behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 73–78. Darlington, R.B. & Macker, C.E.
(1966). Displacement of guilt-produced altruistic behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 442–443.
Davis, B.P. & Knowles, E.S. (1999).
A disrupt-then-reframe technique of social influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 192–199. deCharms, R.
(1968). Personal causation: The internal affective determinants of behavior. New York: Academic Press.
DeJong, W. (1979). An examination of self-perception mediation of the foot-in-the-door effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 2221–2239.References 173 DeJong, W. & Musilli, L. (1982).
External pressure to comply. Handicapped vs. nonhandicapped requesters and the foot-in-the-door phenomenon.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 8, 522–527. DeJong, W. & Oopik, A.J.
(1992). Effect of legitimizing small contributions and labeling potential donors as ‘helpers’ on responses to a direct mail solicitation for charity. Psychological Reports, 71, 923–928.
Denny, M.R. (Ed.). (1991).
Fear, avoidance, and phobias: A fundamental analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Dickerson, C.A., Thibodeau, R., Aronson, E.
& Miller, D. (1992). Using cognitive disso- nance to encourage water conservation.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 22, 841–854. Dillard, J.P. (1990).
Self-inference and the foot-in-the-door technique: Quantity of behavior and attitudinal mediation. Human Communication Research, 16, 442–447. Dillard, J.P., Hunter, J.E.
& Burgoon, M. (1984). Sequential request persuasive strategies: Meta-analysis of foot-in-the-door and door-in-the-face.
Human Communication Research, 10, 461–488. Dolinska, B. & Dolinski, D.
(2006). To command or to ask? Gender and effectiveness of “thought” vs “soft” compliance-gaining strategies.
Social Influence, 1, 48–57. Dolinski, D. (1996).
The mystery of the Polish soul. B.W. Johnson’s effect a rebours.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 1001–1005. Dolinski, D. (2000).
On inferring one’s beliefs from one’s attempts and consequences for subsequent compliance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 260–272. Dolinski, D.
(2005). Techniki wplywu spolecznego [Techniques of social influence] Warszawa: Scholar. Dolinski, D.
(2009). People in a freezer: Self-perception as an explanatory mechanism for the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique. Polish Psychological Bulletin, 40, 113–116.
Dolinski, D. (2010). Touch, compliance, and homophobia.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 34, 179–192. Dolinski, D. (2011).
A rock or a hard place: The foot-in-the-face technique for inducing compliance without pressure. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 1514–1537. Dolinski, D.
(2012). The nature of the first small request as a decisive factor in the effective- ness of the foot-in-the-door technique. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 61, 437–453.
Dolinski, D., Ciszek, M., Godlewski, K. & Zawadzki, M. (2002).
Fear-then-relief, mindless- ness, and cognitive deficits. European Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 435–447. Dolinski, D., Gromski, W.
& Szmajke, A. (1988). Perpetrator’s freedom of choice as a deter- minant of responsibility attribution.
Journal of Social Psychology, 128, 697–710. Dolinski, D., Grzyb, T., Olejnik, J., Prusakowski, S. & Urban, K.
(2005). Let’s dialogue about penny. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35, 1150–1170.
Dolinski, D. & Nawrat, R. (1998).
Fear-then-relief procedure for producing compliance. Beware when the danger is over. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 27–50.
Dolinski, D., Nawrat, M. & Rudak, I. (2001).
Dialogue involvement as a social influence technique. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1395–1406. Dolinski, D.
& Odachowska, E. (2015). Beware when danger on the road has passed: The state of relief impairs a driver’s ability to avoid accidents.
Manuscript submitted for publication. Droney, J. & Brooks, C.
(1993). Attributions of self-esteem as a function of duration of eye contact. Journal of Social Psychology, 133, 715–722.
Duval, S. & Wicklund, R.A. (1972).
A theory of objective self-awareness. New York: Academic Press. Ebster, C.
& Neumayr, B. (2008). Applying the door-in-the-face compliance technique to retailing.
Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research, 18, 121–128.174 References Eisenberg, N., Cialdini, R.B., McCreath, H. & Shell, R. (1987).
Consistency based compliance: When and why children become vulnerable. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1174–1181. Ellsworth, P.C.
& Langer, E. (1976). Staring and approach: An interpretation of the stare as a nonspecific activator.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33, 117–122. Erickson, M.H. (1964).
The confusion technique in hypnosis. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 6, 183–207. Ernest, R.C.
& Cooper, R.E. (1974). “Hey mister, do you have any change?” Two real world studies of proxemic effects on compliance with a mundane request.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1, 158–159. Escalas, J.E. & Luce, M.F.
(2003). Process versus outcome thought-focus and advertising. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13, 246–254.
Escalas, J.E. & Luce, M.F. (2004).
Understanding the effects of process-focused versus outcome focused thought in response to advertising. Journal of Consumer Research, 31, 274–285. Feeley, T.
H., Anker, A. E. & Aloe, A.
(2012). The Door-in-the-Face Persuasive Message Strategy: A Meta-Analysis of the first 35 Years. Communication Monographs, 79, 316–343.
Fennis, B.M. & Aarts, H. (2012).
Revisiting the agentic shift: Weakening personal control increases susceptibility to social influence. European Journal of Social Psychology, 42, 824–831. Fennis, B.M., Das, E.H.H.J.
& Pruyn, A. Th. H.
(2004). “If you can’t dazzle them with brilliance, baffle them with nonsense”: Extending the impact of the disrupt-then- reframe technique of social influence. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14, 280–290.
Fennis, B.M., Janssen, L. & Vohs, K. (2009).
Acts of benevolence: A limited-resource account of compliance with charitable requests. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 906–924. Fern, E.F., Monroe, K.B.
& Avila, R.A. (1986). Effectiveness of multiple request strategies: A synthesis of research results.
Journal of Marketing Research, 23, 144–152. Festinger, L. (1957).
A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson. Finkiel, E.J.
& Baumeister, R.F. (2010). Advanced social psychology: The state of the science.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. Firmin, M.W., Helmick, J.M., Iezzi, B.A. & Vaughn, A.
(2004). Say please: The effect of the word “please” in compliance-seeking request. Social Behavior and Personality, 32, 67–72.
Fisher, J., Rytting, M. & Heslin, R. (1976).
Hands touching hands: Affective and evaluative effects on interpersonal touch. Sociometry, 39, 416–421. Fointiat, V.
(2000). ‘Foot-in-the-mouth’ versus ‘door-in-the-face’ requests. Journal of Social Psychology, 140, 264–266.
Fointiat, V. (2004). “I know what I have to do, but .
. .” When hypocrisy leads to behavioural change. Social Behavior and Personality, 32, 741–746.
Fointiat, V. (2008). Being together in a situation of induced hypocrisy.
Current Research in Social Psychology, 13, 443–451. Fointiat, V., Somat, A. & Grosbras, J-M.
(2011). Saying, but not doing: Induced hypocrisy, trivialization and misattribution. Social Behavior and Personality, 39, 465–476.
Forgas, J.P. (1998). Asking nicely?
The effects of mood on responding to more or less polite requests. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 173–185. Freedman, J.L.
& Fraser, S. (1966). Compliance without pressure: The foot in the door technique.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 195–202. Freedman, J.L., Wallington, S.A. & Bless, E.
(1967). Compliance without pressure: The effects of guilt. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7, 117–124.References 175 Fried, C.
(1998). Hypocrisy and identification with transgressions: A case of undetected dissonance. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 20, 145–154.
Frijda, N.H. (1986). The emotions: Studies in emotion and social interaction.
Paris: Maison de Sciences de l’Homme and Cambridge University Press. Gamian-Wilk, M. & Dolinski, D.
(2015). Compliance without pressure: The role of self-perception in the mechanism of the foot-in-the-door strategy. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Garner, R. (2005). What’s in a name?
Persuasion perhaps. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15, 108–116. Gass, R.H.
& Seiter, J.S. (2011). Persuasion, social influence, and compliance gaining (4th edn).
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Gilbert, D.T. (1991).
How mental systems believe. American Psychologist, 46, 107–119. Gilbert, D.T.
(1995). Attribution and interpersonal perception. In A.
Tesser (Ed.), Advanced social psychology (pp. 99–147). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Gilbert, S.J. (1981). Another look at the Milgram obedience studies: The role of gradated series of shocks.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7, 690–695. Goffman, E. (1959).
The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City and New York: Doubleday. Goldman, B.M.
(2006). Making diamonds out of coal: The role of authenticity of healthy (optimal) self-esteem and psychological functioning. In M.H.
Kernis (Ed.), Self-esteem issues and answers. A sourcebook of current perspectives. (pp.
132–139). New York: Psychology Press. Goldman, M.
(1986). Compliance employing a combined foot-in-the-door and door- in-the-face procedure. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 126, 11–116.
Goldman, M. & Fordyce, J. (1983).
Prosocial behavior as affected by eye contact, touch, and voice expression. Journal of Social Psychology, 121, 125–129. Goldman, M., Kiyohara, O.
& Pfannensteil, D.A. (1985). Interpersonal touch, social labeling, and the foot-in-the-door effect.
Journal of Social Psychology, 152, 143–147. Goldman, M., Seever, M. & Seever, M.
(1982). Social labeling and the foot-in-the-door effect. Journal of Social Psychology, 117, 19–23.
Gorassini, D.R. & Olson, J.M. (1995).
Does self-perception change explain the foot- in-the-door effect? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 91–105. Gottlieb, J.
& Carver, C.S. (1980). Anticipation of future interaction and the bystander effect.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 253–260. Gouldner, A.W. (1960).
The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Sociological Review, 25, 161–178. Greenwald, A.G.
& Banaji, M.R. (1995). Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem,and stereotypes.
Psychological Review, 102, 4–27. Greenwald, A.G., Carnot, C.G., Beach, R. & Young, B.
(1987). Increasing voting behavior by asking people if they expect to vote. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 315–318.
Gregory, W.L., Cialdini, R.B. & Carpenter, K.M. (1982).
Self-relevant scenarios as mediators of likelihood estimates and compliance: Does imagining make it so? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 89–99. Gueguen, N.
(2001). Social labelling and compliance: An evaluation of the link between the label and the request. Social Behaviour and Personality, 29, 743–748.
Gueguen, N. (2002). Status, apparel and touch: Their joint effects on compliance to a request.
North American Journal of Psychology, 4, 279–286. Gueguen, N. (2003).
Fund-raising on the web: The effect of an electronic door-in-the-face technique on compliance to a request. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 6, 189–193. Gueguen, N.
(2013a). “Even a donation one time in your life will help . .
.”: The effect of the legitimization paltry contribution technique on blood donation. Transfusion and Apheresis Science, 49, 489–493.176 References Gueguen, N. (2013b).
Handshaking and compliance with a request: A door-to-door setting. Social Behavior and Personality, 41, 1585–1588. Gueguen, N.
& Jacob, C. (2002). Direct look versus evasive glance and compliance with a request.
Journal of Social Psychology, 142, 393–396. Gueguen, N., Joule, R-V., Courbet, D., Halimi-Falkowicz, S. & Marchand, M.
(2013). Repeating “yes” in a first request and compliance with a later request: The fourth walls technique. Social Behavior and Personality, 41, 199–202.
Gueguen, N., Joule, R-V., Halmi-Falkowicz, S., Pascual, A., Fisher-Lokou, J. & Dufcorcq-Brana, M. (2013).
I’m free but I’ll comply with your request: generalization and multidimensional effects of the “evoking freedom” technique. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 43, 116–137. Gueguen, N.
& Lamy, L. (2013). Whether and helping: Additional evidence of the effect of sunshine Samaritan.
Journal of Social Psychology, 153, 123–126. Gueguen, N., Martin, A. & Meineri, S.
(2013). “Even a single marble will make him/her happy . .
.”: Further evidence and extension of the legitimizing paltry contribution tech- nique on helping. Social Influence, 8, 18–26. Gueguen, N., Meineri, S.
& Charles-Sire, V. (2010). Improving medication adherence by using practitioner nonverbal techniques: A field experiment on the effect of touch.
Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 33, 466–473. Gueguen, N., Meineri, S. & Stefan, J.
(2012). “Say it with flowers” . .
. to female drivers: Hitchhikers holding flowers and driver behavior. North American Journal of Psychology, 14, 623–628.
Gueguen, N. & Pascual, A. (2000).
Evocation of freedom and compliance: The “But you are free of . . .” technique.
Current Research in Social Psychology, 5, 264–270. Gueguen, N. & Pascual, A.
(2005). Improving the response rate to street survey: An evaluation of the “But you are free to accept or to refuse” technique. Psychological Record, 55, 297–303.
Gueguen, N., Pichot, N. & Le Dreff, G. (2005).
Similarity and helping behavior on the web: The impact of convergence of surnames between a solicitor and a subject in a request made by e-mail. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35, 423–429. Gueguen, N.
& Vion, M. (2009). The effect of practitioner’s touch on a patient’s medication compliance.
Psychology, Health and Medicine, 14, 689–694. Hall, E.T. (1969).
The hidden dimension. New York: Doubleday. Harris, M.B.
(1972). The effects of performing one altruistic act on the likelihood of per- forming another. Journal of Social Psychology, 88, 65–73.
Henley, N. & LaFrance, M. (1984).
Gender and culture: Difference and dominance in non- verbal behavior. In A. Wolfgang (Ed.), Nonverbal behavior: Perspectives, applications, intercultural insights (pp.
351–357). Ashland, AL: Hogrefe & Huber Publishers. Henley, N.M.
(1973). Status and sex: Some touching observations. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 2, 91–93.
Herling-Grudzinski, G. (1965). Inny swiat.
[A different world]. Paris: Institut Literaire S.A.R.I. Heslin, R., Nguyen, T.D.
& Nguyen, M.L. (1983). Meaning of touch: The case of touch from a stranger or same sex person.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 7, 145–157. Higgins, E.T. (1996).
Knowledge activation: Accessibility, applicability, and salience. In E.T. Higgins & A.W.
Kruglanski (Eds), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp.133–168). New York: Guilford. Hornik, J.
(1987). The effect of touch and gaze upon compliance and interest of interviewers. Journal of Social Psychology, 127, 681–683.
Hornik, J. & Ellis, S. (1988).
Strategies to secure compliance for a mall intercept interview. Public Opinion Quarterly, 52, 539–551.References 177 Hornik, J. & Zaig, T.
(1991). Reducing refusals in telephone surveys on sensitive topics. Journal of Advertising Research, 31, 49–56.
Hornik, J., Zaig, T. & Shadmon, D. (1991).
Comparison of three inducement techniques to improve compliance in a health survey conducted by telephone. Public Health Reports, 105, 524–529. Howard, D.J.
(1990). The influence of verbal responses to common greetings on compliance behavior: The foot-in-the-mouth effect. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20, 1185–1196.
Howard, D.J. (1995). ‘Chaining’ the use of influence strategies for producing compliance behavior.
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 10, 169–185. Howard, D.J. & Gengler, C.
(1995). Motivating compliance with a request by remembering someone’s name. Psychological Reports, 77, 123–129.
Howard, D.J., Gengler, C. & Jain, A. (1995).
What’s in a name? A complimentary means of persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 22, 200–211.
Howard, D.J., Gengler, C. & Jain, A. (1997).
The name remembrance effect: A test of alterna- tive explanations. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 12, 801–810. Isen, A.M.
(1984). Toward understanding role of affect on cognition. In R.
Wyer, T. Srull & A.M. Isen (Eds), Handbook of social cognition (vol.
3, pp. 179–236). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Isen, A.M. & Levin, P.F. (1972).
The effect of feeling good on helping: cookies and kindness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 384–388. Isen, A.M.
& Geva, N. (1987). The influence of positive affect on acceptable level of risk and thoughts about losing: The person with a large canoe has a large worry.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 39, 145–154. Isen, A.M. & Simmonds, S.F.
(1978). The effect of feeling good on a helping task that is incompatible with good mood. Social Psychology, 41, 345–349.
Izard, C.E. (1977). Human emotions.
New York and London: Plenum Press. Jacob, C., Charles-Sire, V. & Gueguen, N.
(2013). “Even a single package of pastas will help . .
.”: The effect of the legitimization paltry contribution technique on altruism. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 4, 828–836. Jacob, C., Gueguen, N., Martin, A.
& Boulbry, G. (2011). Retail salespeople’s mimicry of customers: Effects on consumer behavior.
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 18, 381–388. Janis, I.L. & Feshbach, S.
(1953). Effects of fear-arousing communications. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 48, 78–92.
Jankowski, K.F. & Takahashi, H. (2014).
Cognitive neuroscience of social emotions and implications for psychopathology: Examining embarrassment, guilt, envy, and schaden- freude. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 68, 319–336. Jensen, J.
D., King, A. J. & Carcioppolo, N.
(2013). Driving toward a goal and the goal- gradient hypothesis: the impact of goal proximity on compliance rate, donation size, and fatigue. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 43, 1881–1895.
Jiang, L., Hoegg, J., Dahl, D.W. & Chattopadhyay, A. (2010).
The persuasive role of incidental similarity on attitudes and purchase intentions in a sales context. Journal of Consumer Research, 36, 778–791. Johnson, W.B.
(1937). Euphoric and depressed mood in normal subjects. Character and Personality, 6, 79–98.
Joule, R.V. (1987). Tobacco deprivation: The foot-in-the-door technique versus the low-ball technique.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 17, 361–365. Joule, R.V., Gouilloux, F. & Weber, F.
(1989). The lure: A new compliance procedure. Journal of Social Psychology,129, 741–749.178 References Kakar, S.
(1976). Curiosity in children and adults: A review essay. Indian Journal of Psychology, 51, 181–201.
Kardes, F.R., Fennis, B.M., Hirt, E.R., Tormala, Z.L. & Bullington, B. (2007).
The role of need for cognitive closure in the effectiveness of the disrupt-then-reframe influence technique. Journal of Consumer Research, 36, 1033–1049. Kelln, B.R.C.
& Ellard, J.H. (1999). An equity theory analysis of the impact of forgiveness and retribution on transgressor compliance.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 864–873. Kenrick, D.T. & Gutierres, S.E.
(1980). Contrast effect and judgments of physical attractive- ness. When beauty becomes a social problem.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 131–140. Kiesler, C.A. (1971).
The psychology of commitment. Academic Press: New York. Kitayama, S.
& Karasawa, M. (1997). Implicit self-esteem in Japan: Name letters and birthday numbers.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 736–742. Kleinke, C.L. (1977).
Compliance to request made by gazing and touching experiments in field settings. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13, 218–223. Kleinke, C.L.
(1980). Interaction between gaze and legitimacy of request on compliance in a field setting. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 5, 3–12.
Kleinke, C.L. & Singer, D.A. (1979).
Influence of gaze on compliance with demanding and conciliatory request in field setting. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 5, 386–390. Knowles, E.
S., Butler, S. & Linn, J. A.
(2001). Increasing compliance by reducing resistance. In J.
P. Forgas & K. D.
Williams (Eds), Social influence: Direct and indirect processes (pp. 41−60). New York: Psychology Press.
Kojima, S. (1994). Psychological approach to consumer buying decisions: Analysis of the psychological purse and psychology of price.
Japanese Psychological Research, 36, 10–19. Konoske, P., Staple, S. & Graf, R.G.
(1979). Compliant reactions to guilt: Self-esteem or self-punishment. Journal of Social Psychology, 108, 207–211.
Koole, S.L., Dijksterhuis, A. & van Knippenberg, A. (2001).
What’s in a name: Implicit self-esteem and automatic self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 669–685. Koole, S.L.
& Pelham, B.W. (2003). On the nature of implicit self-esteem: The case of the name letter effect.
In S.J. Spencer, S. Fein, M.P.
Zanna & J.M. Olson (Eds), Motivated social perception: The Ontario Symposium (vol. 9, pp.
93–116). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Koscielniak, R.
(1998). Wpływ autoprezentacji na uległos´c´. [The influence of self-presentational motives on compliance] Unpublished master thesis.
Wroclaw University. Kraut, R.E. (1973).
Effects of social labelling on giving to charity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 9, 551–562. Kruglanski, A.W.
(1989). Lay epistemic and human knowledge: Cognitive and motivational bases. New York: Plenum Press.
Kruglanski, A. W. & Webster, D.
M. (1996). Motivated closing of the mind: “Seizing” and` “freezing”.
Psychological Review, 103, 263–283. Kubala, I. (2002).
420 sekund to mniej niz. 7 minut. Eksploracja zakresu efektywnos´ci techniki, Dobrze To Rozegraj”.
[420 seconds is less than 7 minutes. Empirical explora- tion into disrupt-then-reframe technique]. Studia Psychologiczne, 40, 111–125.
Kulbat, J. (2003). Strategie selekcji obiektow wplywu spolecznego [Strategies of selections of social influence targets].
Unpublished doctoral thesis., University of Opole, Poland. Kulesza, W., Dolinski, D., Huisman, A. & Majewski, R.
(2014). The echo effect: The power of verbal mimicry to influence pro-social behavior. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 33, 185–203.
Kulesza, W., Szypowska, Z., Jarman, M & Dolinski, D. (2014). Attractive chameleons sell: The mimicry-attractiveness link.
Psychology and Marketing, 31, 549–561.References 179 Lacey, B.C. & Lacey, J.I. (1978).
Two-way communication between the heart and the brain: Significance of time within cardiac cycle. American Psychologist, 33, 99–113. Langer, E.J.
(1978). Rethinking the role of thought in social interaction. In J.H.
Harvey, W.I. Ickes & R.F. Kidd (Eds), New directions in attribution research (vol.
2, pp. 35–58). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Langer, E.J. (1989). Minding matters: The consequences of mindlessness–mindfulness.
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (vol. 22, s.
137–173). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Langer, E.J.
(1992). Matters of mind: Mindfulness/mindlessness in perspective. Consciousness and Cognition, 1, 289–305.
Langer, E.J., Blank, A. & Chanowitz, B. (1978).
The mindlessness of ostensibly thoughtful action: The role of ‘placebic’ information in interpersonal interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 635–642. Langer, E.J.
& Moldoveanu, M. (Eds) (2000). Mindfulness theory and social issues.
Journal of Social Issues, 56. Leary, M.R. & Allen, A.B.
(2011). Personality and persona: Personality processes in self- presentation. Journal of Personality, 79, 889–916.
Lindskold, S., Albert, K.P., Baer, R. & Moore, W.C. (1976).
Territorial boundaries of interact- ing groups and passive audiences. Sociometry, 39, 71–76. Lindskold, S., Forte, R., Haake, C.
& Schmidt, E. (1977). The effects of directness of face-to-face request and sex of solicitor on street corner donations.
Journal of Social Psychology, 101, 45–51. Lyman, S.M. & Scott, M.B.
(1967). Territoriality: A neglected sociological dimension. Social Problems, 15, 236–249.
Maio, G.R. & Olson, J.M. (1995).
Involvement and persuasion: Evidence for different types of involvement. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 27, 64–78. Maj, K.
(2002). Zachowanie uprzejme jako czynnik warunkujacy skutecznocc techniki wplywu spolecznego ‘niska pilka’ [Polite behaviour as a condition determining the effec- tiveness of low-ball social influence technique]. Studia Psychologiczne, 40, 93–109.
Major, B. & Heslin, R. (1982).
Perceptions of cross-sex and same-sex nonreciprocal touch: It is better to give than to receive. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 6, 148–162. Martin, A.
& Gueguen, N. (2013). The influence of incidental similarity on self-revelation in response to an intimate survey.
Social Behavior and Personality, 41, 353–356. McMillen, D.L., (1971). Transgression, self-image, and compliant behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 20, 176–179. Meineri, S. & Gueguen, N.
(2011). “I hope I’m not disturbing you, am I?” Another opera- tionalization of the foot-in-the-mouth paradigm. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 965–975.
Meineri, S. & Gueguen, N. (2014).
Foot-in-the-door and action identification. Binding communication applied to environmental conservation. European Review of Applied Psychology, 64, 3–11.
Milberg, S. & Clark, M.S. (1988).
Moods and compliance. British Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 79–90. Milgram, S.
(1974). Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New York: Harper and Row.
Miller, R.L., Brickman, P. & Bolen, D. (1975).
Attribution versus persuasion as a means for modifying behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 430–441. Miller, R.L., Seligman, C., Clark, N.T.
& Bush, M. (1976). Perceptual contrast versus recip- rocal concession as mediators of induce compliance.
Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 8, 401–409. Morgan, C., Lockard, J., Fahrenbruch, C. & Smith, J.
(1975). Hitchhiking: Social signals at a distance. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 5, 459–461.180 References Morin, A.
(2011). Self-awareness. Part 1: Definition, measures, effects, function, and antecedents.
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 10, 807–823. Mowen, J.C. & Cialdini, R.B.
(1980). On implementing the door-in-the-face compliance technique in a business context. Journal of Marketing Research, 17, 253–258.
Nannberg, J.C. & Hansen, C.H. (1994).
Post-compliance touch: An incentive for task performance. Journal of Social Psychology, 134, 301–307. Navon, D.
(1984). Resources: A theoretical soup stone? Psychological Review, 91, 216–234.
Nawrat, M. (1997). Empiryczne rozstrzygniecie miedzy alternatywnymi wyjasnieniami skutecznosci techniki ”stopa w ustach” [Empirical test of alternative explanations of the “foot-in-the-mouth” effect].
Przeglad Psychologiczny, 40, 157–167. Nawrat, R. & Dolinski, D.
(2007). ‘See-saw of emotions’ and compliance: Beyond the fear-then-relief rule. Journal of Social Psychology, 147, 556–571.
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality.
San Francisco, CA: Freeman. Niedenthal, P.M., Krauth-Gruber, S. & Ric, F.
(2006). Psychology of emotion. Interpersonal, experiential, and cognitive approaches.
New York and Hove: Psychology Press. Niedenthal, P.M. & Setterlund, M.B.
(1994). Emotion congruence in perception. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 401–411.
Nuttin, J.M.N. Jr. (1984).
‘What’s in a name?’ Opening lecture of the General Meeting of the European Association of Experimental Social Psychology, Tilburg. O’Keefe, D.J. (2002).
Persuasion: Theory and research (2nd edn). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. O’Keefe, D.J.
& Figge, M. (1997). A guilt-based explanation of the door-in-the-face influence strategy.
Human Communication Research, 24, 64–81. O’Keefe, D. J.
& Hale, S. L. (1998).
The door-in-the-face influence strategy: A random-effects meta-analytic review. Communication Yearbook, 21, 1–33. Pallak, M.S., Cook, D.A.
& Sullivan, J.J. (1980). Commitment and energy conservation.
Applied Social Psychology Annual, 1, 235–253. Pandelaere, M.B., Briers, B., Dewitte, S. & Warlop, L.
(2010). Better think before agreeing twice. Mere agreement: A similarity-based persuasion mechanism.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 27, 133–141. Pascual, A., Oteme, Ch., Samson, L., Wang, Q., Halmi-Falkowicz, S., Souchet, L., Girandola, F., Gueguen, N. & Joule, R-V.
(2012). Cross-cultural investigation of compliance without pressure: The “you are free to . .
.” technique in France, Ivory Coast, Romania, Russia, and China. Cross-Cultural Research, 20, 1–23. Paska, M.
(2002). “Ja nie chciałem . .
.” Sekwencyjne techniki wplywu spolecznego a zach- owania nieetyczne. [”I didn’t mean it . .
.” The sequential techniques of social influence and unethical behaviour]. Studia Psychologiczne, 40, 69–91. Patch, M.E., Hoang, V.R.
& Stahelski, A.J. (1997). The use of metacommunication in compli- ance: Door-in-the-face and single-request strategies.
Journal of Social Psychology, 137, 88–94. Patterson, M.L., Powell, J.L. & Lenihan, M.G.
(1986). Touch, compliance, and interpersonal affect. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 10, 41–50.
Paulsell, S. & Goldman, M. (1984).
The effect of touching different body areas on prosocial behavior. Journal of Social Psychology, 122, 269–273. Pelham, B.W., Mirenberg, M.C.
& Jones, J.T. (2002). Why Susie sells seashells by the seashore: Implicit egotism and major life decisions.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 469–487. Pendleton, M.G. & Batson, C.D.
(1979). Self-presentation and the door-in-the-face tech- nique for inducing compliance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 5, 77–81.
Petrova, P. & Cialdini, R.B. (2008).
Evoking the imagination as a strategy for influence. In C. Haugtvedt, P.
Herr & F. Kardes (Eds) Handbook of Consumer Psychology. (pp.
505–523). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.References 181 Petty, R.E. & Cacioppo, J.T.
(1990). Involvement and persuasion: Tradition versus integration. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 367–374.
Pliner, P., Hart, H., Kohl, J. & Saari, D. (1974).
Compliance without pressure: Some fur- ther data on the foot-in-the-door technique. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10, 17–22. Pollock, C.L., Smith, S.D., Knowles, E.S.
& Bruce, H.J. (1998). Mindfulness limits compli- ance with the that’s-not-all technique.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 1153–1157. Posner, M.I. & Snyder, C.R.R.
(1975). Attention and cognitive control. In R.L.
Solso (Ed.), Information processing and cognition. The Loyola symposium. (pp.
55–85). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Powell, J.L., Meil, W., Patterson, M.L., Chouinard, E.F., Collins, B., Kobus, T.J., Habermeier, W.
& Arnone, W.L. (1994). Effects of timing of touch on compliance to a request.
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 9, 153–162. Powell, K.L., Roberts, G. & Nettle, D.
(2012). Eye images increase charitable donations: Evidence from an opportunistic field experiment in a supermarket. Ethnology, 118, 1096–1101.
Pratkanis, A.R. & Uriel, Y. (2011).
The expert snare as an influence tactic: Surf, turf, and ballroom demonstrations of some compliance consequences of being altercast as an expert. Current Psychology, 30, 335–344. Pribram, K.H.
& McGuiness, D. (1975). Arousal, activation, and effort in the control of attention.
Psychological Review, 82, 116–149. Reeves, R.A., Baker, G.A., Boyd, J.G. & Cialdini, R.B.
(1991). The door-in-the-face technique: Reciprocal concessions vs. self-presentational explanations.
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 6, 545–558. Reingen, P.H. (1978).
On inducing compliance with requests. Journal of Consumer Research, 5, 96–102. Rembland, M.S.
& Jones, T.S. (2001). The influence of vocal intensity and touch on compli- ance gaining.
Journal of Social Psychology, 134, 89–97. Rind, B. (1997).
Effects of interest arousal on compliance with a request for help. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 19, 49–59. Rind, B.
& Benjamin, D. (1994). Effects of public image concerns and self-image on compli- ance.
Journal of Social Psychology, 134, 19–25. Rittle, R.H. (1981).
Changes in helping behavior: Self vs. situational perceptions as media- tors of the foot-in-the-door effect. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7, 431–437.
Rodafinos, A., Vucevic, A. & Sideridis, G.D. (2005).
The effectiveness of compliance tech- niques: Foot in the door versus door in the face. Journal of Social Psychology, 145, 237–239. Roloff, M.E.
(1987). Communication and reciprocity within intimate relationships. In M.E.
Roloff, G.R. Miller (Eds), Interpersonal processes: New directions in communication research (pp. 11–38).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Rosenhan, D. L., Salovey, P.
& Hargis, K. (1981). The joys of helping: Focus of attention mediates the impact of positive affect on altruism.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 899–905. Sajjad, H. & Tausif, M.
(2012). Consumer behavior knocked intense by mood, communica- tion and product value. International Journal of Information, Business and Management, 4, 111–120.
Sanbonmatsu, D.M. & Kardes, F.R. (1988).
The effects of physiological arousal on informa- tion processing and persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 379–385. Santos, M.D., Leve, C.
& Pratkanis, A.R. (1994). Hey buddy, can you spare seventeen cents?
Mindful persuasion and the pique technique. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 755–764.182 References Scherer, S.E. (1974).
Influence of proximity and eye contact on impression formation. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 38, 538. Schlosser, A.
E., (2003). Experiencing products in the virtual world: The role of goal and imagery in influencing attitudes versus purchase intentions. Journal of Consumer Research, 30, 184–198.
Schur, E.M. (1971). Labeling deviant behavior: Its sociological implications.
New York: Harper and Row. Schwarz, N. & Bless, H.
(1991). Happy and mindless, but sad and smart? The impact of affec- tive states on analytic reasoning.
In J.P. Forgas (Ed.), Emotion and social judgments (pp. 55–71).
Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press. Schwarzwald, J., Bizman, A. & Raz, M.
(1983). The foot-in-the-door paradigm: Effects of second request size on donation probability and donor generosity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 443–450.
Segrin, C. (1993). The effects of nonverbal behavior on outcomes of compliance gaining attempts.
Communication Studies, 44, 169–187. Shen, L. & Dillard, J.
P. (2014). Threat, fear, and persuasion: Review and critique of questions about functional forms.
Review of Communication Research, 2, 94–114. Sherman, S.J. (1980).
On the self-erasing nature of errors in prediction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 211–221. Sherman, S.J., Cialdini, R.B., Schwartzman, D.F.
& Reynolds, K.D. (2002). Imaging can heighten or lower the perceived likelihood of contracting a disease: The mediating effect of ease of imagery.
In T. Gilovich & D. Griffin (Eds) Heuristic and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp.
98–102). New York: Cambridge University Press. Shotland, R.L.
& Johnson, M.P. (1978). Bystander behavior and kinesics: The interaction between helper and victim.
Environmental Psychology and Nonverbal Behavior, 2, 181–190. Skilbeck, C., Tulips, J. & Ley, P.
(1977). The effects of fear arousal, fear position, fear exposure, and sidedness on compliance with dietary instructions. European Journal of Social Psychology, 7, 221–239.
Smith, D.E., Gier, J.A. & Willis, F.N. (1982).
Interpersonal touch and compliance with a marketing request. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 3, 35–38. Snyder, M., Grether, J.
& Keller, K. (1974). Staring and compliance: A field experiment on hitchhiking.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 4, 165–170. Solomon, S., Greenberg, J. & Pyszczynski, T.
(1991). A terror management theory of social behavior: The psychological function of self-esteem and cultural worldviews. In M.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (vol. 24, pp. 93–159).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Spangenberg, E.R. (1997).
Increasing health club attendance through self-prophecy. Marketing Letters, 8, 23–32. Spangenberg, E.R.
& Obermiller, C. (1996). To cheat or not to cheat: Reducing cheating by requesting self-prophecy.
Marketing Education Review, 6, 95–103. Spangenberg, E.R., Sprott, D.E., Grohmann, B. & Smith, R.J.
(2003). Mass-communicated prediction request: Practical application and a cognitive dissonance explanation for self-prophecy. Journal of Marketing, 67, 47–62.
Spiewak, S. (2002). Miedzy drzwiami a hustawka: drenaz poznawczy a skutecznosc wybranych technik wplywu spolecznego [Cognitive depletion and the effectiveness of the door-in-the-face and fear-then-relief compliance techniques] Studia Psychologiczne, 40, 23–47.
Sprott, D.E., Spangenberg, E.R. & Perkins, A.W. (1999).
Two more self-prophecy experi- ments. In E. Arnould, L.
Price (Eds) Advances in consumer research (vol. 25, pp. 621–626).
Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research.References 183 Stier, D.S. & Hall, J.A. (1984).
Gender differences in touch: An empirical and theoretical review. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 440–459. Stone, J.
& Fernandez, N.C. (2011). When thinking about less failure causes more dissonance: The effect of elaboration and recall on behavior change following hypocrisy.
Social Influence, 6, 199–211. Stone, J., Wiegand, A.W., Cooper, J. & Aronson, E.
(1997). When exemplification fails: Hypocrisy and the motive for self-integrity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 54–65.
Strack, F., Martin, L.L. & Stepper, S. (1988).
Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of facial expressions: A non-obtrusive test of facial feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 768–776. Strenta, A.
& DeJong, W. (1981). The effect of a prosocial label on helping behavior.
Social Psychology Quarterly, 44, 142–147. Sussman, N.M. & Rosenfeld, H.M.
(1978). Touch, justification, and sex: Influences on the aversiveness of spatial violations. Journal of Social Psychology, 106, 215–225.
Takada, J. & Levine, T.R. (2007).
The effects of the even-a-few-minutes-would-help strategy, perspective taking, and empathy concern on the successful recruiting volunteers on campus. Communication Research Reports, 24, 177–184. Tangney, J.P.
(1995). Shame and guilt in interpersonal relationships. In J.P.
Tangney & K.W. Fisher (Eds), Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp. 114–142).
New York: Guilford. Tanner, R. J., Ferraro, R., Chartrand, T.
L., Bettman, J. R. & van Baaren, R.
(2008). Of chameleons and consumption: The impact of mimicry on choice and preferences. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 754–766.
Taylor, S.E. (1981). The interface of cognitive and social psychology.
In J. Harvey (Ed.), Cognition, social behavior, and the environment. (pp.
189–211). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Taylor, S.E.
& Brown, J.D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological perspective on mental health.
Psychological Bulletin, 103, 67–85. Taylor, S.E., Pham, L.B., Rivkin, I.D. & Armor, D.A.
(1998). Harnessing the imagination: Mental simulation, self-regulation, and coping. American Psychologist, 53, 429–439.
Terrier, L. & Joule, R. V.
(2008). La procédure de porte-au-nez : Vers une interprétation motivationnelle [The door-in-the-face procedure: Toward a motivational interpretation]. Cahiers Internationaux de Psychologie Sociale, 77, 5–14.
Tomkins, S.S. (1991). Affect, imagery, consciousness.
Vol. III. The negative affects: Anger and fear.
New York: Springer. Tourangeau, R. & Yan, T.
(2007). Sensitive questions in surveys. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 859–883.
Tuma, A.H. & Maser, J.D. (1985).
(Eds), Anxiety and anxiety disorder. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Tusing, K.J.
& Dillard, J.P. (2000). The psychological reality of the Door-in-the-face: It’s helping, not bargaining.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 19, 5–25. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D.
(1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. In: D.
Kahneman, P. Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds), Judgment under uncertainty (pp.
3–20). New York: Cambridge University Press. Tybout, A.M., Sternthal, B.
& Calder, B.J. (1983). Information-availability as a determinant of multiple request effectiveness.
Journal of Marketing Research, 20, 280–290. Uehara, E.S. (1995).
Reciprocity reconsidered: Gouldner’s ‘moral norm of reciprocity’ and social support. Journal of Social and Personal Relationship, 12, 483–502. Uranowitz, S.
(1975). Helping as self-attributions: A field experiment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 852–854.
Valentine, M.E. (1980). The attenuating influence of gaze upon the bystander intervention effect.
Journal of Social Psychology, 111, 197–203.184 References Vallacher, R.R. & Wegner, D.M. (1985).
A theory of action identification. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Vallacher, R.R.
& Wegner, D.M. (1987). What do people think they’re doing?
Action identification and human behavior. Psychological Review, 94, 2–15. van Baaren, R.
B., Holland, R. W., Kawakami, K. & van Knippenberg, A.
(2004). Mimicry and prosocial behavior. Psychological Science, 15, 71–74.
van Baaren, R. B., Holland, R. W., Steenaert, B.
& van Knippenberg, A. (2003). Mimicry for money: Behavioral consequences of imitation.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 393–398. Vaughn, A.J., Firmin, M.W. & Hwang, C-E.
(2009). Efficacy of request presentation on compliance. Social Behavior and Personality, 37, 441–450.
Wagener, J.J. & Laird, J.D. (1980).
The experimenter’s foot-in-the-door: Self-perception, body weight, and volunteering. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 6, 441–446. Wallace, J.
& Sadalla, E. (1966). Behavioral consequences of transgression: I.
The effects of social recognition. Journal of Experimental Research in Personality, 1, 187–194. Walster, E., Walster, G.W.
& Berscheid, E. (1978). Equity theory and research.
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Wegner, D.M., Vallacher, R.R., Macomber, G., Wood, R. & Arps, K.
(1984). The emergence of action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 269–279.
Weigl, B. (1990). Fantazjowanie na temat własnego zachowania jako przesłanka nieuczciwo´sci w sytuacji pokusy.
[Dreaming about one’s own behaviour as a predictor of honesty in temptation situation] Unpublished Research Report. Opole. Weyant, J.M.
& Smith, S.L. (1987). Getting more by asking for less: The effects of request size on donations of charity.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 17, 392–400. Whang, Y-O. (2012).
When and why does the that’s-not-all compliance technique work? Journal of Business and Economic Research, 10, 171–178. Whatley, M.A., Webster, M.J., Smith, R.H.
& Rhodes, A. (1999).The effect of a favour on public and private compliance: How internalized is the norm of reciprocity? Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 21, 251–259.
Wicklund, R.A. & Gollwitzer, P.M. (1987).
The fallacy of the private-public self-focus distinction. Journal of Personality, 55, 491–523. Willis, F.N.
& Hamm, H.K. (1980). The use of interpersonal touch in securing compliance.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 6, 49–55. Wills, T.A. (1981).
Downward comparison principles in social psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 245–271. Wilson, D.
W. (1981). Is helping a laughing matter?
Psychology, 18, 6–9. Wojciszke, B. & Baryla, W.
(2005). Kultura narzekania, czyli o psychicznych pułapkach ekspresji niezadowolenia. In M.
Drogosz (Ed.), Jak Polacy przegrywaja. Jak Polacy wygrywaja [How Poles lose, how Poles win] (pp. 35–51).
Gdansk: GWP. Wood, W. (2000).
Attitude change: Persuasion and social influence. Annual Review of Psychology, 51, 539–570. Zuckerman, M., Lazzaro, M.M.
& Waldgeir, D. (1979). Undermining effects of the foot-in-the-door technique with extrinsic rewards.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 9, 292–296.INDEX action identification theory 108–10, 114 Cialdini, R.B. 1, 4–6, 17, 21–2, 25–33, 37, anchor 102–4, 107, see also contrast effect 40 44, 46, 68–69, 94–5, 142, 145, 164, Aronson, E. 58–60, 169, 172, 173, 183 171, 172, 174, 175, 180, 181, 182 arousal 128, 133–5; and compliance cognitive exhaustion 154, 164; and fear- 134–6 then-relief 154–6; and resources 154, 164 automaticity 104–6; and disrupt-then- commitment 4, 24, 40–3, 80–5, 90 reframe 131; and that’s not all technique consistency 4, 24, 40–3, 80–5, 90 106–7; and the pique technique 116–18; contrast effect 26–7, 30–1, 59, 77, 84, 96, see also mindlessness 103–4; in marketing 26–7 Baumeister, R.F.
6, 47, 62, 145, 170 Dillard, J.P. 14–15, 18–20, 27–30, 143, 173, Beaman, A.L. 14, 16, 20, 170 182, 183 Bem, D.J.
11–14, 170 DeJong, W. 15–16, 20, 70–4, 172–3, 183 Boster, F.J. 37, 113–15, 143, 170 dialogue involvement 87–93, 98, 118, Burger, J.M.
15, 42–3, 54–8, 100–4, 162–4; and dump and chase 39 116–18, 131, 162–4, 170–1 disrupt-then-reframe technique 107–19, 131–2; and modern hypnosis 108; and Carpenter, C.J. 113–5, 171 action identification theory 108–14; and chain of techniques 3, 160; and foot-in- foot-in-the-door 113–14 the-door plus door-in-the-face 161–2; Dolinski, D. 14–15, 20–2, 34–7, 48, 51, 58, and foot-in-the-door plus low-ball 162 67, 70, 83–94, 105, 112, 118–9, 126, 129, charity 50, 62–3; and dialogue 152–7, 162–3, 173, 175, 178, 180 involvement 87–9, 163; and estimating door-in-the-face 25–39, 44–5, 82, 103, the probability of engaging in this 161–4; contrast effect as an explanation activity 78–9; and even a penny will of 26–7; guilt feeling as an explanation help technique 68–71; and fear-then- of 28–31, 39; and information processing relief technique 155; and 115; and need for cognitive closure foot-in-the-mouth 79–87; and gaze 114–15; reciprocity as an explanation of 122; and goal gradient hypothesis 160 27–8; and self-presentation 29–31 cheating 67, 165 dump-and-chase technique 37–9, 45; and Chartrand, T.
57–8, 171, 183 obstacle 37, 39; and rebuff 37186 Index Ellsworth, P.C. 120–1, 174 Hornik, J. 13–14, 21, 124, 129, 162, 176–7 emotion 16, 29, 39, 42–6, 62, 83–5, 121, Howard, D.J.
49–53, 80–88, 128, 160, 177. 133–57; anger 154; contempt 154; hypnosis 108–9, 114 embarrassment 78, 150–2; fear 142–4 hypocrisy 58; and dissonance 59–61; (see also fear-then-relief); guilt 20–31, induction of 58–61 39, 44, 141–2; 145–50; shame 142, 145–50, 157 image induction 47, 77, 95; process vs emotional see-saw see fear-then-relief result 95–7 technique incidental similarity 54–8; and imitation equity 149–50 57–8 even-a-penny-will-help technique 68–71, 97, 160–3. Joule, R.V.
22–4, 29, 41–2, 162, 176, 177, evoking freedom technique 71–4 180, 183 expert snare technique 76–7, 98 eye contact see gaze Kleinke, C.L. 120–4, 128–9, 178 Knowles, E.S. 104, 108–13, 172, 178, 181 fear-then-relief technique 152–7, 164 Fennis, B.M.
111–13, 164, 174, 178 labeling 74–7, 162; and foot-in-the-door Firmin, M.W. 66, 174, 184 74–5, 162 fleeting attraction 164 Langer, E.J. 104–6, 116, 120–1, 154–5, 174, Fointiat, V.
60–1, 81–3, 174 179. foot-in-the-door technique 8–24, 32–8, 45, legitimization of paltry contribution 75–6, 113–4, 160–2; assimilation effect as technique see even a penny will help an explanation of 19–20; and disrupt- low-ball technique 39–44, 162; and then-reframe 113–114; and dump and commitment as an explanation 40; and chase 38–9; and labeling 75–6; and need obligation to make a concession as an for consistency, 21; and positive emotion explanation of 43–4 16–17; self-perception as an explanation lure technique 41–2 of 11–22; and social reward 19 foot-in-the-face technique 32–7, 44 marketing 76, 94, 97; and disrupt-then- foot-in-the-mouth technique 80–7, 98; reframe 112–13, 120, 160; and labeling commitment and consistency as an 76 explanation of 80–4, 90; intimacy and Meineri, S. 13, 71, 90, 125, 159, 176, 179 closeness as an explanation of 85–6 mindlessness 105–6, 116, 154–6; see also Forgas, J.P.
82, 138–40, 174, 178, 182 automaticity four walls technique 22–9 mood 51–2, 76, 80–90, 98, 133–56; and Fraser, S. 5, 9–13, 20, 174 altruism, 137–40; and compliance 138– Freedman, J.L. 9–13, 20, 145, 147, 174 56 Frijda, N.H.
133, 154, 175 full-cycle social psychology 1–4 name 47–58, 64, 80–4, 133; and cocktail- party effect 48–9. gaze 118–22, 162, 166; and nonspecific activator 121–2; and tension 121 O’Keefe, D.J. 28–9, 143, 180 goal-gradient hypothesis 160 Goldman, M.
13, 75, 120, 125–6, 130, Pascual, A. 71–2, 176, 180 160–2, 175 pique technique 115–18, 127–8, 143; and Gueguen, N. 13, 22–4, 31, 56–8, 70–2, 90, mindlessness 116–18; and dialogue 120, 123, 125–6, 137, 147, 159, 175, involvement 118 176–7, 179, 180 politeness 65–8, 81, 106, 140Index 187 positive cognitive state 140–2 self-presentation 61, 63 Pratkanis, A.R.
76, 115–16, 171, 181 Spangenberg, E.R. 79, 165, 182 predictions 17, 78; and real behavior 78–81 terror management theory 46–7 questions asking 77–8, 80 that’s-not-all technique 100–8, 132; and changing the anchor as an explanation repeating yes technique 22–5 of 102–4; and mindlessness/automaticity Rind, B. 62–3, 140–2 106–7; and reciprocity as an explanation rules of social influence 4 of 100–4 touch 7, 122–34, 162; and disruption self-esteem 5, 46–7, 60, 74, 150–2; and 127–8; and gender 129–31; and embarrassment 190–2; and terror homophobia 129; and interpersonal management theory 46–7 closeness 125–8; as a nonspecific activator self-perception 11–22, 68–161 128–9; and social privilege motive 126–9;
Sport Psycholoogy: Linkingg theoryy to ppractice Gangyan, S., Cruz, J., and JJaenes, J.C. (Eds) ISBN: 978‐844‐9148‐282‐6Proceedings of the XIV ISSP World Congress of Sport Psychology Scientific Committee Gangyan, S. Serpa, S.
Papaioannou, A. García-Mas, A. Schack, T.
Stambulova, N. Hung, E. T.M Schinke, R.J.
Kim, Y. Lucidi, F. Noce, F.
Sekiya, H. Poczwardowski, A. Ryba, T.
Amasiatu, A. Loberg, L. Cruz, J.
Márquez, S. Díaz, J Local Scientific Committee Llames, R. Fernández, J.
Torregrossa, M. Ramis, Y. García, J.
Pérez, M.CONTENTSContents KEYNOTES ............................................................................... 1 Monday July 10th...................................................................................................................................... 2 Fighting for an educational youth sport ......................................................................................................................
2 Tuesday July 11th .................................................................................................................................... 3 José Maria Cagigal: Work and legacy of a pioneer of sport psychology ...................................................................... 3 Did you ever let your lover see the stranger in yourself?
Professional development in sport and exercise psychology ................................................................................................................................................................... 3 Facilitating careers in sport .......................................................................................................................................... 4 Are psychological theories used to predict physical activity and guide physical activity behavior change interventions any good?
.............................................................................................................................................. 5 Wednesday July 12th ............................................................................................................................... 6 Moral action in sport: Why does it matter?
................................................................................................................. 6 Addressing weight pressures and body image concerns among athletes around the globe: Assessment, treatment, and prevention ............................................................................................................................................................ 7 Thursday July 13th ...................................................................................................................................
7 Understanding complex human behavior from a dynamical systems perspective ...................................................... 7 Exercise and cognition: Advancing understanding through dose-response, moderators, and mechanisms .............. 8 Friday July 14th .........................................................................................................................................
9 Psychological interventions in sport, exercise and other contexts .............................................................................. 9 Periodization of psychological skills in sport .............................................................................................................. 10 SYMPOSIA .............................................................................
11 Tuesday July 11th ___________________________________________________ 12 Symposia Session 1. (10.30-12) .............................................................................................................. 12 Enhancing adherence to physical activity through customized training to motivated leaders .................................
12 Lessons from cutting-edge Self-determination interventions to promote physical activity: A review (2011-2016) .................... 12 How Coaches’ Interpersonal Style Questionnaire (CIS-Q) became Physical Education Teachers’ Interpersonal Style Questionnaire (PETIS-Q) ............................................................................................................................................................. 13 Initial validation of the Spanish version of the Work Motivation Inventory ................................................................................
13 Focus groups results: a previous step to design motivational physical activity programs .......................................................... 14 Improving physical activity levels in specific populations: The ACTIVATICS intervention program ............................................. 14 Gold in education and elite sport (GEES): 1.
The competences of elite pupil- and student-athletes ........................ 15 Gold in Education and Elite Sport (GEES): A European perspective on the dual career of talented and elite athletes ................ 15 Gold in Education and Elite Sport: Which competences do athletes require for a successful dual career?
................................. 16 Equilibrium between elite sport and education: Are male and female student-athletes equally competent for dual career? ....
16 The importance of gender and life experience in the type of dual career in elite sports based on the analysis of the European project GEES on the example of Polish ....................................................................................................................................... 17 A reflection on the scenarios concerning combination of study and sport and financial matters ............................................... 17 Asian sport psychology secrets of the Rio Olympics ..................................................................................................
18 You don’t know when and how mental training will make a difference: A surprise from a windsurfing athlete in Rio OG ........ 18 Lessons learned from 2016 Rio Paralympic Games with National Wheelchair Archery Team .................................................... 18 Making a splash in Rio: Psychological support for the Australian Olympic swimming team ......................................................
19 Psychological impact of singapore’s first Olympic gold medal ................................................................................................... 19 The paradox of the coach-athlete relationship: The cure and the cause of interpersonal issues in sport ................ 20 Coach-athlete relationships and burnout: A person-oriented approach .....................................................................................
20 Transformational-relational developmental programme for coaches: Quasi-experimental study ............................................. 21 Efficacy beliefs as mediator in the conflict-performance satisfaction relationship. ....................................................................
21 The “fuel” of good quality coach-athlete relationships .............................................................................................................. 22 The psychosocial impact of coach-athlete relationship quality on athletes’ psychophysiological exhaustion: implications for physical and cognitive performance ........................................................................................................................................... 22 Achievement motivation in sports context ................................................................................................................
23 The role of perceived parent, coach and peer motivational climates in determining goal orientations in adolescent athletes .. 23 The relationship of athletes’ moral disengagement to perceived motivational climate and valued goals ................................. 24Contents A qualitative view on women’s soccer experiences within the frame of Eccles' Expectancy-Value Model ..................................
25 The role of physical self-perceptions and mental toughness in determining goal orientation of volleyball players ................... 25 The ‘Clean Sport Alliance’: Shaping anti-doping policy and practice through performance-enhancement conceptualization, value-system management, legitimacy perception and self-regulation ..................................... 26 Adolescent athletes nutritional supplement use behaviours and doping vulnerability ...............................................................
26 Empathic and self-regulatory processes governing doping behavior: Testing a hypothetical process model across four key physical-activity contexts ........................................................................................................................................................... 27 Conceptualising the essential ingredients of anti-doping legitimacy perceptions through elite athletes' views in the UK ......... 27 “I don’t train to win!” – A case study of a circus performer’s identity and mindset ....................................................................
28 Lessons learnt as practitioners in sport and exercise psychology: A case study approach ........................................ 28 From bouquets to resumes: A Boston ballet dancer’s retirement ............................................................................................... 29 On the edge of chaos: Breakups, sexism, performance and the person......................................................................................
29 Prioritising mental health over performance: An elite gymnast’s 6-month journey with a mental performance consultant to maintain her participation in sport ............................................................................................................................................. 30 Writing case studies for publication and professional development .......................................................................................... 30 The premises, evidence, and application of the Trans-Contextual Model in multiple physical activity and health contexts .....................................................................................................................................................................
31 The trans-contextual model ....................................................................................................................................................... 31 Application of the trans-contextual model in fruit intake of Chinese college students ............................................................... 32 The role of school physical education in promoting healthy behaviors outside schools .............................................................
32 The trans-contextual model and learning safety in sport ........................................................................................................... 32 Physical activity and quality of life across cultures .................................................................................................... 33 Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Introduction to the symposium ..................................................................
33 Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Perspectives of U.S. participants ................................................................ 34 Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Perspectives of South Korean participants .................................................
34 Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Perspectives of Korean immigrants in the U.S. ........................................... 35 Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Conclusions and discussion ........................................................................
35 Sports psychology in South America. Experiences in high performance ................................................................... 36 A clinical intervention with Olympic athletes .............................................................................................................................
36 Psychological preparation of international arbitrators in high sports performance ................................................................... 36 The psychodramatic method and the psychology of sport: psychological work aimed at participation and performance in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games ............................................................................................................................................................ 37 The psychological component as a differential variable of sports performance - Olympic Games, Rio de Janeiro 2016 ............
37 Working stages with Olympic athletes ....................................................................................................................................... 38 Exam-based certification: What does it mean for the international sport psychology professional? .......................
38 AASP certification program – from inception to a commitment to update ................................................................................ 39 AASP Certification Program – Impact on Jobs, Marketability & Graduate Training ................................................................... 39 AASP certification program – international initiatives................................................................................................................
40 AASP certification program –implementation logistics & challenges ......................................................................................... 40 The Andalucian Center of Sport Medicine: A multidisciplinary approach to support high performance athletes .... 40 Medicine.
Sport. Multidisciplinar. Performance .........................................................................................................................
41 Sports injuries. Functional recovery. Psychological intervention.
............................................................................................... 41 Sport and exercise physiology ................................................................................................................................................... 42 Ten years of psychological intervention in a High Performance Center ......................................................................................
42 Current studies on personality, physical activity and sport ....................................................................................... 43 Relation between resilience and sport practice in Mexican athletes .......................................................................................... 43 Contributions of the model of the five personality factors for burnout prediction in competition soccer players ......................
44 Mental toughness: a perspective based on positive personality-trait-like individual differences ............................................... 44 Optimism, general self-efficacy and competitiveness in young high-performance athletes ....................................................... 45 Differences in personality characteristics as a function of the category by age and competitive level in canarian wrestlers .....
45 Symposia Session 2. (14.30-16) .............................................................................................................. 46 Gold in education and elite sport (GEES): 2.
The competences of dual career support providers ............................ 46 A European perspective on the importance of Dual Career Support Providers’ (DCSPs) competences ....................................... 46 Promoting dual career support services: Swedish perspectives and actions taken .....................................................................
47 Successful in sports and education: empowerment of the Dutch student-athlete ...................................................................... 47 Working with French DC athletes: opportunity to pay attention to self-regulation competences .............................................. 48 Matching athletes’ needs with dual career support providers’ competences .............................................................................
48 Cultural competence in sport and exercise psychology: extending the issp position stand ...................................... 49Contents Cultural competence development in sport and exercise psychology graduate programs ......................................................... 49 Exploring gendered construction of runner identities in Shanghai through narrative inquiry ....................................................
50 Female judoka’s identities in Greece and Finland: A cultural praxis study.................................................................................. 50 ‘Nobody said it was easy’: Conducting research within culturally diverse teams ....................................................................... 50 Cultural competence in sport and exercise psychology: Extending the ISSP position stand ........................................................
51 Sport psychology applications in Asia ........................................................................................................................ 51 Effect of long-term mindfulness intervention on wushu training and competition: the case of Hong Kong wushu team ........... 52 Integrating mental skills & biofeedback training for youth sport shooters in Singapore ............................................................
52 Secrets of Asian sport psychology: A unique way of mental training in Thailand ....................................................................... 52 Interactive effect of athletic intelligence, imagery and level of performance among sportspersons .......................................... 53 “I am a complete woman:” A qualitative study on the meaning of dragon boat to breast cancer survivors ..............................
53 Cross-cultural examinations of the consequences of the coach-created motivational climate ................................ 54 Relationships between motivational climates, goal orientations, perceived competence and self-determined motivation in soccer players from five European countries .............................................................................................................................. 54 Anxiety and enjoyment in sport: A test of the basic psychological needs theory among English and Spanish female athletes ..
55 Perfectionism and psychological needs satisfaction in youth soccer: The moderator role of motivational climate .................... 55 Interaction of the players’ perceptions of the coaches’ interpersonal styles and implications for athletes’ well- and ill-being in Mexico and Spain ....................................................................................................................................................................... 56 Athletes’ perceptions of their technical and strength and conditioning coaches’ doping confrontation efficacy and susceptibility to intentional and inadvertent doping ........................................................................................................................................
56 Psychological features and interventions in endurance performance ...................................................................... 57 Attentional focus in endurance activities: The influence of natural settings on cognition .......................................................... 57 Dealing with psychological demands in endurance performance: Brief contact interventions as a practical application in long- distance running events .............................................................................................................................................................
58 Mental toughness and behavioural perseverance among Australian rules footballers .............................................................. 58 Psychophysiological features associated with associative strategies in endurance performance .............................................. 59 The influence of mindfulness training on running economy and flow in trained runners ...........................................................
59 Perceptions and concepts of working with elite athletes and coaches ..................................................................... 60 Israeli athletes' and coaches' perceptions of London 2012 as a career change-event ................................................................ 60 A creative theory-driven practice to increase team functioning in preparation to Olympic Qualification and World Championship .............................................................................................................................................................................
61 Steering 'numbers' to performance: D.O.P.E approach (Determination-Optimization-Persistence-Effort) for performance ...... 61 Research informed practice with the Canadian Olympic boxing team ....................................................................................... 61 Implementation and utilization of post-event reflection in collegiate athletes ..........................................................................
62 Bridging the research-practice ‘gap’ in sport and exercise psychology: three strategies for reconciliation .............. 62 Practice-based evidence on evidence-based practice ................................................................................................................. 63 Gaining entry as a Sport Psychologist: a review and extension of current knowledge ...............................................................
63 Stay healthy to prepare and perform: Opportunities for sport psychology research and practice ............................................. 64 Qualitative process evaluation of a state sport academy’s psychology service .......................................................................... 64 Advances in perfectionism research in sport, dance and exercise: The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism .....................
65 A test of the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism following repeated interpersonal failure on a cycle ergometer task ........................ 65 The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism and athletic performance ...................................................................................................... 66 The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism and attitudes towards doping in junior athletes ....................................................................
66 The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism and self-criticism in athletes .................................................................................................. 67 The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism in sport, dance and exercise: A review and reanalysis ........................................................... 67 Emotions and psychobiosocial states in sport ...........................................................................................................
67 Individualized and standardized approaches for a multimodal assessment of psychobiosocial states....................................... 68 Psychobiosocial states in sport performance .............................................................................................................................. 68 Examining the interactive effects of coach-created empowering and disempowering climate dimensions on athletes’ psychobiosocial states ................................................................................................................................................................
69 The case for a motivational neurovisceral perspective on self-control in sports ......................................................................... 69 Cultural sport psychology: Expanding understandings of sociocultural issues and identities within sport ............... 70 Reflexive engagement: Locating our human selves in cultural sport psychology research .........................................................
70 The culturally competent sport psychology professional: A qualitative exploration of the meaning attributed to culture by practitioners and scholars .......................................................................................................................................................... 71 The intersecting sociocultural identities of Canadian national female boxers ............................................................................ 72 The permanent relocation of elite level immigrant athletes into the Canadian sport system ....................................................
72 Is need for novelty the fourth basic psychological need? Extending self-determination theory in physical activity settings ...................................................................................................................................................................... 73Contents Antecedents and outcomes of need for novelty in physical education using a self-determination theory framework ...............
73 Perceived coaching behaviours and motivation in rhythmic gymnasts: the mediating role of perceived need for novelty ........ 74 The experience of novelty in exercise and its relations with motivation, enjoyment, vitality, physical activity levels, and mental health ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 74 The importance of novelty need satisfaction to achieve multiple positive outcomes in physical education ...............................
75 Using an enactive and phenomenological approach for intervention in sport .......................................................... 75 How to be a finisher? An enactive and phenomenological approach for intervention in trail and ultra trail running ................
76 100,000 miles closer to defining mental toughness: The use of the phenomenological approach ............................................. 76 Accessing soccer players’ own-world to better understand and enhance individual and team performance ............................. 77 Towards a better understanding of the doping behavior in elite cycling: from situated activity to Wikström’s Situational Action Theory ........................................................................................................................................................................................
77 Moving beyond the coach – athlete leadership within sports teams ........................................................................ 78 Leading from within: The impact of athlete leaders on their teammates’ confidence and performance ................................... 78 Australian football players’ leadership: Impact on team effectiveness and health/well-being ..................................................
79 Leaders’ impact on motivation and performance: Coaches versus athlete leaders .................................................................... 79 An exploration of the coach’s perceptions of the role of captain in professional rugby ............................................................. 80 Great man or great myth?
Moving beyond the team captain by mapping the leadership structure within the team. .............. 80 An Asian approach to physical activity research: Is it closing a gap within the field’s knowledge?
........................... 81 Acute Exercise and Cognitive Function: An Update from Asia .................................................................................................... 81 Artificial and active modulation of perception in human behaviour ...........................................................................................
82 Comfortable Self-Established Pace (CSEP) as the Best Strategy in Producing Positive Affect in Exercise .................................... 82 Exercise Dependence Research in Taiwan: An Adaptation of Western Research Model............................................................. 83 Physical Activity and Weight Control in a Viewpoint of Exercise Psychology ..............................................................................
83 Symposia Session 3. (17-18.30) .............................................................................................................. 83 Evidencing principles of Positive Sport through theoretical insights, practical applications, and empirical evaluations.................................................................................................................................................................
83 Positive sport perspective on high achievement of Polish expert athletes: On late talent identification and exploration stage 84 Conditions supporting high achievement during the specialization and expert stages: Positive Sport perspective .................... 85 Positive sport as a system: Exploring the relationship between athletic and life excellence ....................................................... 85 i7W Model as a tool for coaches: Theoretical and applied insights into the practice of Positive Sport ......................................
86 The field of sport and exercise psychology in Malaysia ............................................................................................. 86 Olympic state of mood through telepsychology: Profile of an Olympic athlete .......................................................................... 87 Effects of mindfulness intervention on stress and performance in Malaysian youth squash players ..........................................
87 Gender and physical activity index category differences in psychosocial determinants of physical activity among undergraduates .......................................................................................................................................................................... 88 Integrating sport psychology practices in the 2018 World Cup qualification quest of the national field hockey team ............... 88 The Support of Sport Psychology in Preparation and at the Rio Olympics 2016 .........................................................................
89 The transition from school to university being an athlete ......................................................................................... 89 University student-athletes’ acclimatization to the concurrent transitions in sport and education............................................ 90 Gold in Education and Elite Sport (GEES): Do elite athletes in secondary and higher education prioritize different dual career competences?
............................................................................................................................................................................ 90 Dual career support providers’ perspective on elite athletes’ competences for secondary education (SE) versus higher education (HE) ............................................................................................................................................................................ 91 Comparing dual career during secondary education Vs university: experienced scenarios and competences ............................
91 Stages and sport career development: the career path makes a difference ............................................................................... 92 ID471. Refining the delivery of imagery interventions ..............................................................................................
92 Understanding the effects of using an individual self-guided breathing device with imagery training among novice and skilled netballers ................................................................................................................................................................................... 93 Effect of imagery dose repetitions on performance in sport ....................................................................................................... 93 The effects of neuro-linguistic programming imagery on archers’ shooting performance .........................................................
94 Using imagery to increase harmonious passion for physical activity in people with diabetes .................................................... 94 Emerging approaches to the psychological aspects of physical activity and sports in Puerto Rico ........................... 95 Biopsychosocial profile of a group of student athletes in the southern region of the country ....................................................
95 Brain waves management as a sports psychology tool during the las Olympic Cycle ................................................................. 95 Development and validation of the Colón and Andújar Emotional Style Scale with a sample of athletes from a university in Puerto Rico’s northern region ..................................................................................................................................................... 96 Self-efficacy, physical activity, and physical fitness in elementary school girls and boys in Puerto Rico .....................................
96 Physical activity and quality of life across ages and cultures ..................................................................................... 96Contents Motivating physical activity by pedometer use: Results of a program focused on quality of life in at-risk youth ....................... 97 Quality of life in senior golfers: Psychological and physiological correlates ...............................................................................
97 The effects of a Pacific Island volleyball program on the well-being and quality of life of village women .................................. 98 Exercise and health-related quality of life with complex clinical clients ..................................................................................... 98 Doing qualitative research with injured populations: our confessions… ...................................................................
99 Doing qualitative research with injured adolescents: my confessions… ..................................................................................... 99 Doing qualitative research with in-patients: my confessions… ................................................................................................. 100 Doing qualitative research with out-patients: my confessions… ..............................................................................................
100 Doing qualitative research with victims and witnesses of athletic injury: my confessions… ..................................................... 101 The role of structured and unstructured sport activities in skill acquisition and talent development .................... 101 How unstructured sport activities aid the development of expertise in volleyball players .......................................................
102 Perceptions of youth volleyball players about the importance of unstructured sport activities for their skill acquisition and talent development .................................................................................................................................................................. 102 The psychological benefits of unstructured learning environments for young players ............................................................. 103 What constitutes an optimal talent development environment?
The role of structured and unstructured sport activities ...... 103 Research on Morality in Sport in Chinese Athletes .................................................................................................. 104 Coaching style and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes: The mediating role of moral disengagement ......................
104 Cognitive neural mechanisms of moral judgment in Chinese athletes: evidence from ERPs ..................................................... 105 Relationship between moral disengagement in sport and prosocial and antisocial behaviors in Chinese athletes .................. 105 The relationship between moral disengagement and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes ........................................
106 Motivation and psychological intervention in dance: State of the issue and analysis of the educative and professional context ................................................................................................................................................ 106 Daily experiences of basic need satisfaction and frustration experienced in dance schools ..................................................... 107 In the mind of the dancer.
Psychological intervention in dancesport ....................................................................................... 107 Motivational intervention in educative dance context ............................................................................................................. 108 Predictors of motivation within the Basic Dance Studies ..........................................................................................................
108 The role of perfectionism and motivation in the prediction of well- and ill-being in vocational dancers .................................. 109 Identification and development of performance competences in young talented athletes ................................... 110 Cognitive readiness in elite youth sport ....................................................................................................................................
110 Does deliberate practice promote the use of performance competences in talented athletes? ............................................... 111 Identification of within-career challenges and performance behavior competences for Dutch gymnasts................................
111 The development of competences related to performance behavior in talented and elite athletes ......................................... 112 Biofeedback to improve cognitive readiness: Case studies in elite youth sport ........................................................................ 112 Human performance and long distance and marathon runners .............................................................................
112 Differences in performance in elite Kenian and Caucasian long distance runners .................................................................... 113 Intervention with recreational marathon runners .................................................................................................................... 113 Psychological skill training for long distance and marathon runners .......................................................................................
114 Rosa Mota, the psychological experiences of an Olympic Champion ....................................................................................... 114 Running, “the new fashionable addiction”, in the society ........................................................................................................ 114 Sport and exercise psychology practitioners: Competences and challengers strategies of psychological intervention in Mexican sport ......................................................................................................................................................
115 Creation and application of a sport psychology intervention model for national youth tennis teams on tour ......................... 115 Mental training in the professional third-division soccer team in mexico colts uaemex ........................................................... 116 Psychological intervention in high performance young soccer players .....................................................................................
116 Psychological intervention with professional football players .................................................................................................. 117 Psychological training program in obtaining the ascention of the football team colts UAEM F.C. ...........................................
117 Use of quantitative methods to evaluate psychological factors as predictors of sports behavior .......................... 117 The grit scale, a predictive tool for performance in long distance runner ................................................................................ 118 Monitoring load during tapering stage and monotony and strain index influence on stress-recovery levels ...........................
118 The assessment and prediction of sports performance in the 51th judo military championship of the army ........................... 119 Light conditions affect the psychophysiological warfighters stress response in close quarter combat ..................................... 119 Wednesday July 12th _______________________________________________ 121 Symposia Session 4.
(10.30-12) ............................................................................................................ 121 Evaluating sport programs promoting social inclusion: Which challenges using participative approaches? ..........
121 Strenghts and weacknesses of sport projects for social inclusion: a meta-evaluation .............................................................. 121 Using team sport (football) to enhance social inclusion, what pitfalls exist and what about the slurred perspective of measurements? ........................................................................................................................................................................
122 “Play for change”. Some outputs of the participative evaluation research .............................................................................. 122Contents "Between words and numbers": the combination of qualitative and quantitative instruments for a good efficacy evaluation 123 Investigating facilitating conditions of careers in sport ...........................................................................................
123 Social influences on the junior-to-senior transition in Swedish athletes: Narrative case studies .............................................. 124 Female elite athletes’ transition to university: a longitudinal approach ................................................................................... 124 Social influences on athlete career development .....................................................................................................................
125 Talent Development Environment – Psychological Intervention Studies and Their Implications for Athletes’ Career Development ............................................................................................................................................................................ 125 Six fundamental principles that facilitate the transition from junior to professional in football: An example from the Danish premier league ......................................................................................................................................................................... 126 If you listen very hard, a tune will come to you: Applied sport psychologist professional training and development .................................................................................................................................................................................
126 A whole lotta learn: What trainees want to learn and how they learn it ................................................................................. 127 Dazed and confused: The stairway to reason ........................................................................................................................... 127 Good times bad times, you know I had my share: Applied sport psychologists’ professional identity narratives .....................
128 Over the hill and far away: Sport psychologists learning to play .............................................................................................. 128 That’s the (stair) way: Practitioner development observations in sport psychologist professional training ............................. 129 Mobile Technology for Ecological Momentary Assessment (mEMA) in Sport and Exercise ....................................
129 mHealth tools to promote healthy lifestyles in general population .......................................................................................... 130 Changes in physical activity in the elderly assessed by smartphone 3-axes accelerometry: A pilot study monitoring changes in mood state ............................................................................................................................................................................... 131 Stress index in sport throughout HRV analysis: Assessment of a basketball national team during its training camp for the Euro’2015 .................................................................................................................................................................................
131 EMA applications and interventions using biofeedback and gaming for psychological training .............................................. 132 Psychological training in professional football. Applications in Spain and Latin America clubs ..............................
132 Psychological training in Spain and Latin American clubs ........................................................................................................ 132 Development of psychological skills in professional football .................................................................................................... 133 Developing new learning environments for footballers.
An applied experience at Villarreal C.F. ............................................. 133 Neuropsychology and sports performance: Case applied to soccer players of the first team of the saprissa sports club of Costa Rica ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
134 The Sports Psychologist in interdisciplinary work for the development of sports talents ......................................................... 134 Theory and practice: Condemned to understand each other .................................................................................. 135 “Smocks and jocks (from 1979 to 2017)”.
A reflection about sport psychology assessment .................................................... 135 Sport psychological intervention, the most artistic part of our profession ............................................................................... 135 Taking advantage of the portable technology: Use of smartphones as instrument of goal registration ..................................
136 Price of sport psychologist’s work ............................................................................................................................................ 136 Norms of deontological code vs reality of professional practice in sport .................................................................................. 136 Mental well-being in athletes from different perspectives .....................................................................................
137 A mental health clinic to support elite sports: a multidisciplinary approach integrating performance psychology, clinical psychology and psychiatry ....................................................................................................................................................... 137 Coping with developmental tasks and well-being in elite athletes ........................................................................................... 138 MentalEmpowerment – Organisation and utilisation of mental health care in German elite sport .........................................
138 Sexual violence experiences and well-being in German elite athletes ...................................................................................... 139 Team flow in different contexts: A systematic review with particular focus on well-being ...................................................... 139 Structure and development of sports psychology before the new challenges in Iberoamerica ..............................
140 Challenges of Sports Psychology in the 21st Century ................................................................................................................ 140 Development of sports psychology in Mexico: Network work .................................................................................................. 141 Psychosocial benefits of women's sports participation.............................................................................................................
141 Training Psychology: New challenges for a humanistic approach ............................................................................................ 141 Get Set to Go, a multi-site physical activity intervention for mental health service users: Measure developments and real-world practical considerations .................................................................................................................. 142 Examining the factor structure of a short-form version of the Behavioural Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire in mental health service users ..................................................................................................................................................................
143 The feasibility and acceptability of the objective assessment of physical activity in mental health service users .................... 143 A physical activity intervention in a mental health setting: Social-contextual determinants of adoption and adherence ........ 144 Reciprocity and relatedness: Volunteer experiences of providing unpaid peer support for mental health recovery within a physical activity intervention ....................................................................................................................................................
144 Thriving on pressure: Examining the stress experiences of performers in elite sport and military domains .......... 145 “The Team Behind The Team”: Exploring the organizational stressor experiences of support staff in elite sport .................... 145 A mixed-methods examination of the stress process experienced by military veterans competing at the Invictus Games ......
146Contents On the front line: Reflections on a program of research examining the professional demands of practitioner psychologists in elite sport ................................................................................................................................................................................. 146 The prediction of thriving in elite athletes: An exploration of potential process variables and salivary biomarkers ................ 147 Using autobiographies to explore stressors encountered by elite sporting captains ................................................................
147 Examining correlates of the physical activity and leisure motivation scale (PALMS) .............................................. 147 Co-curricular activities: The motives for participating in physical activity among health science students in Malaysia ........... 148 Reliability of the Dutch version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS) in runners ..............................
149 Reasons for adherence to physical activity and sport in Brazil ................................................................................................. 149 Exercise motivation: the role of individual characteristics and social physique anxiety ........................................................... 150 The increasing motivation for physical activity (IMPAct) project: Theory development and intervention strategies .................................................................................................................................................................................
150 A motivational physical activity intervention in a residential psychiatric institution ................................................................ 151 Meta-analysis and path analysis of the reasoned action approach to understand pa and health behaviour: The effect of past behaviour ................................................................................................................................................................................. 151 Motivation for sustained behaviour change: the case within EuroFIT ......................................................................................
151 School-based intervention programs in promoting leisure-time physical activity: Applying the theory of planned behaviour . 152 Significant others’ positive reinforcement, punishment, and dysfunction behaviours in youth sport ....................................... 153 Incidental physical activity in aging: A perspective from neuroscience ...................................................................
153 Effects of incidental physical activity in aging on language processing .................................................................................... 154 Effects of incidental physical activity on cognitive performance and physiological indices of healthy elderly .......................... 154 Effects of incidental physical activity on inhibition and working memory in aging ...................................................................
155 Electroencephalographic differences between physically active and passive elderly subjects ................................................. 155 Thursday July 13th _________________________________________________ 156 Symposia Session 5. (8-9.30) ................................................................................................................
156 Documenting athletes’ activity by articulating phenomenological data and third-person descriptions: A new avenue of research in sport psychology?................................................................................................................. 156 A neurophenomenological approach to sport performance sport: Associating phenomenological analysis of representative sports tasks in ecological settings with patterns of neural activity using EEG devices .............................................................. 156 Analyzing ultra-trail runners’ activity by associating phenomenological data and speed indicators ........................................
157 Behavioural dynamics in trail running: interaction between individual and equipment ........................................................... 157 Pushing beyond the limits in sport: linking phenomenological and cardiac data ..................................................................... 158 Values Symposium 1: Frontiers and futures for the value theory paradigm in sport psychology ...........................
158 The application of value theory as a new paradigm in sport psychology ................................................................................. 159 The Schwartz values model: A pedagogical tool in the National Institute of Education Singapore .......................................... 159 A study of values with athletes and non athletes .....................................................................................................................
160 Lost in translation? Proposing a model of values literacy for physical education ..................................................................... 161 Sport as a tool for positive youth development: The TPSR model ...........................................................................
161 TPSR: A Model for Positive Youth Development using Sport and Physical Activity ................................................................... 161 Impact of a TPSR coach education program on participants’ self-efficacy beliefs related to teaching personal and social skills ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 162 Implementation of the personal and social responsibility model to improve positive youth development during physical education classes .....................................................................................................................................................................
162 Training sport youth coaches in the implementation of the tpsr model ................................................................................... 163 TPSR Incorporated to a highly competitive academy ............................................................................................................... 163 Promoting parenting expertise in youth sport: From evidencing needs to innovative intervention programmes .
164 “I cope by not watching him play!”: Investigating the stress and coping process of parents in competitive youth sport ......... 164 An examination of parental needs in youth academy football ................................................................................................. 165 Changing the conversation about parents in sport ...................................................................................................................
165 Educating and supporting tennis parents using digital delivery methods: A novel online education programme .................... 166 Dealing with protective and risk factors in the athletic career transitions: a reflection on recent trends of psychological research and practice ........................................................................................................................ 166 Retiring from elite sports: a review of qualitative research ......................................................................................................
167 A psychological service for young football players in youth-to-senior transition: research in practice ..................................... 167 Slovenian student-athletes' competences for dual career related scenarios: gender differences ............................................. 168 At the end of the match: comparing career termination process between football players and other-sport’s athletes ...........
168 The game of emotions, under which rules? ............................................................................................................. 169 "Teamless" emotions ................................................................................................................................................................
169 Emotions in the role of sports psychologist .............................................................................................................................. 170Contents In sport and disability, emotions count..................................................................................................................................... 170 Socio-emotional variables in the psychological preparation of national teams........................................................................
171 Current professional skills on sport, health and exercise psychology experts in Spain ........................................... 171 Improvement of health and general well-being through sport, physical activity and exercise ................................................. 171 The FEPD and the competencies of sports psychologists, professional intrusions, the diffusion of the profession and associationism ..........................................................................................................................................................................
172 The Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology: main events of the history of psychology of sports in Spain and current state of affairs ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 172 The Sports Psychologist in multidisciplinary teams. Counseling, counseling and psychological intervention in sports and sports groups ......................................................................................................................................................................................
173 Weaknesses, Threats, Strengths and Opportunities of Sports Psychology in Spain SWOT Analysis .......................................... 173 Interventions for Enhancing Flow in Sport and Exercise .......................................................................................... 173 Effects of music listening on flow state, heart rate, RPE and performance during a single session of moderate intensity exercise .................................................................................................................................................................................................
174 Enhancing flow antecedents to promote flow and increase performance ................................................................................ 174 The effect of a neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) intervention on sub-elite air-pistol shooters’ flow state and performance ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 175 The effects of hypnosis on flow and performance in golf putting .............................................................................................
175 Bridging the gap – Helping young sport psychology enthusiasts stepping out into the real world ......................... 176 Introducing applied working philosophies for young practitioners ........................................................................................... 176 Applying research skills in diverse professional contexts ..........................................................................................................
177 ENYSSP education department: Helping members on their journey in academia ..................................................................... 177 First steps in the world of applied sport psychology ................................................................................................................. 178 Understanding and preventing doping in sport .......................................................................................................
178 Interactive effects of moral identity and moral disengagement on doping: An experimental investigation ............................ 179 Implicit Doping Attitude and Awareness of Unintentional Doping ........................................................................................... 179 Doping susceptibility in young Australian athletes: A latent profile analysis ............................................................................
180 A new school-based intervention program against doping: Early empirical evidence supporting its effectiveness .................. 180 Elite athletes’ beliefs about the legitimacy of anti-doping control procedures: A qualitative study ......................................... 181 Psychology of performance in soccer ......................................................................................................................
181 Psychological skills of soccer players in relation to level of courage, individual and performance variables ............................ 182 Psychological interventions to stabilise performance in standard situations in soccer ............................................................. 182 Relationship between courage and coping among soccer player in Kelantan ..........................................................................
183 Expert approaches to sport psychology consulting in high performing teams.......................................................................... 183 Application of mindfulness and acceptance approaches before and during the Olympics: A Scandinavian approach ................................................................................................................................................................................. 184 Psychological preparation in Swedish Olympic athletes: A Cognitive-Behavioral Training approach .......................................
184 In the eye of the hurricane. Helping a Danish sailor maintain present-moment focus and valued behavior during the turmoil of the 2016 Olympic Games.......................................................................................................................................................... 185 Going the distance: Service delivery for the Danish National swimming team during the Olympics ........................................
185 Applying ACT in the context of elite sports: a reflection on blurred lines between clinical issues and performance enhancement ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 186 Personality-trait-like individual differences and psychophysiology ......................................................................... 186 The contribution of coping related variables and vagal tone on dual dart throwing performance under pressure ..................
187 The relationship between coaches’ emotional intelligence and basic need satisfaction in athletes ......................................... 187 The relationship between mental toughness, emotional intelligence, and perfectionism in elite, amateur and non-athletes . 188 Vagal tank theory: a functional approach to self-regulation resources, bridging the gap between neurophysiology, cognitive psychology, and social psychology ...........................................................................................................................................
188 Slow paced breathing: Does the rhythm (inhalation/exhalation ratio) matter? ....................................................................... 189 Innovations in athlete career research: Young scholars’ presentations and mentors’ panel ..................................
189 Dual career transitions: The UK university student-athletes’ and stakeholders’ perceptions ................................................... 190 From career initiation to discontinuation: an empirical career model of Swedish handball players ......................................... 190 When is the “right” time to retire?
An existential-narrative perspective on endings in athletic careers................................... 191 Ensuring sustainable development of athlete career research: Mentors’ perspective .............................................................. 191 Symposia Session 6.
(10.30-12) ............................................................................................................ 192 Dual career and transitions: a Mediterranean perspective ..................................................................................... 192 Dual career of non-olympic athletes in Spain ...........................................................................................................................
192 Passion and behavioural regulation in the junior to senior transition ...................................................................................... 192 Career transitions among high level young athletes: Elite access in Europe and Middle East .................................................. 193Contents Analyzing in deep dual career models ......................................................................................................................................
193 Individual differences, self-regulated learning, and practice-enhancement through a sport expertise lens .......... 194 Investigating the roles of self-control, conscientiousness, and grit on athletes' practice and commitment to their sport ....... 194 Building on the SRL-SRS: Psychometric evaluation of measures of self-regulated learning in a sport practice context ............
195 Measuring and facilitating athlete self-regulation within an Australian context ..................................................................... 195 Self-regulation, expertise development, and performance in sport: Are we really bridging the science-practice gap? ............
196 Where are we? Where do we go? Integrating and extending perspectives on key personality and self-regulatory variables for the enhancement of sport practice...........................................................................................................................................
196 Fighting the stereotypes: working in martial arts and combat sports ..................................................................... 197 Reflections on a year working with a boxing club: fight or flight? ............................................................................................
197 Elite Judoka athlete: Reflecting on psychological support leading up to Rio 2016 .................................................................... 198 Making weight or making trouble? The extent and nature of weight cutting of Dutch competitive judokas ...........................
198 Love fighting hate violence: Constructing moral boundaries in combat sports ........................................................................ 199 Can you compete? A BBC online intervention study.
Research with reach, scientific value and real-world impact 199 Emotions related to best and worst competitive performances: Effects of age and gender ..................................................... 200 A test and extension of Lane and Terry’s (2000) conceptual model of mood-performance relationships using a large internet sample ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 200 Imagery: An intervention to improve performance or an act of self-control that hinders performance?
................................. 201 The promise of online interventions: From sports to the dining table ...................................................................................... 201 Interventions to alleviate choking under pressure and improve performance .......................................................
202 Primed to perform: Testing and comparing pre-performance routine interventions to alleviate choking in sport ................... 202 Interventions to improve shooting performance in air pistol .................................................................................................... 203 Choking interventions in beach volleyball ................................................................................................................................
203 Evidence for effects of neurofeedback training to improve sport performance: A systematic review ...................................... 204 Physical activity, cognitive function and well-being ................................................................................................ 204 Exercise intensity and cognitive inhibitory function ..................................................................................................................
205 Facilitators and barriers people with mild cognitive impairment to continuing with a physical activity programme ............... 205 Physical activity, cognitive function and well-being ................................................................................................................. 205 Epigenetics in health and neurosciences ..................................................................................................................................
206 Exercise prescription and mechanisms mediating exercise benefits in people with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer´s disease ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 ID364. Adversity in the coach-athlete relationship: Power abuse and interpersonal conflict .................................
207 Public shaming of athletes by coaches ..................................................................................................................................... 207 ‘My job is to make all the players play by my rules’: Coach-athlete relationships in culturally diverse teams .......................... 208 Motivational processes in the coach-athlete relationship: A multi-cultural self-determination approach ...............................
208 Sport psychologists’ role in coach-athlete conflict .................................................................................................................... 209 Culture, sport, mind and society .............................................................................................................................. 209 Physical activity in relation to the self-esteem and social situation of the elderly ....................................................................
210 Sports policy versus popular participation ................................................................................................................................ 210 The relevance of social relationships in sport: Friends, family, classmates and individual sportspeople .................................. 210 Analysis of the commitment of amateur canoeists in team boats.
Differences due to sex ....................................................... 211 Forming agents of change for enhancing positive practice of youth sport .............................................................. 211 Sport values: An European perspective ....................................................................................................................................
212 PsyTool design and teorethical background ............................................................................................................................. 212 PsyTool Online Educational Platform–Using e-learning to develop a network of agents of change in youth sport .................. 213 The PsyTool Educational Platform: Stakeholders’ Reflections on Experiences and Ideas for the Future ...................................
213 Transnationalism, mobility, and acculturation in and through sport ...................................................................... 213 Challenges and strategies to develop athletic migration research and practice ...................................................................... 214 Current research on acculturation through youth sport ...........................................................................................................
214 Acculturation strategies for relocated elite athletes, their peers, and the integrated support team ........................................ 215 Transnational mobility and cultural transition ......................................................................................................................... 215 Healthy behavior with quality sport ........................................................................................................................
216 Autonomy support, achievement goal orientations, psychological needs and satisfaction with life in Mexican athletes ........ 216 Decisional balance and self-determination like predictors of exercise enjoyment in a Mexican population............................. 217 Impact of motivational climate created by parents on hardiness of young athletes ................................................................
217 Psychological factors, chronic diseases and physical activity in elderly people of Mexico and Spain ....................................... 218 The role of self-efficacy as a promotive of a healthy behavior and the establishment of an active lifestyle in Mexican population ................................................................................................................................................................................ 218Contents Profile of competencies and accreditation in the professionalization of sport psychology ....................................
219 Challenges of the professional practice in sport psychology..................................................................................................... 219 Professional experience in sport psychology ............................................................................................................................ 219 Professional perspectives of supervision in sports psychology .................................................................................................
220 The accreditation of specialist in the area, and expert in sub-areas in sports psychology in Spain .......................................... 220 The psychologist of sport as a trainer (of psychological skills).................................................................................................. 221 Promoting positive youth development through sport: research to practice initiatives .........................................
221 Bridging the research-to-practice gap in Canadian sport: The PYD SportNET Project .............................................................. 222 Integrating life skills into two youth development programs for golfers .................................................................................. 222 Using parent feedback to improve an online PYD program ......................................................................................................
223 Developing partnerships to bridge the gap between research and practice in youth sport ...................................................... 223 Symposia Session 7. (14.30-16) ............................................................................................................
224 The role of psychology in working with Olympic and Paralympic athletes .............................................................. 224 Is an onsite sport psychology service during the Olympic Games really necessary? .................................................................
224 Relationship between the onsite collaboration with a performance psychologist and the occurrence of failure and success factors at the Olympics? ........................................................................................................................................................... 225 The Canadian national boxing team’s emergence and relapse in an Olympic cycle .................................................................
225 The interdisciplinary support provided by sport, health and clinical psychologists to Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches of TeamNL .................................................................................................................................................................. 226 Working with Paralympic Athletes. ..........................................................................................................................................
226 Save the Dream Symposium: Runway to save your dream ..................................................................................... 227 Runway to save your dream ..................................................................................................................................................... 227 Eight Olympic participations ....................................................................................................................................................
227 The experience as a referee ...................................................................................................................................................... 228 If you fall down, don't be afraid. Smile and stand up!
.............................................................................................................. 228 How to overcome social restrictions and political barriers ....................................................................................................... 228 Values Symposium 2: Exploring youth sport values with sport-specific value questionnaires ................................
228 Developing youth sport value questionnaires in the UK ........................................................................................................... 229 An examination of sport values among Filipino youth .............................................................................................................. 229 Value clusters and moral decision-making in youth sport ........................................................................................................
230 Youth Sport Values Questionnaire-2 (YSVQ-2): A validity and reliability study in a Turkish sample ......................................... 231 Parents’ sport socialization values and sport motivational climate as predictors of adolescents’ antisocial behaviours during competitions............................................................................................................................................................................. 231 Multiple identities of self-talk: From window into thought to performance-oriented mental training ..................
232 The relationship between self-talk and outward emotional reactions ..................................................................................... 232 Goal-directed self-talk in competitive situations in male basketball ........................................................................................ 233 The effect of first-person versus non-first person self-talk on endurance performance ............................................................
233 Performance in the heat: A psychobiological approach to the effectiveness of self-talk .......................................................... 234 Self-talk can help countering the effects of distraction. Lab and field evidence .......................................................................
234 Sport psychology for and with coaches ................................................................................................................... 235 The Philosophical and Psychological Development of a Coach: A Case Study........................................................................... 235 Integrating the 5C’s within coach-player relationship and performance-improvement plans in team sports ..........................
236 The unique role of coaches and their current evolution ............................................................................................................ 236 What can we learn from coaches? The most useful skill when working with coaches: listening ..............................................
236 Expatriation in sports: the experience of Brazil, Chile & Portugal ........................................................................... 237 Expatriation in sports: the experience of Brazilian soccer players ............................................................................................ 237 Expatriation in Sports: a case study of a Brazilian basketball player ........................................................................................
238 The expatriation in sport: the experience of Chilean athletes ................................................................................................... 238 Expatriation in sports: Keys of Portuguese soccer coaches’ success ......................................................................................... 239 Supporting youth athletes’ development in a dual career context .........................................................................
239 Development of sport and school burnout in elite student-athletes: a longitudinal mixed methods study .............................. 240 Identity profiles of Finnish adolescent dual-career athletes ..................................................................................................... 240 Officially, school is first and hockey second: a Finnish ice hockey club’s philosophy and coaching practices ...........................
241 The role of parenting styles in adolescent athletes’ psychological well-being during the transition to upper secondary school ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 241 Holistic and ecological approaches in talent development: The role of the environment in athletes’ careers and acquisition of expertise ............................................................................................................................................ 242 Creating optimal environments for talent development ..........................................................................................................
242Contents The Danish National Badminton Center: A successful talent development environment ......................................................... 243 Holistic approach to understanding a dual career environment at a Swedish university ......................................................... 243 The micro-macro link in the study of sport expertise: An ecological dynamics approach .........................................................
244 Understanding the role of the sociocultural environment during the transition from talent development to performance environment ............................................................................................................................................................................. 244 Coping, resilience and personal growth following a sport injury ............................................................................. 245 Exploring religiosity and spirituality in coping with sport injuries .............................................................................................
245 Loving the challenge: Resilience in sport injury rehabilitation .................................................................................................. 246 Developing a model of perceived benefits and personal growth following a sport injury ........................................................ 246 Understanding posttraumatic growth among para sport athletes with an acquired disability ................................................
247 My dream job: Sport psychology as part of a multidisciplinary injury rehabilitation support team ......................................... 247 Antecedents and mechanisms of self-control in athletic contexts .......................................................................... 248 Self-control and fear of negative evaluation as contradictory mechanisms explaining the relationship between autonomy frustration and disordered eating ............................................................................................................................................
248 Motivational antecedents and physiological responses during sequential self-control tasks ................................................... 249 The effects of priming autonomy frustration and satisfaction on self-control and subsequent physical activity intentions ..... 249 Emotion regulation, motivation and performance: The impact of a controlling intervention on a cycling time trial in ego depleted individuals .................................................................................................................................................................
250 Prior self-control exertion and perceptions of pain during a physically demanding task .......................................................... 250 Development and validation of the physical activity and leisure motivation scale for youth (PALMS-Y) ................ 251 Development and validation of a youth version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS-Y)...................
251 Measuring the motives for physical activity of adolescents: invariance of the Malay version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale for Youth across Gender ............................................................................................................................... 252 Construct validity and reliability of the Turkish version of Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale-Youth..................... 252 The relationship between motives of participation in physical activity and the amount of physical activity among Malaysian Chinese secondary students .....................................................................................................................................................
253 Mindfulness, mental training and sports excellence ............................................................................................... 253 Managing stress through physical exercise: Indigenous methods ............................................................................................ 254 Mindfulness, mental training and sports excellence .................................................................................................................
254 Performance failure appraisal, optimism and coping among athletes ..................................................................................... 255 Sports psychology in performance enhancement of elite sportspersons .................................................................................. 255 The excellence training model excellence in sport and life .......................................................................................................
255 Friday July 14th ____________________________________________________ 257 Symposia Session 8. (8-9.30) ................................................................................................................ 257 Brain and cognition - New tools to improve performance ......................................................................................
257 Intelligent coaching space – Motor learning and coaching in virtual reality ............................................................................ 257 The effects of SMR/theta ratio neurofeedback training on golf putting performance ............................................................. 258 The superglasses - cognitive technologies as task assisting devices for sport and rehabilitation .............................................
258 Adaptive cognitive training – a smart terminal to enhance performance ................................................................................ 259 The Use of high-technologies in research and for performance enhancement ...................................................... 259 Neuro-psychophysiological monitoring of team processes .......................................................................................................
260 Using video based technology to enhance perceptual-cognitive skills across sports ................................................................ 260 Eye-tracking technology for the study and applications of expert athletic performance .......................................................... 261 Visual perception technology for improving decision making and anticipation........................................................................
261 Technology for improving decision making during critical law enforcement incidents ............................................................. 262 Sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not: How can we make the exercise experience more pleasant? .................................................................................................................................................................................
262 Preparing exercise psychology for its post-cognitivist future: Re-establishing the role of affect within dual-process models of human behaviour ..................................................................................................................................................................... 263 Can the physical environment influence affect during high-intensity exercise? A multistudy investigation .............................
263 Is deeper better? Psychological effects of immersive technology during exercise .................................................................... 264 Enhancing the exercise experience through music-related interventions: A heuristic theory-based approach .........................
264 Phychological intervention in football: from initiation to elite ................................................................................ 265 The consistent construction of the sporting context. Opportunities to facilitate personality development of young athletes .
265 Creation of the sports psychology department in the football academia of a Spanish club ..................................................... 266 Strategies to train psychological game situations in football ................................................................................................... 266 Training methodology in football accentuated in psychological variables: the role of the physical trainer in the specific pitch tasks .........................................................................................................................................................................................
267Contents Flow in sport: Relationships and measurement ...................................................................................................... 267 The impact of coaching behaviours on flow experiences in competitive sports ........................................................................ 268 The relationship between self-presentation and flow among exercise participants .................................................................
268 Examining the relationship between psychological needs, motivation and flow experience in sport ....................................... 269 Cognitive appraisals, emotions and reinvestment as antecedents of flow states in athletes ................................................... 269 Is Team Flow State Equivalent to Individual Flow State?
.......................................................................................................... 270 Phenomenology, social psychology and psychobiology: contributions and emotional aspects from different areas to researches in sport psychology ........................................................................................................................... 270 Are combat sport and MMA violently experienced?
A phenomenological analysis of fighting and Extreme Combat Experiences ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 271 How the body moves: understanding movement in sport and exercise through a phenomenological perspective .................. 271 Invisibility and precariousness in the work of MMA athletes ...................................................................................................
272 Mood states as a predispositional condition and its relations with behavior, performance and time ...................................... 272 Excellence in sports and academics ......................................................................................................................... 273 A study of emotional intelligence and coping with stress among young tennis players ...........................................................
273 Excellence in sports and academics .......................................................................................................................................... 273 Mental toughness, mindfulness, psychological skills and sportsmanship among Indian competitive athletes ......................... 274 Psychological skills training program for rifle and pistol shooters to enhance their performance levels ..................................
274 Self-determination theory: New applications and processes of change.................................................................. 275 Sowing the seeds: Exploring the potential role of community gardens in promoting individual and community needs and well- being ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 275 Extinguishing the stress from firefighting: Psychological need satisfaction and frustration uniquely predict stress and depression in English operational firefighters ..........................................................................................................................
276 Reciprocal effects of motivation in physical education and self-reported physical activity ...................................................... 276 Antecedents of change in amotivation toward physical education across a school year ......................................................... 276 Advances in psychology applied to adapted physical activity and sport .................................................................
277 Physical activity, intellectual disability and quality of life ......................................................................................................... 277 The Physical Self-Concept in Colombian athletes with visual disabilities .................................................................................. 278 Quality in sport psychology services for paralympic athletes: what is required, and why?
...................................................... 278 Mental disease and sport ......................................................................................................................................................... 279 Psychological abilities and skills in coaches of disabled athletes ..............................................................................................
279 The psychological approach to school physical education and competitive sports in a Korean perspective .......... 280 A cross-validity of the athletic identity measurement scale for Korean athletes ...................................................................... 280 Relationship between parent interaction and athletic identity among badminton players ......................................................
280 The cross-cultural understanding on counterfactual thinking between korean and chinese elite swimmers ........................... 281 The effect of coach-player interaction on sport passion among badminton players ................................................................ 281 The relationship between teaching and emotions in physical education lesson from the perspective of elementary school teachers ....................................................................................................................................................................................
282 The role of sport psychologists in football academies ............................................................................................. 282 Cultural integration of Chinese football players in Spain .......................................................................................................... 283 Learning football through creating a game model based on values .........................................................................................
283 Working with the pillars in C.E.Constància ............................................................................................................................... 283 The interview as a tool to work ................................................................................................................................................ 284 When we talk about developing talent, what are we talking about?
....................................................................................... 284 Symposia Session 9. (10.30-12) ............................................................................................................
285 Psychological intervention with parents and coaches of young athletes ................................................................ 285 Drug use and unsportsmanlike behaviors integrated prevention with young athletes through coaches and parents ............. 285 Influence of parents and coaches in developing comprehensive youth athletes ......................................................................
285 Perception about the parents of young athletes: Results of a survey ....................................................................................... 286 Study on the motivation of the parents of athletes .................................................................................................................. 286 The importance of expectations in training stages of athletes .................................................................................................
287 Applications of football psychology: proposals and experiences ............................................................................ 287 Personal strengths of football coaches: how to shape the integral trainer .............................................................................. 287 Development of psychological skills in specific game situations: analysis of technical performance in young players´ competition ..............................................................................................................................................................................
288 Experiences in the sports psychology department of a professional football club in Colombia ................................................ 288 Main psychological variables trained in a female heterogeneous soccer team in adverse conditions ..................................... 289 Leadership in regards to soccer coaches: performance optimization model ............................................................................
289Contents Re/building sport psychology through localized approaches: An ISSP Symposium in memory of Bola Ikulayo (1948- 2016) ........................................................................................................................................................................ 290 African indigenous dance as an alternative management of emotional disorders among Nigerian female athletes ............... 290 Sport psychology in Latvia: A scientist-practitioner perspective ...............................................................................................
291 Integrating pre-game rituals and pre-performance routines in a culture-specific context: Implications for sport psychology consultancy .............................................................................................................................................................................. 291 Educational aspects of sport psychology in Ukraine ................................................................................................................. 292 Updating the state of the art of the Caribbean and South American sport psychology ..........................................
292 Psychology and football in Argentina: History of a complex relationship ................................................................................. 292 HISTORY OF SPORT PSYCHOLOGY IN CUBA .............................................................................................................................. 293 History of sports psychology in Mexico: From the field to the laboratory ................................................................................
293 History of sport psychology in Argentina .................................................................................................................................. 294 Updating the state of the art of sport psychology in Chile ....................................................................................................... 294 Global efforts in developing credentialing systems for sport and exercise psychologists: Four organizational perspectives (AASP, FEPSAC, EFPA, and ISSP) ..........................................................................................................
295 The FEPSAC certification for specialists in applied sport psychology ........................................................................................ 295 AASP certification: The critical move to an exam-based credential .......................................................................................... 296 EuroPsy: European accreditation for professional sport psychologists .....................................................................................
296 ISSP progress in introducing international credentialing: Processes, challenges, and emerging solutions ............................... 297 Sport Performance enhancement through various psycho-physiological and psycho-motor training .................... 297 An investigation of muscle activation while performing fine motor task among badminton players .......................................
298 Analysis of selected physiological variables on psychomotor functioning of athletes under stress .......................................... 298 Comparison of coordinative and proprioceptive abilities among selected team games ........................................................... 299 Effects of psychological training on performance of track and field athletes ...........................................................................
299 Testing of cognitive power and heart rate against selected quick board drill for athletes ....................................................... 300 Psychosocial processes in competitive and interactive sports ................................................................................ 300 Courage profile of female soccer players in relation to individual, social and performance variables ......................................
301 Characteristics of athletes leadership of college sports teams in Brazil.................................................................................... 301 Process or outcome: How to make a balance? Psychological preparation of the Rio Olympics water polo silver medalists ....
302 Effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills in volleyball ............................................................................ 302 Motivational profiles and anxiety in table tennis players: Differences across competition levels............................................. 303 Critical perspectives on exercise is medicine ...........................................................................................................
303 Dances with wolves: If exercise becomes medicine, how might the medicines respond? ......................................................... 304 Exercise is medicine: Extending the metaphor to include biomedical ethics .............................................................................
304 Experiences and perceptions of sport and movement-based activities for those enduring trauma during their youth: A systematic review and meta-study ........................................................................................................................................... 305 The exercise is medicine narrative: When alternative stories matter ....................................................................................... 305 The negative side effects of exercise as medicine: Understanding the patient experience .......................................................
306 Identifying personal and contextual motivational factors to change behaviour in different performance settings 306 Coach interpersonal styles of communication and athletes’ willingness to dope: Cross-cultural evidence .............................. 307 Aussie-FIT: Evidence of the need for and appeal of the Australian version of the Football Fans in Training (FFIT) Program for overweight and obese Aussie Rules Football (AFL) Fans ........................................................................................................... 308 In search of key attributes of peer leaders for the promotion of physical activity in older adults.............................................
308 Occupational stressors and work engagement in a sample of Australian army personnel: The role of mental toughness, stressor appraisals and proactive goal regulation .................................................................................................................... 309 Zooming in on the effects –psychological need satisfaction mediates the effects of a digital exercise intervention on motivational regulations and exercise behavior ....................................................................................................................... 309 Fool’s gold: Expert perception of deceptive motion ................................................................................................
310 Expert perception of deceptive motion: three fundamental questions ..................................................................................... 310 Embodied Simulation in Deception Detection........................................................................................................................... 311 The role of deception in the temporal calibration of constrained actions ................................................................................
311 My eyes are deceiving me: How virtual reality technology can help us understand the effects of deception on players’ decision- making in sport ........................................................................................................................................................................ 312 Symposia Session 10. (15.30-17) ..........................................................................................................
312 The role of sport and exercise psychology journals in the development of scientific and professional field .......... 312 Psychological interventions in high performance: case studies .............................................................................. 313 Psychological intervention programs in high performance sports, some problems to consider ...............................................
313 Use of cardiac coherence to improve respiration effectiveness as a technique for stress management in high performance . 314Contents The coach’s coach: a case study unfolding conditions that influenced coach’s optimal improvement ..................................... 314 Training of emotional competencies in a football team ...........................................................................................................
315 Sport as a veritable tool to enhance peace sustainability in Port Harcourt metropolis of Rivers State, Nigeria. .... 315 Cultural perspectives to sport psychology: experiences of working with national teams in Botswana .....................................
316 Talent development and athletes’ fulfilment in Nigerian secondary school sports competition. .............................................. 316 Barriers to sports participation as a means of achieving sustainable social development.
...................................................... 317 Youth sport research in the African context: a key to evidenced based programming for youth psychosocial development .. 317 Motivational profiles in exercise and physical activity behavior .............................................................................
318 A "feel good factor" analysis of four exercise motivation profiles ............................................................................................ 318 Becoming active post-therapy – an exploration of motivational profiles during exercise change in obese patients ................ 319 Effects of a digital intervention program on motivational regulation patterns in an exercise context: A latent transition analysis of the “motivational soup” .......................................................................................................................................................
319 Understanding motivational strategies used by exercise professional: A person-centered approach ...................................... 320 Establishment of sport psychology international accreditation .............................................................................. 320 Development of accreditation system of sport psychologists in Asian-South-Pacific region.....................................................
321 African Society for Sport and Exercise Psychology-The way forward ........................................................................................ 321 “Taking the bull by the horns”: Accreditation of the specialty .................................................................................................. 321 Are the stage of change theories applicable to model health behavior change in Chinese sample?
...................... 322 The transtheoretical model-based intervention application for physical activity among Chinese people: a systematic review 322 Testing the four steps from inactivity to activity model for physical activity: three empirical studies ...................................... 323 Testing the hybrid feature of the health action process approach (HAPA) for physical activity among Chinese adults ............
323 Application and effect of psychological intervention of multiple health behavior on cardiac patients in home-based rehabilitation aftercare ............................................................................................................................................................ 324 Effect of a web-based intervention on physical activity and fruit and vegetable intake among Chinese university students ... 325 Youth Experience Survey: Where it started, where it has traveled, and what issues it faced along the way ..........
325 The history, evolutions, and future of the Youth Experience Survey ......................................................................................... 326 Exploring the factor structure of the Youth Experience Survey for Sport adapted to Special Olympics athletes ....................... 326 Cross-cultural adaptation and psychometric properties of the portuguese version of the Youth Experience Survey for Sport (YES-S) ......................................................................................................................................................................................
327 Adapting the youth experience survey for emerging adult athletes: The creation and ongoing validation of the university sport experience survey ..................................................................................................................................................................... 327 The short form YES-S and its utility within youth and university settings ................................................................................. 328 Imagery measurement and psychophysiological correlates ....................................................................................
328 Spanish version of the Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM): cross validation of hard copy and online forms ....................... 329 Validation of the Chinese version of the Sport Imagery Ability Measure .................................................................................. 329 Psychophysiology of sport imagery ..........................................................................................................................................
330 Neural correlates of internal and external imagery .................................................................................................................. 330 Addressing mental health in sport: An international perspective ........................................................................... 331 Mental health and well-being in Canadian intercollegiate athletes .........................................................................................
331 Well-being and ill-being in the context of elite sports: A reflection on the complex interdependency between performance and clinical issues ............................................................................................................................................................................ 332 Mental illness and health within the Olympic sport environment: Issues and solutions ........................................................... 332 Collateral damage: The dark side of extraordinary opportunities in elite sports ......................................................................
333 The effects of exercise on anxiety, depression, and associated unhealthy behaviours ........................................... 333 The effects of exercise on anxiety: What is known and how might exercise work? ..................................................................
334 An exercise augmented smoking cessation treatment for individuals with high anxiety sensitivity: The relationship between attendance patterns and quit success ...................................................................................................................................... 334 The antidepressant effects of exercise in the first two weeks of antidepressant therapy among hospitalized inpatients with major depressive disorders ....................................................................................................................................................... 335 Yoga for depression: Two trials examining efficacy, mechanisms, and acceptability ...............................................................
335 Emerging methodological approaches in sport and exercise psychology research ................................................. 336 Development of a self-efficacy scale for athletes of collective sports ....................................................................................... 336 Fear of failure in sport: A portuguese cross-cultural adaptation ..............................................................................................
337 Sources of sport-confidence questionnaire to brazilian athletes: Transcultural adaptation and preliminar evidences of semantic validity ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 338 Testing a full theoretical model of parental involvement in sport: Preliminary results ............................................................. 338 Sports psychology for the best performance ...........................................................................................................
339 Influence of group cohesion in psychological development and sports development of teenager football players .................. 339 Program of psychological skills for children and youth soccer football trainers ....................................................................... 339Contents Psychological resilience and the coping mechanism for stress on young baseball athletes ......................................................
340 Sport psychology and its contribution to the development of the career in sports. analysis of perceptions psychologist - athlete ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 340 The psychological preparation of the National Absolute National Team of Colombia for the Soccer World Cup 2014 ............
340 Motor control and learning enhancement in individual sports ............................................................................... 341 Motor imagery assessment in research and professional practice: An evidence-based protocol. ............................................
341 Cognitive and biological aspects of controlling complex movements ....................................................................................... 342 The relationship between imagery ability, experience and perceived coaching ability among judo coaches ........................... 342 The influence of mental types of practice on the performance and the mental representation structure of the golf putt .......
343 Performance monitoring and improvement: a psychophysiological approach ......................................................................... 343 POSTERS .............................................................................. 344 TUESDAY JULY 11TH ________________________________________________ 345 Posters Session 1.
(9:30-10:30) ............................................................................................................ 345 Prototypicality ratings of acts for achievement motivated behavior of young competitive athletes by coaches and sport psychologists ............................................................................................................................................................................ 345 Strategies used by elite athletes to maintain and manage their athletic identity ....................................................................
345 Study on decision-making of penalty-kick direction from the perspective of theory of mind .................................................... 346 Performance failure appraisal, optimism and coping among athletes ..................................................................................... 346 Where do people look during drop landing?
............................................................................................................................ 347 The relationship between the use of music in sports and trait anxiety, burnout, and emotional instability among Japanese college athletes ........................................................................................................................................................................ 347 Sport psychology as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroot sports ..............................................................
348 Cheating and gamesmanship in young soccer players ............................................................................................................. 348 Fair play, cheating and gamesmanship in grassroots sports .................................................................................................... 349 Impulsivity and inhibitory executive functioning in adolescents with online game addiction ...................................................
349 Re-examining ego involvement in sport: A qualitative exploration of its bright and dark side ................................................. 350 Implicit ability of expert baseball batters for distinguishing subtle changes in pitchers’ arm movements in computer animations ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 350 Sport moral disengagement and college athletes’ aggressive behavior ...................................................................................
351 The skill necessary for a good play of the circumstantial judgment in the soccer .................................................................... 351 Disadvantageous height perception by high jumpers before the run under psychological pressure ........................................ 352 Assessment of team coordination in sport: A scoping review ...................................................................................................
352 The psychological effect of virtual exercise system on university students ............................................................................... 353 The prediction of empowering and disempowering motivational climate on subjective vitality among youth athletes: The mediating effects of basic psychological needs ........................................................................................................................ 353 Research on influential factors of rehabilitation exercises in consumer psychology perspective ..............................................
354 Self-talk and motor skill performance: Moderating effects of mindfulness .............................................................................. 354 The psychological benefits of grunting on tennis court: A qualitative exploration ................................................................... 354 The global integrated methodology for the development of specific behaviours in football: examples and applied proposals 355 Psychology of sport and mental health: An experience with body practices ............................................................................
355 Cooperation on sports: Measurement in categories of basic soccer football forces ................................................................. 356 The role of coach-athlete relationships and achievement goals in determining motivational orientation of adolescent athletes ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 356 Athletic identity and career behaviors - the moderating effects of self-identity status and self-complexity ............................
357 The adaptation of psychological support in Japanese ski jumping men’s national team from 2006 to 2014 ........................... 357 A study on the color preferences and aggressive behaviors in college students ....................................................................... 358 Perfectionistic strivings and concerns on the emotional experience of young athletes ............................................................
358 The prediction of 3 × 2 achievement goal on the subjective well-being among youth athletes: The mediating effects of psychological needs .................................................................................................................................................................. 359 The effect of tennis expertise on motion-in-depth perception: An event-related potential study ............................................. 359 Research on implicit cognitive attitude of red attire among wrestlers in wrestle game ...........................................................
360 Changes in sleep quality and mental health following the physical activity program administered to civil sanitation workers 360 Measuring individual hierarchy of anxiety invoking sports related activities: development and validation of the Photographic Series of Sports Activities for Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction (PHOSA-ACLR) ........................................................ 361 Athlete’s envy: Appraisal patterns, benign envy and malicious envy ....................................................................................... 361 Competition result and its influence on the motivation score of athletic handball players ......................................................
362 Analysis of depression, anxiety and stress among professional students at collegiate level .................................................... 362 Teaching life skills through soccer to inmates of a juvenile offenders institute ........................................................................ 363Contents The relationship between sport-grit, temporal state anxiety and performance in track and field athletes ..............................
363 The moderating role of disability in the effect of Athletic Identity and Satisfaction with life ................................................... 364 Adaptation of the Bernese Motive and Goal Inventory in leisure and health sports for people in adolescence and young adulthood (BMZI-JFEA) ............................................................................................................................................................. 364 Psychological training for inclusion of persons with disabilities to participate in sports ..........................................................
365 The mediating role of self-esteem on perfectionism-creativity relationship in college dancers ................................................ 365 3 × 2 Achievement Goal Profiles in Table Tennis Players .......................................................................................................... 366 An exploration study on strategies that professional baseball player use in coping with an increasing number of games ......
366 Development of athletic injury emotion regulation behavior scale .......................................................................................... 367 Gaining entry in sport psychology consulting: A critical review of consultant characteristics and future research directions .. 367 The effect of perceived peer relationship on expectancy and value beliefs in physical education: the moderating effect of gender ......................................................................................................................................................................................
368 Response biases and strategies in sport data: An item response theory perspective ............................................................... 368 Socio-moral reasoning, Social Identity and Social Justice among adolescents in Physical Education ....................................... 369 Is there a difference on reaction time, movement time and response time between U18 and U21 categories of the Brazilian judo team?
............................................................................................................................................................................... 369 Career adapt-abilities scale—dual career form (CAAS-DC): Psychometric properties and initial validation in high school student-athletes ....................................................................................................................................................................... 370 Perfectionism and goal orientation with sports shooting athletes ...........................................................................................
370 Research on the two-way relationship between adolescent short track speed skating skaters' self - consciousness and personality................................................................................................................................................................................ 371 Effects of psychological pressure intentionally generated during practice ............................................................................... 371 Visual search strategies of soccer players in offensive situation of soccer: Combining eye movement and retrospective verbal protocol data ............................................................................................................................................................................
372 Effects of quiet eye training on learning of perceptual-motor skills ......................................................................................... 372 Visual search strategies in female college basketball players .................................................................................................. 373 Reaction time of Japanese expert football players during decision making .............................................................................
373 Visual search strategies of baseball players in the simulated infield defensive situation ......................................................... 374 Influence of psychological competitive ability on the emotional intelligence of canoe players ................................................ 374 The effect of acute exercise on the planning aspect of executive function among preterm children ........................................
375 Cognitive awareness of the Müller-Lyer illusion influenced the grip size estimation ................................................................ 375 The association of cardiovascular fitness, obesity, and executive function: An ERP study of Task-switching ........................... 376 Contextual interference effect in sport skill learning: systematic review and meta-analysis ....................................................
376 Accomplishment motivational level and personality characters of Basketball Players and Non-sportsmen-An Analytical study ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 377 Everything is cool when you're part of a team? Interdependence and cognitions, emotions, and performance under pressure .................................................................................................................................................................................................
377 An exploration of the relationship among female adolescent athletes’ perceptions of the motivational climate, goal orientation, refocusing, and peaking ability ............................................................................................................................. 378 A study on relationship of lifestyle and socio-economic status with obesity in indian children ................................................ 378 Change in proprioceptive perception after the prolonged tendon vibration treatment ...........................................................
379 Examining the relationship between moral values and moral behaviour among adolescent athletes and non-athletes ......... 379 Testing for causality in exercise psychology: Applying the Bradford Hill criteria ...................................................................... 380 What researchers develop is sometimes not what counseling sport-psychologists need: How long should a questionnaire be?
................................................................................................................................................................................................. 380 Physical self perception profile of adults participating in zumba aerobic programs ................................................................. 381 Development of the Arabic version of the Trait Sport Confidence Inventory ............................................................................
381 Does the use of an audio-imagery intervention affect pre-competition anxiety and increase self-confidence in female collegiate soccer players? ......................................................................................................................................................................... 382 Swimming for people with disabilities x motor development tests: Project of the University of Santa Cruz do Sul - RS - Brazil 382 Aquatics activities associated with the process of well-being and quality of life - Piracema Project ........................................
383 Exploration on recognition and satisfaction of learners and instructors regarding the feedback utilizing dance image analysis ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 383 Relationship between motor abilities and behaviors in children with ADHD ............................................................................ 384 The hidden and disclosed messages of motivational pre-game videos and their influence on soccer players’ performance....
384 A mindfulness-based intervention for the rehabilitation of an injured sportist: A case study in professional soccer ................ 385 Influences of physical attributes on visual analysis and athletic performance ......................................................................... 385 Gymnastics exercise facilitates visuo-spatial working memory in children ...............................................................................
386 An evaluation of time movement anticipation among female athletes of various sports ........................................................ 386 Effect of Mindfulness-based Cognitive intervention on the stress-related psychological indexes of elite athletes ................... 387Contents Characteristics and physical activity intentions of women taking part in a mass participation charity event ..........................
387 Brain mechanism of the effect of physical activity on physical self information processing of adolescence ............................. 388 Psychological burnout among basket ball referees .................................................................................................................. 388 Promoting physical activity in workplace; an integrated model for applied exercise psychology interventions .......................
388 Posters Session 2 (19.30-20.20) ............................................................................................................ 389 The validation of the Chinese version of Youth Experience Survey for Sport (YES-S) ................................................................. 389 Experiential avoidance and cognitive fusion associated with competitive state anxiety among adolescent aerobics athletes 389 Habitual technical trainings do not improve cognitive functions ..............................................................................................
390 Relationship between trait rumination/trait reflection and state self-esteem among Japanese university athletes: Using a qualitative approach ................................................................................................................................................................ 390 The psychological mechamism involved in the group sandplay technique’s positive effect on team performance in sport ..... 391 An investigation on self-esteem among community-living adults in India ................................................................................
391 Relationship between motor abilities, toe skill, and like and dislike for physical activity among Japanese kindergarten children ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 392 Relationship between athletes life stress and burnout: Mediating effects of perceive global stress ........................................ 392 Effect of parental behavioral control on water high-risk practices for adolescents: Moderated mediating effect ....................
393 Effect of water safety skills on high-risk practices for adolescents: Moderated mediating effect ............................................ 393 The beneficial effects of acute exercise on executive function in adolescents .......................................................................... 394 The effect of neurofeedback and mindfulness on sport anxiety and athletic performance of young soccer players ................
394 The psychological impact of media on the performance of Iranian Olympic athletes’ ............................................................. 395 Visual control strategy by sloped and non-sloped green and skill expertise in golf putting ...................................................... 395 Exploring exercise addiction experiences of fitness activity participants ..................................................................................
395 Roots to grow and wings to fly: A case study of psychosocial development of young people in a performance club setting ... 396 Improving decision making with video-feedback analysis (The DTM Model Applies to Tennis) ................................................ 396 The influence of core affect on cycloergometer endurance performance .................................................................................
397 Imagery use helps attention focus and task adherence during effort: Recommendations for best practices ........................... 397 Tracking activity: Evaluating perceived usefulness and effectiveness of Fitbit ......................................................................... 398 Coaches’ perspectives on their roles related to athletes’ personal and psychosocial development in university sport ............
398 The utility of three questionnaire measures of physical activity in healthy young adults: Comparison with accelerometer data ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 399 Stop&Go: An intervention program to promote healthy and physically active lifestyles for patients with substance use disorders ................................................................................................................................................................................... 399 Motivational profiles for exercise of patients with substance use disorders: A preliminary cluster analysis ............................
400 How do freshmen experience a training program based on sports psychology? -A study of a female university football club- 400 Applicability of recovery and stress ratings among junior athletes .......................................................................................... 401 Self-regulation and wellbeing of retired football athletes ........................................................................................................
401 Drive for muscularity, drive for thinness, attitudes and intentions to use substances to improve performance and appearance in students of sport sciences ..................................................................................................................................................... 402 Motivational climate and the intention to continue / drop-out and burnout in two moments of a season.............................. 403 Helping teachers overcome negligence in elementary physical education ...............................................................................
403 The predictability of big-five personality on coaching efficacy among coaches ....................................................................... 403 Unique case study to evaluate EMDR model efficacy on improving pianist performance skills and competition anxiety reduction .................................................................................................................................................................................. 404 Bullying among schoolchildren from the municipalities of Novo Cabrais, Vale do Sol and Vera Cruz, RS, Brazil ......................
404 Sheltered children and adolescents: a study of the motor development of the participants of the Copame Project of the University of Santa Cruz do Sul - RS - Brazil .............................................................................................................................. 405 Exploring the subjective experiences of amateur club golfers during competitive performance .............................................. 405 Anxiety, self-confidence, and performance in football players: A mixed-method approach .....................................................
406 Differences in general intelligence and visual memory among middle aged housewives of varied lifestyle ............................. 406 Antecedents, characteristics and consequences of psychological momentum: a taiwanese athletes’ perspective .................. 407 The role of perceived autonomy support on athlete-coach relationship and enjoyment in adolescent soccer players .............
407 Expertise of leading female tennis athletes – From the perspective of deliberate practice/deliberate play – .......................... 408 Searching strategy in performing response selection task under time constraints ................................................................... 408 Factors influencing on exercise habits after having one’s first child - Perspective of the value consciousness of sports and purposes of playing sports -......................................................................................................................................................
409 Stress-mindset, personal stress and psychological well-being: a multi-study paper ................................................................. 409 Performance optimization in competitive exams of Clinical Psychology: case study ................................................................ 410 Progress and prospect of student water safety education .......................................................................................................
410 What is next? How young athletes experience the youth academy ......................................................................................... 411 Psychology of sport and mental health: An experience with body practices ............................................................................
411Contents Child sport cohesion questionnaire: Cross-cultural adaptation and content validity to brazilian portuguese .......................... 412 Burnout in professional female soccer players ......................................................................................................................... 412 Chronotype in judokas of high performance and sports technification ....................................................................................
413 Physical self–concept in runners: Changes during a training cycle in non–professional adult runners ..................................... 413 The stability of mental toughness across situations: Taking a social-cognitive approach ........................................................ 414 Does passion predict exercise addiction?
A study in team- and individual sports ..................................................................... 414 The influence of sport participation on psychological states of an athlete with an acquired impairment ................................ 415 Preliminary validation of the implicit scale of conceptions of sports ability on the Chilean context .........................................
415 Type of sport, practice time and self-efficacy among university students ................................................................................ 416 Satisfaction of basic needs and associated coping strategies. A study in a sample of Spanish soccer players .........................
416 Temporal patterns of U-15 soccer players’ moods ................................................................................................................... 417 ESC Project: Are we influenced by strangers’ physical activity and sedentary behaviour? A Randomized Controlled Trial ......
417 Teacher evaluation based on student performance, well-being and ill-being in physical education teachers: Self-determination motivation as mediator ............................................................................................................................................................ 418 External focus of attention and autonomy support have additive benefits for motor performance in children ....................... 419 Attribution for succes and failure of student athletes ..............................................................................................................
419 Preliminary results of a systematic descriptive bibliographical review on the measurement of sport performance in sport psychology................................................................................................................................................................................ 420 Motives for the practice of physical activity and the impact on subjective well-being in older adults ...................................... 420 Validate the satisfaction of the sports services: UANL, México ................................................................................................
421 In the UCA fair play. The sport education ................................................................................................................................. 421 The impact of the sports climate generated by the coach in the goal orientation of university athletes .................................
422 Understanding the relationship between mental illness and sport: A life history perspective .................................................. 422 A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised control trials to promote physical activity via dyadic interventions ... 423 Encouraging older adults with a disability to participate in sport and physical activity: An examination of the Inspire and Include project ..........................................................................................................................................................................
423 The relationship between athletes' gratitude and subjective well-being: The mediating role of perceived social support ....... 424 Differences in sensomotor coordination as a function of team games ..................................................................................... 424 Exploring the cultural aspect of motivational climate: An eastern perspective ........................................................................
425 The differences in mental toughness and exercise behaviour amongst athletes and exercisers .............................................. 425 How to determine success of sport psychological interventions? Ambulatory assessment of functional athletic behavior .....
426 Psychological well-being in relation to leisure-time physical activity among female university students ................................. 426 Stress coping strategies and self-efficacy in athletes of different performance ....................................................................... 427 Attentional focus in motor learning: the effects of the distance of external focus of attention and task difficulty ..................
427 Parents’ emotional intelligence and sideline behaviors: The mediating role of coping strategies ............................................ 428 Emotional intelligence and competitive sports: Comparative study between adolescent athletes and non-athletes............... 428 Self-concept in Primary schools students and its association with fitness ................................................................................
429 Levels of stress and recovery in brazilians road cycling athletes............................................................................................... 429 Levels of personal and social responsibility of athletes and attitudes towards sport ............................................................... 430 Competitive anxiety in young elite female handball players according to specific playing position .........................................
430 Study about motivation in young high level performance female handball players ................................................................. 431 Effects of exercise on executive functions in Korean preschool children ................................................................................... 431 Distributive justice: the effects of coaches’ interpretation of status and power of the role of coach .......................................
431 Relationship of physical condition with attentional and perceptive measures in adolescents depending on gender ............... 432 Physical condition and attentional ability in adolescents ......................................................................................................... 432 How does leadership affect wisdom through coaching-efficacy based on passion?
A conditional process model ................... 433 Parental support throughout athlete development: The case of Portuguese volleyball players ............................................... 434 An innovative proposal from the model of sports education in primary education ..................................................................
434 Multidimensional perfectionism and cortisol stress response: a systematic review and evaluation ........................................ 435 Relationships between sports psychological profile, competitive anxiety and satisfaction of basic psychological needs in beach handball players ....................................................................................................................................................................... 435 WEDNESDAY JULY 12TH _____________________________________________ 437 Posters Session 3.
(9:30-10:30) ............................................................................................................ 437 Psychological characteristics associated with sports performance in young elite female handball players. Differences between specific playing position ...........................................................................................................................................................
437 Dose-response effect of acute exercise on resting-state EEG in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder ........... 437 Impact of physical activity enjoyment on physical activity frequency and motor ability among Japanese children aged 6-12 years ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 438 Program for the development of the implicit beliefs related to the intelligence and sporting ability in secondary students ....
438Contents After the final buzzer – life satisfaction and readiness for sports retirement of former elite ice-hockey players ...................... 439 Links between perceived motivational climate and Greek youth basketball players’ motivation ............................................. 439 Level of activación in the badminton serve...............................................................................................................................
440 Effect of verbal feedback on the psychophysiological arousal of university athletes ................................................................ 440 Comparison of group cohesion between beginner and more advanced participants in music yoga classes ............................. 440 Health psychology in university students: exercise, physical health and nutrition ....................................................................
441 Preference of leadership behaviour of coaches by by nigeria university athletes ..................................................................... 441 Barriers to sports participation as a means of achieving sustainable social development in michael otedola college of primary education ................................................................................................................................................................................. 442 Emotional intelligence and coping strategies in sports: A review .............................................................................................
442 Comparison of psychological performance strategies of elite athletes .................................................................................... 443 Impact of the basic psychological needs on well-being and physical activity in older adults .................................................... 443 "CIDADANIZA" - Planning, implementation and evaluation of a citizen education program in an African-based Portuguese school: an action research case study ......................................................................................................................................
444 Children’s body-image in their drawings －How is the characteristic behavior of children represented in their full-length self- portraits? .................................................................................................................................................................................. 444 Parental profiles and their effects on elite adolescent athletes’ self-determination theory variables ......................................
445 Mental preparation guideline and workbook for young athletes in Hungary ........................................................................... 445 Mindfulness training for Hong Kong elite athletes: A single-case designed study .................................................................... 446 The construct validity and reliability evidence of Turkish version of sport multidimesional perfectionism scale in adolescents athletes ....................................................................................................................................................................................
446 Development and validation of a new multidimensional measure of coach interpersonal behaviours .................................... 447 Career development of Swiss sport psychologists .................................................................................................................... 447 Perceptual cognitive expertise and the role of anxiety in sport: A systematic review ...............................................................
448 Physical activity attenuates negative affective responses during inactivity and hypoxic conditions ........................................ 449 Examining the relationship between basic psychological needs, mental toughness, motivation and young athletes’ exercise participation ............................................................................................................................................................................. 449 Stress, coping strategies and resilience of the Brazilian youth beach volleyball team summary ..............................................
450 Ironic or overcompensating error in golf putting: The importance of attention imbalance ...................................................... 450 Relationship of motivational climate and self-determined motivation: A study of mediation of needs satisfaction ................ 451 The attitudes of exercisers in wellness and fitness centers towards leisure activities and the problems they encounter .........
451 The effectiveness of aerobic exercise on improving quality of life of patients who have suffered a stroke .............................. 452 Coaches’ interpersonal style, frustration of the basic psychological needs, and affects in university athletes ......................... 452 Employment status and physical activity among Japanese mothers of preschoolers ...............................................................
453 Effects of internal versus external focus of attention on the learning of a balance task without and with a secondary visual task ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 453 Athlete´s path to excellence: The role of mother´s sacrifice ..................................................................................................... 454 Study on influence of the square dance to climacteric women’s physical and mental health...................................................
454 Relationship between organizational stressor and athlete burnout: Regulatory effect of perceived social support and mental toughness ................................................................................................................................................................................. 454 Investigation on the influence of involvement in exercise on physical self-concept of high school student .............................. 455 Academy athletes’ perspectives on the role of a coach-created motivational climate in their dual career pursuits .................
455 Identification of psychological markers for detecting climbing talents among young practitioners......................................... 456 Psychological characteristics in swimmers from Rio Esgueva Sport Performance Centre (Castilla y León, Spain) .................... 456 The relationship of sport career at childhood with later sport talent －Systematic sport training at childhood－ ..................
457 An exploratory study of the situations and process that evoke pride of athletes ..................................................................... 458 The relationship between mental arousal and performance .................................................................................................... 458 Impact of emotional pictures with different valence on attentional bias of tennis plays: behavioral and ERP evidence ..........
459 Chinese calligraphy practice: A new way of athletes' mental training ..................................................................................... 459 Legitimacy of anti-doping policies - athletes as researchers .................................................................................................... 460 Effects of imagery and augmented imagery training programme on direct free kick accuracy of juvenile football players .....
460 Determinants of social loafing among team-sport players of tertiary institutions in Lagos State ............................................ 461 The contribution of early auditory and visual information to the discrimination of shot power in soccer and volleyball ......... 461 Comparing exercise enjoyment and preferences for interval exercise and endurance exercise among inactive adults ............
462 Sport burnout inventory — dual career form (SPBI— DC) for adolescent student-athletes: Validity and reliability ................. 462 Action-respiration coupling in Japanese archery (Kyudo) ......................................................................................................... 463 A diary study of within-person relationships between regular distance running and well-being..............................................
463 Mental robustness – Concept and operationalization of a Scale (MR2B) ................................................................................. 464 Study at the Pablo de Olavide University (Seville, Spain): Physical activity and healthy habits ................................................ 464 The effect of emotional intelligence on collective efficacy in collegiate athletes ......................................................................
465Contents Low objectively assessed vigorous-intensity physical activity is associated with increased adrenocortical reactivity to psychosocial stress in students with high stress perceptions .................................................................................................... 465 Social identities and social identity leadership promote health-related outcomes in exercise settings: evidence from parkrun ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 466 Motives of pro-healthy behaviors of ex-athletes ......................................................................................................................
466 Negative addiction scale: an evaluation of Brazilians amateur runners ................................................................................... 467 Pain catastrophizing on high performance athletes ................................................................................................................. 467 High levels of kinesiophobia in painful elite athletes during competitive season .....................................................................
468 Mindfulness-based intervention program to reduce anxiety levels in martial arts athletes ..................................................... 468 Motivational climate and physical self-concept in equestrian jumping competition adult athletes ......................................... 469 Goal orientation and mental resilience in elite sport ................................................................................................................
469 Imagery use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease....................................................................................... 470 Factors that promote or hinder physical activity participation in patients with colorectal cancer: A systematic review .......... 470 Physical activity in health sciences students of Uruguay: Practices, motives and resources .....................................................
471 Decisional balance, self-efficacy and it´s predictive effect on the exercise enjoyment on a Mexican sample ........................... 471 The influence of motivational climate in engagement of Argentinean athletes from Youth Olympic Games ........................... 472 Exploring participation bias in Canadian sport across competitive levels .................................................................................
472 Self-regulatory processes, acculturation and sport .................................................................................................................. 473 Olympic athletes’ development. An ecological understanding .................................................................................................
473 Goal orientation, self-rated soccer abilities, and perceived coach behaviours among adolescent male and female soccer players from Germany and Japan ............................................................................................................................................. 474 Psychological well-being of athletes associated with the prevention-intervention programme for sports injuries conducted in the Academic Sports Centre in Gdańsk ..................................................................................................................................... 474 Effect of an intervention program on motivation and basic psychological needs in School Physical Education classes ...........
475 Are motivation questionnaires inefficient to explain PA levels during PE lessons? Differences depending on how PA is assessed using accelerometers ............................................................................................................................................................... 475 Analysis of the efforts within the body movement provides new perspective of the burnout syndrome – a controlled study ..
476 Influence of physical activity on cognitive performance and brain oxygenation in children aged 10-11 years ......................... 476 Analyzing bad conducts in 14-16 year-old boys and girls football ............................................................................................ 477 Intervention procedure and protocol to reduce the number of incidents in boys and girls football matches between the ages of 14 and 16 years old ..................................................................................................................................................................
477 Determinants of psychological wellbeing among active adolescents ....................................................................................... 478 Presentation and comparison of two research-based models of sport talent development environment designed in different cultural contexts ....................................................................................................................................................................... 478 4 ways of thinking that can change the way of tennis training ................................................................................................
479 Enhanced mental strength of professional junior handball players: Experiences from a mindfulness training program.......... 479 Burnout in young Swiss elite athletes and the role of mental toughness as a stress buffer ...................................................... 480 Preliminary design of a post-sports injury psychological rehabilitation program .....................................................................
480 Theory of planned behavior among athletes from two regions of Mexico ............................................................................... 481 Analysis of a football team psychological training programme................................................................................................ 481 Effects of mass media on high performance sportsmen.
Study with Uruguayan Footbal Selection ......................................... 482 Professional football psychological intervention in Uruguay. Club Atlético Rentistas ..............................................................
482 Sports values training program linked to fair play. An experience at the Montevideo Wanderes Football Club ...................... 483 Thursday July 13th _________________________________________________ 484 Posters Session 4.
(9.30-10:30) ............................................................................................................ 484 The pictorial scale of physical self-concept for young children (P-PSC-C): A feasibility-study ................................................... 484 Physical activity and sport as a protective factor against health-threatening experiments with adulthood ............................
484 The motivational function of an objective in physical activity and sport .................................................................................. 485 Development of a revised self-efficacy scale for collegiate competitive swimmers .................................................................. 485 Effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills in volleyball ............................................................................
486 Women in refeering: Profesional and sports career through two life stories............................................................................ 486 Stressors, coping, and well-being among sports coaches: A systematic review ....................................................................... 487 Brazilian high performance athletes: A personality traits and positive psychology study ........................................................
487 Competion trait anxiety of under-12 soccer players. Inflence of competition level .................................................................. 488 Athletic identity moderating effect on social support influence on serious injuries rehabilitation process in soccer player´s ..
488 Recovery-stress balance and perception of internal training load in university endurance runners ......................................... 489 Active lifestyles and self-rated health in adolescents ............................................................................................................... 489 Healthy lifestyles and body mass index as correlates of body image in a primary schoolchildren ............................................
490 Marathon Seville: the experience as a determining reason for the volunteer’s participation................................................... 490Contents Strategies to foster life skills and transfer in social inclusion programs using football ............................................................. 491 Predicting moral attitudes and behaviour in young team sport athletes: A self-determination theory perspective .................
491 Comparing interventions with youth and senior elite athletes: Insights from expert sport psychology practitioners ............... 492 Stress and effort markers in sports using video from the face .................................................................................................. 492 Monitoring stress-recovery process and psychological aspects at real time in individual and team sports ..............................
493 Research of psychological variables of personality readiness for sports performance in young footballers ............................. 493 Emotional stress of young 6-7-year-old hockey players after their participation in competitions ............................................ 494 Exploring participation bias in Canadian sport across competitive levels .................................................................................
494 Red effect in romantic context: take sport dancers as participants .......................................................................................... 495 The modulating effect of cardiorespiratory function on executive function induced by acute aerobic exercise: an evidence from fMRI study ................................................................................................................................................................................ 495 The relationship between perfectionistic strivings and perfectionistic concerns and mental health among athletes ..............
496 The prediction of proactive personality and coaches’ autonomy-support behavior on college student-athletes’ career exploration behavior ................................................................................................................................................................ 496 Suppress or express? Ironic effect of self-control in sport .........................................................................................................
497 Exploring flow in sport and exercise therapy with war and torture survivors ........................................................................... 497 Physical and sports activity in adolescents spa consumers ....................................................................................................... 498 Physical fitness and self-perceptions in teenagers ....................................................................................................................
498 Degree of impact of psychological assessment during altitude training with elite athletes ..................................................... 498 The effect of a mental skills programme on the anxiety of track-and field athletes in secondary schools ............................... 499 Motivation and sport satisfaction: analysis of the mediator impact of coach-athlete relationship from the Brazilian coach perspective ...............................................................................................................................................................................
500 Stress and injuries in the rhythmic gymnastics’ Brazilian team for the Rio 2016 Olympic games ............................................. 500 Understanding positive youth development in sport through the voices of indigenous youth ................................................. 501 Self-efficacy as an antecedent of mental toughness, prosocial and antisocial behaviors of youth athletes in Botswana ........
501 IIncidence of environment and the personality in the development of resilience through sports in adults. Recommendations to promote it in childhood ............................................................................................................................................................ 502 The efficacy of affective behavioral strategies for increasing physical activity: Implications for harnessing the dual-mode model .................................................................................................................................................................................................
502 A depth study on the factors of slump bounce-back of professional golfers ............................................................................. 503 The association between physical activity wearables and athletic identity in student-athletes ............................................... 503 Passion, sport motivation and aggression among combat sport athletes ................................................................................
504 A systematic review and meta-analysis of relative age effects in female sport ........................................................................ 504 The longitudinal impact of relative age on organized sport and unorganized physical activity participation in pre-adolescents ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 505 Students’ psychological growth in high school athletic clubs: Role of students’ perceptions of teacher ..................................
505 Investigation of variables aimed at reducing depressive symptoms in collegiate athletes prior to competitions: Use of logical thinking errors and behavioral activation as variables ............................................................................................................. 506 Relationship between the effective use of language during the feedback process and its impact on youth soccer athlete’s exercise commitment, athletic performance, and persistence of an exercise ........................................................................... 506 Analysing visual behavior and its effects on decision making.
An experimental study in volleyball ......................................... 507 A narrative study on the psychological development of athletes through the experience of yips ............................................ 507 Development of a tag game to improve children’s helping behavior-related self-efficacy .......................................................
508 The psychological factors of sports injury prevention ............................................................................................................... 508 The influence of self-consciousness and other-consciousness on “choking under pressure” in sports ...................................... 509 Examining the contextual factors that influence life skills transfer from sport to life ...............................................................
509 Development of guidance tools for cooperative skill acquisition .............................................................................................. 510 Highly skilled player's gaze behavior in basketball shootings ................................................................................................... 510 The characteristic of the movement task judged from the internal trouble in college students: analysis by the Landscape Montage Technique .................................................................................................................................................................
511 Educational program "Sácale partido al cole" Sevilla FC SAD ................................................................................................... 511 The mental strategies of elite climbing sherpas ....................................................................................................................... 512 Psychological and motor determinants of effectiveness of an individual play in football game ...............................................
512 Visual exploratory behavior in elite youth football players: A study on visual search activity and performance of players in all otutfield positions at the ajax-academy ................................................................................................................................... 513 Cognitive and neural mechanisms for perception of biological motion eliminated most kinematic information of gymnastics skills .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 513 Combining student and athlete roles – sleep quality and psychological functioning of academic athletes ..............................
514 Identification of factors predicting athletes’ sport commitment: Capabilities of team unity and collective efficacy ................ 514Contents Subjective assessment of exercise and physical activity (IPAQ-LF) in Japanese elementary school teachers and their relation to mental health: Testing a hypothetical model to management with stress experiences ........................................................... 515 Development of a positive psychological capital scale for athletes ..........................................................................................
515 Preliminary analysis of the psychometric properties of the perceived social support scale in mexican young athletes ............ 516 The consequences of positive outward emotional reactions in table tennis ............................................................................. 516 The effects of acute exercise on executive function in children of preterm birth ......................................................................
517 The relationship between body and fitness related self-conscious emotions and goal orientations......................................... 517 The effects of long-term soccer or futsal training on the development of perceptual skills during passing.............................. 518 Professor learning climate vs.
student learning orientation as moderators of the impact of sport motivation on the importance and utility of physical education perception ............................................................................................................................. 519 Cardiovascular capacity, weight status and peer relations in students of 5th and 6th grade .................................................. 519 Study + training.
Dual career at the University of Seville .......................................................................................................... 519 José María Cagigal’s impact on the 3rd Psychology Of Sport World Congress in 1973 ............................................................ 520 The prediction of empowering motivational climate on coach-athlete relationship: The mediating effect of psychological needs in high school basketball ..........................................................................................................................................................
520 A qualitative study on the psychological process of excellent performance of Japanese athletes in international competitions held in Japan ............................................................................................................................................................................ 521 Athlete’s skills with oneself. Definition and classification .........................................................................................................
521 Outcomes of the positive coach-athlete relationship: A qualitative study in youth basketball teams ...................................... 522 Are careers assistances programs effective in Spain? Athletes' perceptions about difficulties to carry out a dual career ........
522 Physical fitness and self-perceptions in teenagers .................................................................................................................... 523 Burnout: An intervention performed in a handball coach......................................................................................................... 523 Choking under pressure in sport competition: An exploratory study based on coping “profiles” in a sample of Portuguese athletes ....................................................................................................................................................................................
524 SNK Learning System: a model of integral education through sport ........................................................................................ 524 Psychological evaluation and perception of violence in football referees of lower categories ................................................. 525 Quantifying external focus of attention in sailing by means of action sport cameras ..............................................................
525 Roles of competence and sport anxiety on well-being among table tennis players .................................................................. 525 The last straw: Doping behavior as maladaptive coping strategy ............................................................................................ 526 Motivation factors for the practice of pole sport: applications for management .....................................................................
526 Constraining your actions with internal focus of attention? Evidence from event-related brain potentials ............................. 527 "Put the ball in the basket" – The paradox of shooting three-point shots in basketball ...........................................................
527 Links between sport preferences and personality dimensions: an approach to pertinent individualized sports therapy programs ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 528 In-depth understanding on elite athletes' subjective-wellbeing: What’s the difference between subjective-wellbeing of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean elite swimming athletes ........................................................................................................................ 528 A new profile display format for the monitoring of psychobiosocial states of athletes ............................................................
529 To be or not to be physically active after completing Secondary: lineal models vs. QCA .......................................................... 529 Sport specific sports psychology: a conceptual framework for Danish elite triathletes ............................................................
530 Posters Session 5. (16:00-17:00) _______________________________________ 530 A diary study of relationships between regular distance running and goal orientations in exercise ........................................ 530 Returning home after playing abroad: re-adaptation challenges of elite Swedish handball players ........................................
531 Examining the “big three” coping processes in adolescent athletes ......................................................................................... 531 Fatigue perception indicators on Dakar Rally-Raid motorcycling riders ................................................................................... 532 Psychometric properties of the subjective vitality scale (SVS): Evidence from Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong ...................
532 Effects of individual and competitive goal structures on dart throwing performance and heart rate ...................................... 533 An exploration of the field’s demand on development of educational contents for basketball coaches of female youth clubs 533 Explore resilience of principal dancer ....................................................................................................................................... 534 Effects of mental training on reservists’ fatigue in physical training ........................................................................................
534 Sport psychology in the training process of the referee and the football assistant referee ...................................................... 535 Sports educational workshops .................................................................................................................................................. 535 Sports as a risk environment: homophobia and bullying in a sample of gay and heterosexual men ........................................
536 Developing a body expression program to improve empathic competence ............................................................................. 536 Self-organized exercise to prevent back pain: The role of behavior regu-lation and self-efficacy in an athlete sample ........... 537 Mechanisms of Exercise Dependence – A person centred approach to study the predictive ability of anxiety, obsessive passion and appearance orientation on exercise dependence ..............................................................................................................
537 Attention, heart rate and skilled motor performance: Effects of task difficulty ........................................................................ 538 The psychophysiological effects of pressure on skilled motor performance ............................................................................. 538 Developing a theoretically grounded mentorship programme for women in coaching ............................................................
539Contents Goal attainment effects on cognitions, emotions, and subsequent performance in a golf putting task ................................... 539 An evaluation of time movement anticipation among female athletes of various sports ........................................................ 540 The influence of performing arts practice on physical education students’ motivation ............................................................
540 The relationship between the ability of motor imagery and the clumsiness in exercise in university students ......................... 541 Who suffers more from sport pain - men or women? ...............................................................................................................
541 Is perceived autonomy support provided by a coach related to the frequency of injury preventative behavior among elite golfers? .................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 Can emotional disclosure promote sport injury-related growth?
............................................................................................. 542 Passion for teaching and burnout in Physical Education teachers: The mediating role of being a transformational leader .... 543 How well can children and parents’ report on children’s motor skill competence?
.................................................................. 543 Influence of applying a modified Stroop Test during postural control task in children of 4-years-old ...................................... 544 Run about it?
Psychological and personal reflections on long distance group running ............................................................ 544 Relationship between personality trait of elite Latvian football players and their psychological skills ..................................... 545 Yoga teachers’ motivational trajectories from practitioner to teacher ....................................................................................
545 Effects of acute stress and cardiovascular fitness on the shifting aspect of executive function: A pilot study .......................... 546 Examining happiness, subjective vitality, aggression and depression of bodybuilders according to gender ............................ 546 Psychometric properties of Turkish version of short form of physical self-description questionnaire .......................................
547 An experimental study of intermediate education mode of water safety of college student ................................................... 547 Development of Chinese athlete mental health scale ............................................................................................................... 548 The prediction of mindfulness on subjective vitality and athlete burnout among golfers: The mediating effects of basic psychological needs ..................................................................................................................................................................
548 Case study of chronic exercise effect on facial skin condition and subjective well-being .......................................................... 549 Dance program using kinect for education purpose affects body expression of children with intellectual disabilities ............. 549 Isotropy bias remains regardless of experienced levels in amateur tennis players ...................................................................
550 Using floor sign to promote physical activity in Japanese women’s University ........................................................................ 550 Qualitative study of the process of adapting to different cultures in Japanese soccer athletes and coaches ........................... 551 The role of teachers’ controlling behaviour in physical education on adolescents’ health-related quality of life: A test of conditional process model ........................................................................................................................................................
551 Physical activity positively associated with psychological well-being and loneliness in finnish population sample .................. 552 Maximal handgrip strength and its control in judo athletes before and after training session ................................................ 552 Coping rarely takes place in a social vacuum: The antecedents and outcomes of dyadic coping in coach-athlete relationships .................................................................................................................................................................................................
553 “You’re gonna win and you’re gonna win it easy”: World-class athletes’ experiences of media expectations ......................... 554 Psychological well-being and off-field needs of professional male South African sevens rugby players ................................... 554 Participation in physical activity and sport: Developmental pathways and experiences of elite male South African athletes with cerebral palsy ...........................................................................................................................................................................
555 Evolution of the teacher´s leadership and their level of self-determined motivation throughout the academic year .............. 555 Characteristics of event-related potentials for open-skilled players during mental rotation task ............................................ 556 Leisure-time physical activity levels and the correlation with physical activity self-efficacy in Chinese university students .....
556 Contextual factors influencing decision-making: Perceptions of professional soccer players ................................................... 557 The effectiveness of group acceptance and commitment therapy for psychological outcomes among collegiate archers ...... 557 Development of mental toughness scale for elite swimmers....................................................................................................
558 Comparison of anxiety, motivation and imagery scores of professional football players ......................................................... 558 The relationship between Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) and positive psychological states of elite athletes ........................... 559 Grit, perfectionism and flow among university gold medalists: Implications for performance enhancement ..........................
559 Risk taking in chess: The relationship between an opponent’s playing strength and settling for a draw ................................. 559 Coping with permanent loss of physical ability and involvement in competitive sport: A qualitative analysis of experiences of Polish elite wheelchair rugby players ....................................................................................................................................... 560 Identify psychological predictors of primary school teachers’ motivating style and time allocated to physical education.......
560 Investigation of subjective vitality and basic psychological needs in traditional dance activities ............................................. 561 Personality characteristics of football referees from different Brazilian States ........................................................................ 561 Coping strategies and personality traits in Brazilian football referees .....................................................................................
562 Relationship between inhibitory control and objectively-assessed physical activity in Parkinson’s disease: A neurotrophical link ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 562 Changes of rating of perceived exertion (RPE) and mood state in the different freestyle swimming training sessions ............ 563 Motivation for sport activities and phisical self-concept in students ........................................................................................
563 Sensation seeking and coping with stress for the participants in the Antarctic expedition ...................................................... 564 Association between profile variables and sport-confidence of Brazilian gymnasts and football players ................................ 564 Developmental trajectories of individual and team sports participation during childhood (ages 6 to 10): Distinct associations with psychosocial outcomes .....................................................................................................................................................
565Contents Transactive memory as a mediator of the association between cohesion and and collective efficacy in professional sport .... 565 Examining the motives for participating in dance activities, using the “Behavior Regulation in Sport Questionnaire” (BRSQ) 566 Youth sport coaches’ perceptions on the value of positive youth development within coach education courses ..................... 567 Using object visual research (Lego Serious Play®) to evaluate a life skills program ..................................................................
567 The influence of cognitive effort on the efficiency of tactical behavior of young soccer players .............................................. 568 A low-intensity psychological intervention to prevent sport injuries: the adaptation of the “Mental Warmup for Athletes” program to Spanish young soccer players ................................................................................................................................ 568 Visual search strategy of soccer players according to positional roles .....................................................................................
569 How do individual team members regulate their behavior to achieve spatiotemporal collective behavior? ............................ 569 Effects of the Teaching Personal and Social Responsibility Model (TPSR) through sport on youths' perception of positive development ............................................................................................................................................................................
570 A study of quiet eye’s phenomenon in the shooting trial of combined event ........................................................................... 570 The role of perceived autonomy support and needs satisfactio in the intention to do exercise and physical activity of older adults ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 The contribution of early auditory and visual information to the anticipation of volleyball serves ..........................................
571 Impact of doping control experience and learning on anti-doping knowledge of Japanese sports university students ............ 572 Adaptation and validation of Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS) to assess motives for participation leisure time physical activity and sport in Finnish high school students ............................................................................................... 572 Being a rollerskater in Barcelona: Putting the focus on lifestyle sports' passion & experiences ...............................................
573 The role of perceived autonomy support from coaches and basic psychological needs in determining motivation of girl soccer players ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 Influence of parental support in anger levels in athletes .......................................................................................................... 574 Influence of parental education styles in athletes satisfaction .................................................................................................
574 Measuring states of goal involvement in specific achievement situations: Development and validation of a 6-goal questionnaire ........................................................................................................................................................................... 575 The psychological skills inventory for footballers ..................................................................................................................... 575 The organization of sports psychology in Brazil: structuration and training in the sports training center of the federal university of Minas Gerais ........................................................................................................................................................................
576 The role of alexithymia and competitive emotions in predicting flow in athletes ..................................................................... 576 Friday July 14th ____________________________________________________ 578 Posters Session 6. (9.30-10:30) ............................................................................................................
578 Intention to be physically active in low motivated Physical Education students ....................................................................... 578 Effects of the language use on students' motivation within a bilingual physical education setting ......................................... 578 Reliability and validity of the “Student Interest-in-the-Arts Questionnaire” (SIAQ) in Greek elementary traditional dance educational context ..................................................................................................................................................................
579 The factor structure and reliability of the Movement Imagery Questionnaire for Rehabilitation Settings-Second Edition (MIQ- RS2): A multi-trait, multi-method approach ............................................................................................................................. 579 Physical activity and quality of life: focus group interviews with korean immigrants............................................................... 580 Analysis and evaluation of psychological skills associated with performance in rhythmic gymnastics ....................................
580 Impact of received and perceived social support upon athlete’s psychological well-being....................................................... 581 SERVQUAL for the evaluation of the quality of the educative service for the class of health and physical culture in high school in México ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 581 The contribution of coping related variables and vagal tone on working memory performance under pressure .....................
582 Basic psychological needs in exercise and exercise motivation among elderly candidate and elderly people .......................... 582 How do illness stories shape physical activity experiences? Insights into arthritis as redemption and contamination .............
583 Relaxation techniques in stress control .................................................................................................................................... 583 Public shaming of professional athletes through social media ................................................................................................. 584 Investigating the relationship between authentic leadership and follower outcomes in sport: A cross-sectional study...........
584 Development and transfer of life skills in high level skating: Comparison of the experiences of female coaches and their skaters ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 585 Integration of psychological and physiological activity during fencing competition: consequences on mental preparation .... 585 Comparison of athletic identity levels between athletes from collective and individual sports ................................................
586 Mental training in the management of anxiety and self-confidence in selected athletes in Chile ............................................ 586 Match-Fixing: a threat to the values of sport. Representations of the phenomenon among Italian League B football players 587 Validation of the portuguese version of the work motivation scale in sport coaches ...............................................................
587 Validation of the Portuguese versions of the need satisfaction and need frustration scales in sport coaches.......................... 588 Peer leadership, cohesion and team performance in intramural football ................................................................................ 588 Self-esteem and empathy toward obese people in university students of exercise sciences ....................................................
589 For sport versus through sport: The role of the coach in youth athletes’ moral character development .................................. 590Contents The use and application of mental-imagery in triathlon ........................................................................................................... 590 Motivational climate and youth beliefs about sport .................................................................................................................
591 Integrated mindfulness-based intervention to enhance performance-relevant psychological skills of elite badminton players ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 591 Aerobic exercise training ameliorates craving and inhibitory control in methamphetamine dependencies: A randomized controlled trial and event-related potential study .................................................................................................................... 592 Repetitive transcranial stimulation on the somatosensory and premotor cortices modulates the level of kinesthetic perception .................................................................................................................................................................................................
592 Bioenergetics and psychological profile of an ultra-endurance walker .................................................................................... 593 Health risk perception and perception bias by the physical activity level among middle-aged adults...................................... 593 Effects of a physical fitness program on fear of failure, physical self-perception and physical fitness in physical educational classes ......................................................................................................................................................................................
594 Understanding motivational determinants of enjoyment and intention to continue in competition of persistent Portuguese swimmers ................................................................................................................................................................................. 594 Differences between leadership behaviour of coaches and the perceived and preferred leadership behaviour of their young table tennis players .................................................................................................................................................................. 595 Factors associated with success in high-performance sports ...................................................................................................
595 Sports psychology: Intervention with children who practice american football ....................................................................... 596 Perceived motivational climate, attitudes to moral decision making and prosocial and antisocial behavior in youth team sports: examination of relations ............................................................................................................................................... 596 The influence of psychological factors on pain levels among circus arts students ....................................................................
597 Difference in visuo-spatial cognition as a function of physical activity in children ................................................................... 597 "I am really good at sports!" The physical self-concept of children in Kindergarten and primary school ................................. 598 Psychological intervention with recreational runners at Valencia Marathon expo ..................................................................
598 Key points for the efficient coaching application as a tool for the psychological intervention in sports ................................... 599 Case report on a clinical sport psychological intervention for a rugby player ........................................................................... 599 Case study on hypertension, physical exercise and psychophysiological coherence biofeedback .............................................
600 Identifying information for anticipation in complex sport actions ............................................................................................ 600 Tramadol effects on physical performance and sustained attention during a 20-min indoor cycling Time-Trial ...................... 601 The relationship between the sport moral disengagement and the athletes’ pro-social and anti-social behavior in sport: The meditation of moral identity ....................................................................................................................................................
601 Comparison of the motivational productivity of Brazilian elite soccer athletes in different conditions .................................... 602 Burnout and coping among elite athletes: a longitudinal perspective...................................................................................... 602 What are the psychological changes during the final round in female sport pistol?
................................................................ 603 Anxiety effects on trigger timing in female elite sport pistol shooters...................................................................................... 603 Establishing linkages between emotional intelligence, efficacy beliefs and coaches’ competitive behaviors ...........................
603 Athletic trainers’ views on psychosocial issues and referral practices ...................................................................................... 604 Investigating the influence of intra-individual changes in perceived stress symptoms on injury risk in competitive soccer: a prospective study ..................................................................................................................................................................... 605 The difference of the perceived competitive environment in Japanese college athletes from the view of dysfunctional family605 Coach-athlete relationship: Gender differences at professional and amateur competition level .............................................
606 Ratings psychological in hockey ............................................................................................................................................... 606 Spanish version of the Athlete Engagement Questionnaire: Psychometric properties ............................................................. 607 Reduced Spanish version of participation motives questionnaire for exercise and sport: Preliminary psychometric properties607 A pilot study about compulsive exercise and risk of eating disorders in Spanish adolescents ..................................................
608 Well-come back! A qualitative study of psychological readiness to return to competitive sport following injury in elite basketball players .................................................................................................................................................................... 608 Psychological intervention with neurofeedback support ..........................................................................................................
609 Burnout in professional soccer football referees ...................................................................................................................... 609 Psychometric properties of the Spanish version of the Weight Pressures in Sport ................................................................... 610 Relationship between the Weight Pressures in Sport questionnaire (WPS-F & WPS-M) with SATAQ-4 and BSQ questionnaires .................................................................................................................................................................................................
610 Predicting fluid intake before exercise among athletes: aA theoretical integration perspective .............................................. 611 Associations among Internet use, physical activity, and physical fitness of elementary school children .................................. 611 Effects of acute aerobic and resistance exercises on the stroop test: An electrophysiological and biochemical study .............
611 Obesity and multiple aspects of cognitive functions in adolescents ......................................................................................... 612 Pluralistic ignorance: the psychological explanation of academic underachievement among Taiwanese student-athletes .... 612 The influence of early life competitive sport involvement on later life experiences ..................................................................
613 Diagnosis and modelling of basic motor competencies and their development ....................................................................... 613 Influential factors of individual career management of Chinese coaches ................................................................................. 614Contents How team sport athletes cope with shared stressors: A communal coping perspective ...........................................................
614 Examining athletes’ superstitious in sports: A qualitative approach ........................................................................................ 615 The effects of an outdoor activity on the life skills of Japanese university students ................................................................. 615 Relationships of fitness and obesity levels in influencing inhibitory control .............................................................................
616 Relationship between motor coordination and interference control ability in children with attention deficit /hyperactivity disorder .................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 Effect of acute exercise mode on serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and task switching................................... 617 What inhibits “loss of spirit?” A qualitative study of losing and not losing spirit in competition ..............................................
617 Association between exercise modality with different physical and cognitive demands and executive function ..................... 618 A student-athlete’s experience of life: An exploratory study from a meaning of life perspective ............................................. 618 Difference of visuo-spatial working memory capacity in table tennis players with different levels of skill: an ERP study ........
619 The acute effect of running on pupil size in middle-distance runners ....................................................................................... 619 Psychophysical stress indicators and burnout in sports trainers ............................................................................................... 620 Pre-performance routines of elite competitive Brazilian volleyball athletes: an exploratory study ..........................................
620 Students’ perceptions of their self-confidence in Physical Education lessons trough the practice of sports according to the gender and formal practice experience .................................................................................................................................... 621 Effectiveness of authentic leadership in the context of sport: athletes’ commitment and enjoyment and the mediating role of autonomy and trust .................................................................................................................................................................. 621 Winning attitude as a state competitive anxiety predictor.......................................................................................................
622 The influence of cardiovascular fitness, and obesity, on executive function in a Stop-Signal Task: An electrophysiological study ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 622 Posters Session 7. (14.30-15:30) _______________________________________ 623 The revision and factorial structure validation of the sport psychological capital scale ...........................................................
623 The prediction to sport performance and self-handicapping of collegiate tennis players' sport psychological capital and coach- athlete relationship .................................................................................................................................................................. 623 The influence of cardiovascular fitness, and obesity, on executive function in a Stop-Signal Task: An electrophysiological study ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 624 Where are football players paying attention to when viewing football fields: Evidence from eye movements ........................
624 Association of 2D: 4D digit ratio with frailty and MMSE in community-dwelling older adultsand Human Development ......... 625 Habitual physical activity and social support in adolescents .................................................................................................... 625 Expert-novices differences in decision-making skill in soccer referees ......................................................................................
626 Does athletes’ perception of leadership differ according to goal achievement and sport success? .......................................... 626 The impact of mental routines on performance enhancement of young tennis athletes..........................................................
627 Anger management and perfectionism in youth tennis players of a high performance sport center ....................................... 627 Portuguese badminton on the way to the olympic games Rio 2016, a holistic aproach ........................................................... 628 The resumption of a Portuguese Olympic dream .....................................................................................................................
628 Is there variation in burnout levels in soccer athletes during a season? ................................................................................... 629 Youth academy athletes’ parents’ participation on sports practice .........................................................................................
629 Impact of passion on the hope perception among Brazilian athletes ....................................................................................... 630 Perfectionism and satisfaction of basic psychological needs: a study in the Brazilian futsal context ....................................... 630 Talent development and athletes’ fulfillment in nigerian secondary school sports competition ..............................................
631 Assessment of the predisposing factors to self-efficacy among university athletes in South-West, Nigeria ............................. 632 The influence of college students' physical exercise on core self-evaluation: The mediating role of physical self-esteem........ 632 Coach-athlete relationship and athletes’ performance satisfaction: The mediating effects of hope and athlete engagement 633 Effects of two different protocols of weight training in patients with Alzheimer’s disease ......................................................
633 Coaches of masters athletes: Beliefs and perceptions of their influence on athletes ................................................................ 634 Evaluation of an exercise programme to improve quality of life recovery as a rehabilitation strategy in cancer process ........ 634 A nutritional program for physical education instructors to improve their competences as agents of change ........................
635 The moral disengagement in doping scale (MDDS): Validity and reliability of the Turkish version .......................................... 635 Value systems of Turkish youth athletes .................................................................................................................................. 636 Auto-efficacy, situational and external factors in amateur, beginner and competitive Mexican runners ................................
636 Eye quietness and quiet eye in expert and novice golf performance: an electrooculographic analysis .................................... 637 Strategies used during mental rotation of hand images depend on imagery difficulty ............................................................ 637 Careers and employability of graduates of the European Master in Sport & Exercise Psychology from 2009 to 2016 .............
638 Mental toughness and emotional intelligence of professional basketball players in terms of different variables .................... 638 Emotional intelligence and sport-oriented attitudes of young athletes and non-athletes ........................................................ 639 “Organizing for Excellence”: stress-recovery states in the Danish national orienteering team during a training camp and the 2015 World Championship .......................................................................................................................................................
639 Amount of hard continuous long runs during first ten years of training of elite long distance Kenyan and Spanish runners ... 640Contents Changing my messy brain: An autoethnographic tale of neurofeedback for sport and health ................................................. 640 The mediational role of autonomous and controlled motivation in the relationships between basic psychological needs satisfaction and athletes' self-talk ............................................................................................................................................
641 Pre-competition anxiety levels in the spanish athletics national team for the most significant competitions: European, World Championships and Olympic Games ........................................................................................................................................ 641 Effects of perceived exertion of different training loads on the volleyball male players' performance ..................................... 642 Segmentation of clients in fitness centers according to quality and fidelity .............................................................................
642 Organizational culture and job satisfaction in fitness centers .................................................................................................. 643 Determinants of moral decision-making in sport: Comparison between Olympic and Non-Olympic athletes .......................... 643 Approach and avoidance motivations in achievement contexts: A comparative test of two models .......................................
644 Development and validation of the Approach-Avoidance System Questionnaire (AASQ) ......................................................... 644 Specific questionnaire for motor riders. Evaluation of situations and difficulties management, self-confidence and team dimensions ...............................................................................................................................................................................
645 The effectiveness of respiratory and mobility exercises on anxiety and depression of hospitalized surgical patients .............. 646 The use of observational learning by youth athletes: Observing opponents in competition ..................................................... 646 Social support and negative affective responses influence on rehabilitation adherence among injured athletes: A longitudinal mediation approach .................................................................................................................................................................
647 Patients’ experiences of physical activity on prescription with access to counsellors in routine care – a qualitative study in Sweden ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 647 Performance enhancing substances in exercise settings: a systematic review ......................................................................... 648 How ongoing match status shapes variability and regularity of volleyball game actions ........................................................
648 Team ranking and exploitation of variability and regularity in game actions: Use of entropy to assess collective tactical behaviours ................................................................................................................................................................................ 649 Discriminant analysis of need satisfaction, motivational regulations, wellbeing and performance between soccer players with high and low perception of coach-autonomy support .............................................................................................................. 649 Development and initial validation of the Italian Mood Scale (ITAMS) for use in sport and exercise contexts .........................
650 Above board: Reframing the moral decision-making of NCAA student-athletes ...................................................................... 650 The utility of sports psychology in health and social intervention programs. Gender-based violence ......................................
651 Perceptual-cognitive skills in team and combat sports ............................................................................................................. 651 The implementation of the eye tracking in psychological diagnosis in rock-climbing and golf ................................................. 652 Consequences of prosocial and antisocial behavior for the recipient: An experimental study ..................................................
652 Stressors and coping in voluntary sports coaches..................................................................................................................... 653 Athlete burnout: A multidimensional approach on predicting burnout under a conceptual integrated perspective ................ 653 Evaluating the associations between coaches’ autonomy supportive behaviors, the quality of athlete-coach relationship and athlete burnout under a Self-Determination perspective .........................................................................................................
654 Assessment of self-regulation ability in psychological training for athletes of Russian national team ..................................... 654 Similar gaze metrics underlie visual-tracking behavior during motor execution and motor imagery for manual interception 655 Is physical activity important in adolescent peer relationships? ...............................................................................................
656 Identification tools of the talented soccer player: A review focused on the psychological-decisional aspect ........................... 656 Psychophysiological variables in competition chess, a journey to the center of the board ....................................................... 657 The etiology of morbid obesity from a qualitative perspective .................................................................................................
657 Pre-competition anxiety in young paddle tennis players in Castilla y León ............................................................................... 658 The impact of the Health Behavior with Quality Sports Thematic Network (REDDECA) and its degree of development and ability to convene, according to the IV International Colloquium on Sports Psychology .......................................................... 658 Emotional management in athletes neurosis with physical exercise ........................................................................................
658 Social attitude and value in sport -comparative study between German and Japanese youth athletes- .................................. 659 Relationship between basic needs satisfaction in sport and burnout/engagement among Japanese soccer players ............... 659 The relationship between attitudes toward sport and the characteristics of autobiographical memories in high school students .................................................................................................................................................................................................
660 Greek traditional dance learning: Impact on student motivation ............................................................................................. 660 Effects of acute aerobic exercise on executive control network: Rs- fMRI study of preadolescent children .............................. 661 10 years of the Hungarian sport psychologist education ..........................................................................................................
662 Optimal emotions and self efficacy of polish gymnasts ............................................................................................................ 662 Yoga poses increase psychological empowerment and state self-esteem in comparison to ‘power poses’ .............................. 663 2016 Olympic Games: Perceptions about the development of sport psychology in brazil ........................................................
663 Sports and exercise psychology in 21st century present in sports psychology in Mexico: AMPDAF .......................................... 664 Psychological intervention protocol in sport from the motivational coaching perspective ....................................................... 664 What is the relation between fitness condition and psychological parameters in shooting sports?
......................................... 664 Effects of physiotherapeutic and psychological intervention program on emotion regulation in a sample of Spanish soccer players ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 665Contents Motivation, anxiety and sports injury.
Results of a psychological intervention program applied to a sample of soccer players ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 665 Factors related to psychological competitive ability of Japanese college athletes ................................................................... 666 Effects of acute exercise on food-related cognition in obese adolescents ................................................................................
666 The role of athletes’ mindfulness on future alexithymia, burnout, and performance ............................................................... 667 A qualitative exploration of martial artists’ mental training: Interpretations of the function of Qi and energy ....................... 667 The relationship between mental arousal and performance ....................................................................................................
668 Impact of emotional pictures with different valence on attentional bias of tennis plays: behavioral and ERP evidence .......... 668 Role of the social state in pre-performance routines: A psychobiosocial state approach ......................................................... 669 Influence of parental education styles in support .....................................................................................................................
669 Starters and non-starters in football: Differences in the perceptions of coach’s leadership behaviors ..................................... 670 Supported or pressured: Differences on perception of parental role among athletes and parents .......................................... 670 AUTHORS INDEX ..................................................................
672KEYNOTES 1Keynotes Keynotes Monday July 10th Fighting for an educational youth sport Jaume Cruz, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. According to sport psychologists, the effects of sport participation on children´s psychosocial development are controversial issues for sport scientists. Some authors have outlined the importance of sport practice in order to improve physical fitness, self-confidence or sportspersonship.
However, there is also some evidence of negative effects of athletic participation such as burnout or attrition due to parents’ overemphasis on the outcome of the game or the punitive communication style of some youth coaches. In short, adult leaders -coaches, parents, officials, sport organizers- who interact with young players determine the quality of children’ athletic experience. Although coaches are considered a key figure in youth sport −because coaches’ behaviors, attitudes, and values are imitated by their players, not only in sport settings but also in other contexts of players’ lives− most children receive coaching from untrained amateur coaches.
Due to this reality, coach training programs as the Mastery Approach to Coaching (MAC; Smith, Smoll, & Cumming, 2007), have been implemented to produce salutary effects on a wide range of outcome variables. Taking into account that most coach programs usually had not provided individualized behavioral feedback, because occur in the form of a group-administered workshop, Sousa, Smith, and Cruz (2008) took a step forward and encouraged sport psychologists to adapt the coach behavioral guidelines to the individual evaluations assessed in the baseline stage and developed the Programa de Asesoramiento Personalizado a Entrenadores (PAPE Individualized Program for Counseling Coaches). The intervention with parents of our research group started in 1998, when the Barcelona Sport Council requested our group to design a campaign on the psychological aspects of parents’ positive participation in sport.
As the campaign was conceived to be as widespread as possible, multiple resources were produced in order to reach diverse sport participants. Six different products were designed in order to disseminate the principles of Barcelona’s Campaign: a booklet, leaflets, posters, a video, a web page, and workshops. (Cruz, Ramis &Torregrossa, 2016).
The results of Barcelona´s Campaign to promote parents’ sportspersonship in youth sport were promising in terms of the level of positive communication messages given to the players. However, in a field study for the campaign, referees of football and basketball games of children of 9-10 years old received only 4% of encouragement and 68% of criticism, reflecting that some parents place too much emphasis on winning. In this sense, we have to assume that the elements of the campaign were insufficient by themselves to change the spectators’ behaviors towards referees.
In general, campaigns attempted to influence spectators’ behaviors, but the ones that behave in an appropriate way did not receive any kind of social approval. If we want to modify parents/spectators behaviors in youth sport, maybe we need to reward them on the outcome of the competition for the positive and supportive behaviors they exhibited towards players, coaches, and referees. In this sense, it is interesting to follow new developments on parents’ positive participation in sport, such as the “Juga verd” (“Play green campaign;” Alastrué & González, 2013), that proposed giving extra scores based on parents and spectators behaviors which are taken into account in the outcome of the matches.
My final reflection, from a cognitive- behavioral perspective, is that if we want to change the values in youth sport and avoid gamesmanship, discrimination and violence, the sport psychologists have to work not only with coaches and parents but also 2Keynotes with sport organizers, officials, referees and peers … in order to empower them as Agents of Change, as the European Project Psytool tries to do. Tuesday July 11th José Maria Cagigal: Work and legacy of a pioneer of sport psychology Alberto Cei, University of San Raffaele, Ceiconsulting José Maria Cagigal (Bilbao, 1928 – Madrid, 1983) played a fundamental role to establish for the first time in the world an international network in the field of sport psychology, culminated in the foundation of the International Society of Sport Psychology. In fact, it was during the 4th Congress of the Groupement Latin de Medecine Physique et des Sports, Barcelona, 1963, that Ferruccio Antonelli, Michel Bouet and José Maria Cagigal discussed about their interest in the sport psychological aspect and speculated upon the organization of a worldwide congress.
Thanks to his vision, not only in 1965 in the first ISSP-MC Ferrer Hombravella was elected as General Secretary, but José Cagigal in 1973 organized the 3th ISSP Congress in Madrid. This key role was clearly recognized by Antonelli during this Congress: “I want to remember that, it’s not wrong, to say that the scientific Sport psychology was born in Spain.” Furthermore, under his direction this Congress was very important because was attended by members from Eastern countries as well as North America. To appreciate this result, we have to remember that at time the world was divided in two blocks and the Cold war did not favoured this kind of relationships.
In the same time, in Spain, the current Faculties of Sports Science owe their foundation to his work and few scholars have added value to the history of sports and education like he did. Cagigal was the first director of the Institutos Nacionales de Educacion Fisica (INEF), the first founded in Madrid in 1967, where it was included the field of psychology, establishing a strict connection between the pedagogy and the sport psychology. He became totally involved in this new organization, since his personal, professional and institutional goals was sustained by his dual status as professor and director.
José Maria Cagigal was married with Isabel de Gregorio Hidalgo and they had five children. He was a humanist but an action man too. I believe his legacy can be described through his words: "we can talk of a sport-show, i.e., a sport developed towards this spectacular slope, programmed and exploited; suitable for dissemination, propaganda; subject to champions requirements; discovered and used by finance, industry and trade; frequently associated with professionalization.
The sport of the success of the broadcasts, advertising, politics ... By another way, in another direction, it’s running another sport - the first in term of numbers - alien to propaganda, to marketing, to the political involvement ... Actually it is not a second-class sport.
It's anthropological and vividly the first" (Cagigal, 1975, p. 59-60). Did you ever let your lover see the stranger in yourself?
Professional development in sport and exercise psychology David Tod, Liverpool John Moores University Applied sport and exercise psychology can be traced back to the late 19th century. Since the field’s inception, researchers have focused largely on the specific factors involved in service delivery, such as the efficacy of interventions (e.g., goal setting) and the identification of athlete attributes (e.g., mental toughness) which might enhance performance if developed. Only within the last 25 years have researchers have paid substantial attention to the applied sport and exercise psychologist, with early studies focused on stakeholders’ perceptions of effective practitioners’ characteristics.
It is even more recent that researchers have examined practitioner development issues, such as developmental journeys, supervision, and processes involved in 3Keynotes gaining expertise (e.g., reflective practice). Consequently, much less is known about the people delivering applied sport psychology services, and how best to train them, compared with knowledge about the interventions they employ. The imbalance in knowledge may lead to an overemphasis in practitioner education on the tools consultants have, at the expense of a focus on their development as service providers.
Potentially, this imbalance compromises formal training effectiveness. This hypothesis may help explain recent research that documents ways in which graduates believe their training has not prepared them for situations they have encountered. The recognition that professional development research has considerable room for growth also comes at a time when several countries have developed or reviewed training routes and accreditation schemes designed to ensure quality in the profession.
In response to the clear need for research, several investigators around the globe are pursuing lines of inquiry that may underpin high quality professional development and training, including practitioner development trends, the acquisition of decision making skills, and optimal training environments. In this keynote, I will overview current insights emerging from this research and suggest implications. More specifically, I will answer three questions.
First, what are the characteristics of effective, safe, and ethical applied sport psychologists? Second, what are consultants’ journeys towards expertise? Third, what are the implications for individual practitioners and professional organisations?
Answers to these questions provide the keys to this keynote. First, the phrase “be, know, do” summarises expert practitioners. Expertise involves having a wellspring of knowledge, a toolbox of interventions, and the personal characteristics needed to establish and maintain working alliances with clients.
Second, practitioners often stutter along their journeys, experiencing joys, doubts, pride, and disappointments, as they learn about themselves and their clients ever more deeply and make choices about how they wish to work with athletes so they are effective and authentic in their professional roles. Third, developing trainees’ psychological knowledge, competence at using interventions, and ability to form working alliances with clients are necessary but insufficient goals in their education. Based on emerging research trends, effective applied sport psychologist training also involves helping individuals create a suitable professional identity or a cognitive structure that helps them understand their identity capital; that is their mental, physical, and social resources that allow them to negotiate successfully the environmental demands they encounter throughout their careers.
Facilitating careers in sport Dorothee Alfermann, University of Leipzig While pursuing a career in sport can be an exhausting and time-consuming task, at the same time, it may be regarded as an exciting and enjoyable experience. In the literature there exist a number of stage models showing that careers in sport often follow foreseeable pathways from childhood to adulthood, similar to educational careers. But, as only a minority of youngsters who start in competitive sport will become elite athletes the main research question in sport and performance psychology is about the facilitating or/and hindering conditions of sport career development, or talent development, as some authors call it.
In the history of sport career research we can find several periods. At first, the focus was directed toward the athlete, mainly her or his physical and psychological capacities. The athlete with all her/his individual talents was regarded as the main engineer of her/his career.
A second approach considered career development mainly as the result of a successful interaction within the athletic triangle, namely athlete, coach and parents. This means that the athlete was now regarded as a social being developing within his/her immediate social environment. Besides athletes’ dispositions for a career, research now focused on coaches’ behaviours and on parental support.
Even though in that approach the interaction and relationship of athlete and social environment was an important extension to former views, the possible influence of peers or other socialization agents was somehow neglected with the result that till today we are in urgent need of good empirical studies on the influence of peers on elite sport careers. In the last ten to fifteen years we can realize important extensions to the athletic 4Keynotes triangle approach. These are concentrated on the macro-environments of athletes, the so-called talent development environment (TDE).
On the one hand, research is considering how optimal sport environments should look like (e.g., the sport system, the club, availability of sport facilities, emphasis on dual careers and its support, sport psychology support), and on the other hand, the optimal TDE may differ according to type of sport and the cultural background where athletes are growing up. Culture seems to play an important role in career development and has come into the focus of research only recently. To summarize, sport career development is not only the result of athletes’ talent and the cooperation within the athletic triangle, but also of an optimal sport environment on the one hand and of cultural ideology and preconditions on the other hand.
In the lecture I will present research supporting this comprehensive view of facilitating conditions of sport careers. Special emphasis will be put on cultural viewpoints and on the role of talent development environments. Finally, suggestions will be given for future research and for sport psychology interventions.
Are psychological theories used to predict physical activity and guide physical activity behavior change interventions any good? Martin S. Hagger, Curtin University, University of Jyväskylä Investigators in the field of exercise and health psychology have frequency cited the importance of a theoretical basis when conducting research on the psychological predictors of physical activity participation for health.
A theoretical approach has also been advocated in the development of effective interventions to promote increased uptake and maintenance of physical activity behaviour in public health (e.g., general population) and clinical (e.g., cardiac rehabilitation) contexts. In this talk I will critically evaluate the contribution that psychological theory has made to predicting and changing physical activity behaviour. My approach will be from a standpoint of current status of theory use in exercise psychology – what positive outcomes has psychological theory brought to providing an evidence base for physical activity prediction and to informing interventions to change physical activity behaviour, and what are the shortcoming and limitations of the theories used?
Based on this analysis I will outline how researchers and practitioners are leveraging the advantages, and addressing the limitations of, theories applied in physical activity behaviour, and offer suggestions for future research and practice. My analysis will begin by outlining some of the successful outcomes of physical activity research applying theories from social psychology to understand and change physical activity behaviour. Notable successes include the identification of key theoretical constructs that account for unique variance in physical activity behaviour across multiple contexts and populations, and the identification of viable constructs for behavioural interventions to target in order to bring about concomitant behaviour change.
Theory has also unveiled the potential mechanisms by which psychological constructs impact physical activity behaviour, and identified the factors that magnify and diminish the effects (i.e., moderators). However, several critiques and limitations have been levelled at theories applied to physical activity. These criticisms include: the relatively static nature of the theories; the vast number of theories and the associated problems with definition, redundancy, and conceptualization of constructs; problems in prediction including relatively modest or weak effects particularly in the face of past behaviour; failure of many theories to account for important basic processes including non-conscious, automatic processes and emotional factors; and problems associated with identifying appropriate means to change theoretical constructs and processes in interventions based on theory.
I will outline the inherent problems associated with these issues and outline how researchers have attempted to deal with them. These include the importance of adopting longitudinal, panel, experimental, and multiple repeated measures designs (e.g., momentary ecological evaluation) to test theory predictions and, in particular, the nomological validity; categorizing the essential constructs from theories and using theoretical integration to arrive at a core set of constructs and processes that account for variance in physical activity behaviour; including measures of past behaviour in theories and adopting dual 5Keynotes process or dual phase models to provide a comprehensive account for the multiple processes that relate to health behaviour; and systematically mapping key behaviour change methods to the core constructs that account for variance in health behaviors; and the importance of factorial designs to evaluate the effectiveness of individual behavior change methods. I will outline examples of each of these lines of research and how they are contributing to moving the science of behavioural prediction and change in physical activity forward.
Wednesday July 12th Moral action in sport: Why does it matter? Maria Kavussanu, University of Birmingham Questions about morality are highly relevant to any context that involves social interaction. Sport is such a context, where participants interact with each other; thus, moral issues unavoidably arise in this context.
It is widely accepted that ultimately morality is reflected in one’s actions. Moreover, morality is not only about refraining from doing the wrong thing, for example, not cheating, abusing, or deceiving others, also called inhibitive morality. It is also about being proactive in one’s interactions with others, and engaging in behaviors that are beneficial to others, also termed proactive morality.
In the context of sport, the terms prosocial and antisocial behavior have been used to refer to proactive and inhibitive morality, respectively. Examples of these behaviors are helping an opponent off the floor, encouraging a teammate after a mistake, and intentionally injuring or verbally abusing another player. In this presentation, I will discuss research pertaining to prosocial and antisocial behaviors in sport, with particular emphasis on their antecedents and consequences.
I will also present my recent work on doping, which I have investigated as a moral issue. Several personal and social environmental variables could influence prosocial and antisocial sport behavior. Evidence from several of our studies shows that athletes who report more frequent antisocial behavior toward their teammates and opponents, tend to be: high in ego orientation, which is the tendency to feel successful when one shows superiority over others; high in moral disengagement, which refers to the justifications people use for their transgressive behavior; low in empathy, which is the ability to take someone else’s perspective; and low in moral identity, which is the centrality of being a moral person in one’s self- concept.
These individuals also tend to not experience guilt when acting antisocially toward others, and perceive a performance motivational climate in their team. In contrast, athletes who report more frequent prosocial behavior tend to be high in task orientation and perceive a mastery motivational climate in their team. Prosocial and antisocial behaviors can have important consequences for the recipient.
Team sport players, who perceived their teammates as acting prosocially toward them during a match, also enjoyed the match, tried harder, and reported more commitment to play with their team. Prosocial teammate behavior has also been linked to positive affect, task cohesion, more focused attention, and greater happiness. In contrast, antisocial teammate behavior has been associated with lower effort, anger, anxiety, negative affect, and burnout.
Morality in sport is exemplified by adhering to the rules of sport, thus honoring a fair competition. A behavior that clearly breaks these rules is the use of banned performance enhancing substances, also known as doping. That doping is a moral issue is clearly seen by the consistent relationships between doping and variables that have been associated with antisocial behavior, such as moral identity, moral disengagement, and guilt.
Athletes, who have a strong moral identity have lower tendency to morally disengage, experience more guilt, and are less likely to use banned substances to enhance their performance. 6Keynotes Morality matters at every level of sport. It has important consequences for others, particularly those athletes, who dedicate a large part of their life to sport; it is a prerequisite for preserving the integrity of sport; and can contribute to the quality of the sport experience.
Addressing weight pressures and body image concerns among athletes around the globe: Assessment, treatment, and prevention Justine J. Reel, University of North Carolina Wilmington Athletes strive to be peak performers; they are viewed to be incredibly tough mentally and physically fit. Facing intense physical and psychological demands to be the best is a normalized part of competitive sport participation.
Competitive strategies may involve changing one’s weight, shape, or size to meet perceived body ideals for one’s sport. To this end, certain athletes have become “at risk” for developing unhealthy eating and exercise practices as they attempt to lose, gain, or maintain weight to achieve a perceived performance advantage and “look the part” in the process. A well-known case involved an Olympic gymnast, Christy Henrich, who was purportedly told by a judge and her coach that she should lose weight to increase her chances of competing on the world stage.
This competitive desire fueled a dangerous battle with anorexia nervosa, extreme weight loss, and eventually death due to complications of the eating disorder. Another example was Bahne Rabe, a competitive Olympic rower from Germany, who died from extreme malnutrition associated with his anorexia nervosa. Weight management strategies for athletes can include a range of behaviors such as severe dietary restriction or fasting, the use of laxatives, diuretics, or diet pills, vomiting, and overexercise.
Symptoms like these can reach the designated frequency, duration, and severity to warrant a clinical diagnosis. Pressures from the sport environment, such as pressures to change one’s body to become more competitive, have been associated with the onset and maintenance of these unhealthy eating and exercise behaviors in athletes. Other identified weight pressures in sport include weight requirements, weigh-ins, team uniforms, comments from coaches, judges, and teammates, an emphasis on size associated with position or weight class, or an emphasis on appearance associated with the presentational component of some sports.
These weight pressures can contribute to negative body image and feelings about the need to change a physical aspect of one’s physique. Research has indicated that athletes in so-called “aesthetic” sports, such as figure skating, gymnastics, or diving, may be especially likely to experience body image concerns and disordered eating due to the intensity of the appearance-related pressures that are associated with the judged, artistic component of these sports. This keynote presentation will provide an overview of studies linking weight pressures, body image concerns, and disordered eating in sport that have been conducted over the past two decades.
Further, recommendations will be provided regarding the assessment of weight pressures in athlete populations to detect problematic attitudes and behaviors early. The Weight Pressures in Sport scale will be introduced for use with both male (i.e., WPS-M) and female athletes (WPS-F). The presentation will also cover how to proactively address weight pressures in the sport context and the need for education.
These and other strategies for the prevention of body image concerns and disordered eating in sport will be forwarded in order to further mobilize sport psychology researchers and practitioners, globally, to promote healthy sport environments. Thursday July 13th Understanding complex human behavior from a dynamical systems perspective Yuji Yamamoto, Nagoya University 7Keynotes Interpersonal competition and coordination in sports can manifest complex behaviors. The recent dramatic improvements in measurement technology have enabled the collection of massive amounts of precise data in real sporting fields with high spatiotemporal resolution.
Using these data, we present examples showing that common principles underlie these behaviors, as they do physical and natural phenomena, from a dynamical systems perspective. First, in one-on-one sports, such as Japanese martial arts and kendo, practitioners exhibit abrupt phase transitions from in-phase to anti-phase and vice versa, corresponding to 0.1-m differences in the interpersonal distance, which was used as a control parameter. These phenomena can be understood as synchronization or oscillatory dynamics, that is, “coupled oscillators”, like the famous finger experiment by Dr.
Kelso. Synchronization can be found everywhere, such as in hanging clocks, candles, fireflies, and flocking birds. Second, coordination patterns involving more than two people were modeled as coupled oscillators using symmetric Hopf bifurcation theory, which is based on group theory.
Expert soccer players maintain high symmetry, such as using rotation mode during a three-on-one ball possession task, compared with intermediate and novice players, who show partial anti-phase mode. Third, based on discrete dynamics like a Lorenz map, we classified competitive movements in kendo matches into six coordination patterns, using a return map analysis. Second-order state transition diagrams with the conditional probabilities consisting of the “farthest apart” high-velocity state and the “nearest together” low-velocity state revealed the skill differences between expert and intermediate competitors.
Furthermore, the ‘pass’ behavior in football games exhibits network dynamics that are both common characteristics shared with other huge networks and unique. The common feature of two competitive networks involves “hubs” in the pass network. However, one hub switched to another hub over time, which constitutes unique network dynamics, as compared with other large-scale networks, because both error tolerance and self-organizing properties are required in a football game.
Finally, the real-time dynamics of football games possess self-similarity characteristics in the movement of the ball and the team-turf boundary, similar to those found in the physical laws of fractional Brownian motion, regardless of the players’ psychological status or their level of training. The persistence time below which self- similarity holds was found to be several tens of seconds. In summary, we can identify principles that underlie complex behaviors in sporting activities that are shared with physical and natural phenomena based on oscillatory, discrete, network, and fractal dynamics.
This suggests that common principles underlie complex human behavior, just as they do physical and natural phenomena. We plan to explore the nature of complex sporting behaviors, including interpersonal and team competitions, which involve cooperation and competition. This will increase our understanding of complex human behavior.
Exercise and cognition: Advancing understanding through dose-response, moderators, and mechanisms Jennifer L. Etnier, University of North Carolina at Greensboro Researchers have been interested in understanding the effects of physical activity on cognitive performance for decades. Since the end of the 20th century, our understanding has been that both single sessions of exercise (acute exercise) and long-term programs of exercise (chronic exercise) have small-to- moderate benefits for cognitive performance (Etnier et al., 1997).
Given the reliable benefits that have been observed, the challenge for us going into the 21st century is to advance our understanding of mechanisms and moderators of these effects. This is important because by understanding mechanisms and moderators, we can better understand how to consistently obtain small effects, how to elicit larger effects, and for whom the effects are most likely to be beneficial. With current and former students and colleagues, I have conducted a 8Keynotes program of research designed to further our understanding of these nuances of the exercise/cognition relationship.
In one line of inquiry, we have conducted a series of studies using an acute exercise paradigm to explore dose-response relationships between exercise intensity, exercise duration, and cognitive performance. Our research has demonstrated that the nature of the relationship between exercise intensity and cognitive performance is task specific. In particular, a linear relationship is evident for more “simple” tasks while a curvilinear relationship is observed with more complex tasks.
At moderate levels of intensity, we have also demonstrated that 20-min of aerobic exercise results in the largest cognitive benefits. In addition, we have conducted a series of studies focused on how the timing of acute exercise moderates the influence of exercise on short- and long-term memory. Thus far, results suggest that exercise is most effective at benefiting memory when administered prior to exposure to the target material and that the durability of the effects may be intensity-dependent.
In another line of research coming from a cognitive reserves perspective, we have considered how exercise might differentially benefit individuals based upon factors expected to negatively impact cognitive reserves. As examples, we have looked at health conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Our most recent research is focused on exploring the potential benefits of exercise for cognitively normal adults at genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Our findings support the potential benefits of exercise even for those with a familial and genetic risk of AD and suggest that exercise adopted as a lifestyle behavior might be able to delay the onset of AD. With respect to mechanisms, our lab has begun to explore the potential role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and of resting-state connectivity (RSC) as potential mediators of the effects. Our findings support a potential role of RSC as a mechanism, but are less clear with BDNF.
I look forward to reviewing this body of evidence with attendees at the International Society of Sport Psychology World Congress and to entertaining questions and discussion on the topic. Evidence of the cognitive benefits of exercise is provocative particularly given that people are increasingly sedentary; that the population of older adults is on the rise resulting in dramatic increases in the number of persons expected to experience cognitive impairment; and that pressures for cognitive performance in the schools is mounting at the same time that dedicated time for physical activity is at record lows. Friday July 14th Psychological interventions in sport, exercise and other contexts Adrian H.
Taylor, University of Plymouth Policy makers, commissioners of services and end users want to know the optimum dose of physical activity, sport or exercise for improving health and well-being. But it is sometimes difficult to translate research from acute studies to efficacy (with a known controlled intervention) and effectiveness (in which intervention engagement may be less optimum) studies. The talk will begin with a presentation of a framework for understanding evidence from acute and efficacy studies before turning to the challenges in effectiveness studies.
The literature is full of studies in which convenient samples engage well with an intervention (and testing procedures) and provide strong efficacy evidence. Offering interventions to people who are less willing to engage creates special challenges and studies often provide no evidence of effectiveness, relative to a comparison group. The presentation will focus on a series of studies in which we have targeted people with low levels of physical and mental well-being and, with input from the target population, psychology theory and evidence on behaviour change techniques, we have co-produced interventions to hopefully maximize uptake and sustainable engagement in physical activity.
The physical activity and sedentary target behaviours we have sought to change have been identified from acute studies and chronic efficacy studies. 9Keynotes Two studies, TREAD and BAcPAc, have involved the design and evaluation of complex interventions to promote physical activity to people with clinical depression. Three studies, EARS, STRENGTHEN and TARS have involved the design and evaluation of complex interventions to promote physical activity to people from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Finally, one study (e-coachER) is examining whether a bespoke web-based intervention for 450 primary care patients with chronic physical (obesity, diabetes, hypertension and osteoarthritis) and mental health (history of depression) conditions who have been referred to a GP exercise referral scheme (ERS), can increase physical activity after 1 year (assessed by accelerometer) compared with those who are only referred to an ERS. In each case we have tried to balance the facilitation of a sufficient dose of physical activity to have health benefits with the challenge to ensure the intervention facilitates the need for a sense of Competence, Control (autonomy) and Companionship (relatedness), nicknamed the 3 Cs. Drawing on principles of motivational interviewing and self-determination theory, practitioners are trained to reflect after each session on how they have acutely and chronically facilitated improvements in the 3 Cs (eg, though self-monitoring and setting personalized goals to achieve success in change; allowing patient autonomy in deciding where, when and through which mode support sessions are held; and encouraging the seeking and use of support from others).
In all studies we have tried or are trying to assess intervention fidelity, ie, whether or not the practitioners deliver what they have been trained to do, and some examples will be provided. In conclusion, we are seeking to develop and evaluate physical activity (broadly and inclusive of sport and exercise) interventions that could be implemented in health services should they prove to be effective and cost-effective. At every step we work with public and patient representatives to develop the intervention and study methods, and this is helping us to ensure that the findings can be implemented in health services should they prove to be effective.
Periodization of psychological skills in sport Gloria Balague, University of Illinois at Chicago Periodization is considered a key strategy in optimal training and sport performance. The balance of volume and intensity is a major variable in periodization, while the sequence of areas trained (physical conditioning, technical skills, tactical skills) is another. Periodization has not reached sport psychology in any consistent way.
The major stumbling block in the lack of periodized work of psychological skills in sport is the lack of agreement in the field regarding what are the basic sport psychology skills. There is also some confusion between what are skills, tools or outcomes. There are several labels that make it into most everyone’s list, but that consensus approach may just reflect similarity of training.
The second issue, assuming we could agree on the first one, would be to clarify if skills build onto each other, thus requiring some to be taught before others. There is no clear evidence for this issue either, and only some common sense or experiential evidence. Finally, there is the issue of adequately balancing Intensity and Volume.
How many skills should be taught in one phase?, For how long should they be practiced?, what is the difficulty level of the skills? All of these are variables without evidence based answers. If we take a holistic approach to periodization, coordinating psychological skills training with training, recovery and nutrition the picture gets even more obscure.
Nevertheless, the fact that an issue is complicated or confusing is not reason enough to avoid it, on the contrary, we should start working on it and build on what has been learned. This presentation will summarize what we know about it and offer some suggestions for next steps. 10SYMPOSIA 11Symposia Tuesday July 11th Tuesday July 11th Symposia Session 1.
(10.30-12) Enhancing adherence to physical activity through customized training to motivated leaders Chair: Carme Viladrich (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) There is a profusion of intervention programs aimed at helping physical education teachers and physical activity trainers to arrange motivational climates appropriate for participants’ satisfaction, motivation, well- being and adherence. The aim of this symposium is to show the benefits of customizing such programs taking into account the expectations, experience, motivation and needs of both leaders and participants in physical education and leisure physical activities. This aim is accomplished sharing a case of design of an intervention customized to attend three groups at health risk in Spain (adolescents, elderly and sedentary former elite athletes).
Firstly, we present the literature review; secondly, the adaptation of main tools to measure work motivation of physical education teachers and the teachers’ interpersonal style perceived by their pupils; thirdly, the results of the focus groups on motivation, necessary conditions, expectations and objectives of each subpopulation; and lastly, the customization of an intervention to help physical education teachers, physical activity trainers and former elite athletes in their effort to gain adherence to physical activity as a component of a healthy life style. One of the goals of this symposium is dissemination of the research funded from the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad [grant identifier: DEP2014-52481-C3-1R] Keywords: physical activity, motivation, psychological intervention, qualitative methods, psychometric methods Lessons from cutting-edge Self-determination interventions to promote physical activity: A review (2011-2016) Saül Alcaraz, Juan Pons, Jaume Cruz (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) The purpose of the present study is to review recent interventions aimed at promoting physical activity using a self-determination theory (SDT) framework. We present ideas that researchers could find useful to develop their programs.
Our review considers the journal articles published between 2011 and 2016. According to the inclusion criteria, the studies were limited to those: (a) using SDT as reference framework; (b) conducted with healthy participants with age ≥ 12 years old; and (c) with a main goal of promoting physical activity or related variables. Results are presented in three categories: (a) approach and general aspects of the intervention, (b) assessment of the intervention, and (c) development of the intervention.
Regarding the approach, two types of interventions emerged from our data: those conducted within an existing setting, where professionals in charge receive particular training that is expected to indirectly influence their students/patients; and interventions developed from zero, where participants receive training or information directly (e.g., using an app). Results showed that the most common approach to develop interventions is autonomy support and autonomy satisfaction. Concerning the assessment of the intervention, researchers could consider (a) using mixed-methods approach, (b) evaluating objective and self-reported measures and (c) measuring participants’ satisfaction with the intervention.
Regarding the development of the intervention, it appears crucial to understand the needs of the target population (e.g., focus groups) and to develop skill-based tailored interventions that include SDT not only as concepts to teach but also as a way of thinking that guides 12Symposia Tuesday July 11th the development of the intervention. As a conclusion, we present how results could be translated into the development of future intervention programs. Funding for this communication was provided by grant EP2014- 52481- C3-1R (I+D+I Project, Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness).
Keywords: physical activity, autonomy support, psychological basic needs, motivation, exercise, intervention program How Coaches’ Interpersonal Style Questionnaire (CIS-Q) became Physical Education Teachers’ Interpersonal Style Questionnaire (PETIS-Q) Ariadna Angulo-Brunet, Carme Viladrich (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), David Sánchez-Oliva (University of Extremadura) Physical education teachers’ interpersonal style has been widely studied regarding Basic Psychological Needs support (i.e., autonomy, competence and relatedness support). A supportive interpersonal style contributes to enhance motivation and engagement towards physical education class. Contrarily, the contribution of controlling interpersonal style to thwart these basic psychological needs has been less studied.
The CIS-Q incorporates three factors intended to measure thwarting of basic psychological needs (i.e., autonomy, competence and relatedness thwarting). The aim of this study is to adapt into Catalan and Spanish languages and gather validity evidence related to CIS-Q for high school students towards their physical education teachers. Participants were 595 students from 32 different classes.
There were 283 girls and 312 boys between 11 and 18 years old. 375 students answered the questionnaire in Catalan and 219 in Spanish. Confirmatory factor analysis with six factors showed acceptable fit to the data in Catalan (χ2 = 350.33, df = 237, p < .001, CFI = .93 TLI = .92, RMSEA = .04) and all factors exhibited acceptable discriminant validity (maximum correlation of 0.82).
Instead, in Spanish, despite the good fit to the data (χ2 = 273.97, df = 237, p =0.05, CFI = .97 TLI = .97, RMSEA = .03) the six factors model was unacceptable due to the lack of discriminant validity between support factors (values from 0.83 to 0.96). Simplified models obtained collapsing support items into a single factor showed good fit to the data in Spanish and unacceptable fit in Catalan providing additional support to the main conclusion. This study contributes to gather validity evidence for CIS-Q as an appropriate questionnaire to examine physical education teachers’ interpersonal style.
Although supportive and controlling behaviors can be studied in both languages there is lack of evidence for comparability among both factor structures. Keywords: physical education, motivation, adolescents, confirmatory factor analysis, factor invariance Initial validation of the Spanish version of the Work Motivation Inventory David Sánchez-Oliva (University of Extremadura), Ricardo Cuevas (University of Castilla - La Mancha), Francisco M. Leo, Tomás García-Calvo (University of Extremadura) Several studies have demonstrated the importance of the motivation at work to explain and predict performance outcomes (Baard, Deci, & Ryan 2004; Ellemers, de Gilder, & Haslam, 2004; Gagné & Deci, 2005; Vansteenkiste, Simons, Lens, Sheldon, & Deci, 2004).
Based on this premise, the aim of the current study was to adapt and validate the Spanish version of a questionnaire to assess motivation at work. 357 Physical Education teachers (231 males) aged between 25 and 61 years old (M = 41.29) completed an adapted version of the English version (Tremblay, Blanchard, Taylor, Pelletier, & Villeneuve, 2009) of the Work Motivation Inventory (WMI; Blais, Lachance, Vallerand, Briere, & Riddle, 1993). From the original version, we added an items per factor in order to test the factorial validity of a structure composed by 24 items and the 6 types of regulations described by Self-Determination Theory.
A set of measurement models using both Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Exploratory Structural Equation Modelling (ESEM) were evaluated. The results showed that the ESEM models displayed better fit than CFA, as well as well as better discriminant validity in 13Symposia Tuesday July 11th terms of lower factor correlations. In this particular sample, identified regulation was not well captured (i.e., low main-loadings and high cross-loadings), particularly in the first-order solution.
The B-ESEM solution displayed promising findings to analyze the motivation at the work context, although future studies should focus on the psychometric properties of the identified regulation. Keywords: work motivation, teaching, validation, ESEM Focus groups results: a previous step to design motivational physical activity programs Salvador Miró, Andrea Perez-Rivases, Susana Pallarès, Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) Framed in the project "Health promotion and adherence to physical activity (PA) through the Self Determination Theory," the objective of this work is to present the previous evaluation made from focus groups (FG) of each group studied (i.e., adolescents, elderly people and former elite athletes) to design adapted intervention programs. Six FGs were conducted to collect data: three FGs with adolescents, two FGs with elderly people and one FG with former elite athletes.
The guideline of the FG contemplated four themes in relation to PA: (a) motivation; (b) necessary conditions; (c) expectations and objectives; and (d) technologies. Once the thematic content analysis was made, the results focus on the differences and similarities between the different groups studied. In the adolescents group, motivation is given by the fun, effort, improvement and socialization.
The amotivation towards the practice of PA is due to the small variety of activities. The elderly people comments that motivation arises from feeling active, trying new things and health. This group points to boredom and imposition as the main factors of amotivation towards the practice of PA.
In the case of former elite athletes, the motivation towards the practice of PA is given by fun and health, while the amotivational factors are produced by the lack of recognition and the post career injuries. All the results are serving as a guide to design and develop programs for the promotion of regular practice of PA, adapted to the diversity of target population studied. For the adolescents group, the program will be implemented through PA teachers in two sessions.
Sessions aimed at elderly people will be led by specialized monitors in this area during two sessions. In the case of former elite athletes, the program will be guided by former athletes, being monitored for 12 months. Keywords: health, adherence physical activity, adolescents, elderly people, former athletes, qualitative study Improving physical activity levels in specific populations: The ACTIVATICS intervention program Juan Pons, Javier Ciruela, Anna Jordana, Yago Ramis (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) The ACTIVATICS project is aimed at improving PA levels in three vulnerable populations: adolescents, elderly and sedentary former elite athletes.
Based theoretically on self-determination theory (SDT; Ryan & Deci, 2000) and on previous literature of SDT-based programs to enhance autonomy support and intrinsic motivation in PA and in PE classes (e.g., Su & Reeve, 2011) a tailored intervention program was designed for each target population. To complement the theoretical knowledge which provided information about the contents to be included in the program (i.e., providing meaningful rationales, acknowledge negative feelings, use of non-controlling language, offer choices and nurture inner motivational resources), focus groups were carried both with target populations and experts on PA promotion which oriented the best way to approach the intervention with the trainees (i.e., PE teachers, PA monitors and sedentary former elite athletes). This technique gave insight on the perceived motives, barriers and facilitators for the implementation of autonomy- supportive styles of the PE teachers and monitors, as well as perceived motives, barriers and facilitators to become physically active of the final users (i.e., adolescents, elderly and sedentary former elite athletes).
For PE teachers and PA monitors, the ACTIVATICS intervention program, consisted on 3hr personalized and 14Symposia Tuesday July 11th interactive workshops where theoretical SDT-principles were explained, but mainly oriented on providing recommendations to fulfil autonomy-supportive styles. Virtual and face-to-face follow-up activities were programmed to assess the feasibility of the program implementation. In the case of former elite athletes, an individualized mentoring program based on Rational Emotive Behavioral Therapy adapted to sport (Turner, 2016) was carried out.
This responds to experts’ perceptions that, for a former athlete, it is challenging to reframe their relationship with PA once they finish their athletic career. Keywords: improving physical activity levels in specific populations: The ACTIVATICS intervention program Gold in education and elite sport (GEES): 1. The competences of elite pupil- and student-athletes Chair: Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) One of the main challenges talented and elite athletes face is combining education and high-level sport.
In order to assist 15-to-25-year-old athletes preparing for a successful dual career (DC) and to assist DC support providers to optimize the quality of their support, the ‘Gold in Education and Elite Sport’ (GEES) project was initiated in 2015 with the support of the Erasmus+ Sport programme. This 2-year project brought together 40 internationally renowned dual career researchers and expert practitioners from 17 research and elite sport institutions (e.g. universities, NOCs, sport governing bodies, high performance centres) from 9 EU Member States (Belgium, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the UK).
This symposium will disseminate the research results of the GEES project, focusing in this first part on the competences of 4196 elite pupil- and student-athletes perceived to require in order to successfully manage their DC. The first presentation will provide a general outline of the GEES project. A second presentation will focus on athletes’ perceived importance and possession of different DC competences.
In a third and fourth presentation, gender differences and similarities in DC competences in Slovenian and Polish athletes will be discussed. A fifth presentation will cover an Italian perspective on DC competences. The second symposium will present the competences that dual career support providers require in order to optimize their DC support to athletes.
Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, elite level sport, academic career Gold in Education and Elite Sport (GEES): A European perspective on the dual career of talented and elite athletes Paul Wylleman, Koen De Brandt, Simon Defruyt (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Audrey Pérusin, Véronique Leseur, Nadine Debois (Institut National du Sport, de l'Expertise et de la Performance) The aim of the presentation is to provide a general outline of the GEES project, focusing on its overall aims, methodologies and key figures. In order to meet the final aim of GEES to assist 15-to-25-year-old athletes preparing for achieving a successful dual career ‘education and elite sport’ pathway, and to assist dual career support providers (DCSPs) with a view in optimizing the quality of their support and initiating new sustainable services, four studies were conducted. In studies 1 and 2, an online self-assessment tool was developed to identify the competences required by pupil- and student-athletes as well as by DCSPs in order to optimize the dual career ‘education and sport’ pathway.
3247 elite pupil- and student-athletes and 336 DCSPs from 9 EU Member States completed the GEES survey on the perceived importance and possession of their competences, enabling the development of generic, specific (e.g. gender, sport specific), developmental (e.g. athletic/educational stage of development), and scenario-specific competence profiles (e.g.
competences required when an exam coincides with a crucial competitive phase). In study 3 and 4, 42 DCSPs were surveyed via focus groups and face-to-face interviews in order to identify, optimize, develop and evaluate the methods and instruments (e.g. competence profiles) used by DCSPs to maximize their own competences and daily 15Symposia Tuesday July 11th practice with student-athletes.
Bringing together the findings of the four studies, a manual for DCSPs was developed with competence profiles, methods and tools that are likely to contribute to DCSPs’ daily practice with student-athletes in the field of data collection, intervention and evaluation. The results of the GEES project suggest clear contributions to elite pupil- and student-athletes’ successful dual career and provide new prospects for improved dual career support providers’ educational pathways. Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, competences, elite athletes, dual career support provider Gold in Education and Elite Sport: Which competences do athletes require for a successful dual career?
Koen De Brandt, Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Simon Defruyt (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) The aim of this study was to explore student-athletes’ perceptions of the importance, possession and need to develop different dual career (DC) competences. 3247 15-to-25-year-old student-athletes completed the GEES survey (mean age 18.6 ± 2.5 yrs; 46% female; 76% pupils and 24% students) using a 5-point scale with a predefined list of 38 DC competences categorised in 4 DC competence factors: 1) DC management competences (DCM; e.g. efficient use of time), 2) Self-regulation and Resilience competences (SRR; e.g.
using setbacks as a positive stimulus), 3) Social competences (SOC; e.g. asking advice to the right people), and 4) Career Planning competences (CPL; e.g. exploring career plans outside of elite sport) (De Brandt et al., 2016).
Athletes perceived all competence factors as important for a successful DC (range: 4.15-4.39). However, CPL competences were perceived less important than DCM, SRR and SOC (p<.001; Cohen d range: .40-.50). Perceived importance scores (4.34±.42) were higher than perceived possession (3.71±.49) for all competence factors (p<.001; d range: .68-.79), with the largest difference found for SRR (d=.79).
This study revealed that elite athletes require a combination of different competences in order to have a successful DC. Student- athletes perceived the highest need to develop their SRR competences. In order to guarantee a holistic, developmental and situational perspective, future research should identify DC competences in different groups (e.g.
gender, type of sport), stages of development (e.g. secondary and higher education), and specific DC scenarios (e.g. an international competition coinciding with an exam period).
Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, factor analysis, academic career Equilibrium between elite sport and education: Are male and female student-athletes equally competent for dual career? Saša Cecic Erpic (Univerza v Ljubljani), Janja Tekavc (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) The study’s purpose was to explore the importance and possession the athletes perceive in different dual career competences, and to investigate for possible gender differences in this area. A questionnaire Gold in Elite Sport and Education (GEES) presenting a list of 38 dual career competences (attitudes, knowledge, and skills) was administered to 198 Slovenian student athletes (97 males and 101 female) aged between 15 and 25 (M = 18.92 yrs; SD = 3.7 yrs).
The athletes indicated the importance and possession of each competence. Gender differences occurred for the perceived importance and possession of dual competences, with female athletes showing a higher possession of dedication to succeed in both sport and study, time management, and a belief that both careers can positively complement each other. Male athletes perceived a higher possession of assertiveness, self-belief, emotional control, stress management, and ability to negotiate and stand up for one self.
Future dual career support programs should promote a development of a wide range of competences among student athletes in order to foster athletes’ success in both sport and school/studies. In developing these programs, gender specifics of male and female athletes should be considered. 16Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, competences, gender differences, university students The importance of gender and life experience in the type of dual career in elite sports based on the analysis of the European project GEES on the example of Polish Marek Graczyk, Anna Nawrocka, Pawel Atroszko, Waldemar Moska, Tomasz Tomiak, Hubert Krysztofiak (Gdansk University of Physical Education and Sport) The objective of this study is to check whether the gender is important for the development of the dual career in professional sport.
This study was used a Chi-square test of independence measurement model and student’s T test also applied method of analysis 7 scenarios (not experienced and experienced) presented in the audited. An extensive literature review and feedback from athletes sports science provided feedback on the scenarios, providing evidence of content validity. A final survey-list, consisting of the 38 items of competences (possession and importance) and completed by two hundred forty three young people took part in this study: 105 women (43.2%) and 138 men (56.8%) athletes.
Their mean age was M = 18.77 years (SD = 2.74). Four people did not report their age. The youngest person was 15-years old and the oldest person was 25-years old.
There are statistically significant differences between men and women in terms of competences and possession competences important. There were statistically significant difference between females and males in experienced scenario 3, 5 and 6 (e.g. 3,5 scenarios for the attempt to reconcile the demands of education and sports at the same time and the scenario 6: for the lack of support from the coach.).
Where not statistically significant difference between female’s and male’s life experiences. Results in the two stages of the study confirmed the partially raised three hypotheses. It turned out that the gender can affect the course of the dual career in professional athletes.
The results obtained have confirmed the research hypothesis founded. Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, gender, Poland A reflection on the scenarios concerning combination of study and sport and financial matters Donatella Minelli (CONI School of Sport), Flavia Guidotti (University of Foro Italico), Angelo Altiere (CONI School of Sport) This study aims to explore Italian student-athletes’ competences and investigate the perception of sport as a factor for success in education, an entertainment or future job. Elite sport and education calls for increasing individual commitment to achieve goals of excellence.
In fact, in sports for elite performance, athletes are committed to at least ten years and a total of ≥10.000 hours in sports (Ericsson, 2006), spending about 20-30 hours per week in training and competition, with considerable differences in relation to the type of sport (Williams and Hodges, 2005). These conditions determine the population of the atypical nature of the "student-athletes", making their needs unique in relation to the reconciliation of their sport with education. 140 15-to-26-year-old student-athletes completed the GEES survey in Italy.
The subjects showed a significant perception of minor possession compared to importance (p<.001) for all 38 competences. The “willingness to make sacrifices and choices to succeed in sport and study” has the highest importance (4.34±.42) and possession (3.9±1.0). The “vision of where you want to go in life after your dual career” has a low importance (4.1±0.9); the “ability to critically evaluate and modify your goals when needed” has a low possession.
The ability to negotiate (in order to stand up for your own interests) has the lowest importance (3.7±1.2) and possession (3.3±1.0). Concerning the six scenarios, respondents showed significant differences (p<.05) in relation to their experience. Their management of the scenarios has been generally positive (4.07 ± 1.27 to 3.48 ± .89), but pupils seem to have no experience in scenario 4 and the “ability to spend and manage your own money” has low frequency.
The dual career offers no negative impact on study, but does not seem to offer experiences useful to plan life after education pathway. 17Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, Italy, competences Asian sport psychology secrets of the Rio Olympics Chair: Liwei Zhang (Beijing Sport University) Asian countries showed their strong ability to win gold medals in Rio Olympic Games. Sport psychology performs an important role in helping Asian athletes’ preparation for touch competitions in OG.
Four papers in this symposium disclosed the unique way Asian sport psychologists did mental training for athletes in Rio OG. The paper by Liwei Zhang et al. reported a windsurfing athlete’ one-year mental training program and discussed the way to combine skill training (from the western idea of mental training) and spirit nurture (from Chinese culture) in mental training that indicated the feature of Chinese athletes’ mental training.
Yongchul Chung et al. debriefed their 6-month psychological skills training with 2016 Rio Paralympic wheelchair archery team. In addition to common mental training practice such as goal setting, motivation, relaxation, concentration, and performance routine they also used some newly added devices (e.g., interactive metronome and rescalm) in their program.
Georgia Ridle et al. chronicled the sport psychology support provided to Swimming Australia during the 2013-2016 period including onsite support at the Rio Olympics. They introduced a program of culture change based on Lencioni’s (2002) model to overcome absence of trust, fear of conflict, lack of commitment, avoidance of accountability, and inattention to results.
They also addressed the way they helped athletes to cope with unexpected difficulties in Rio OC. Finally, Emily Ortega shared the psychological impact of Joseph Schooling winning the first Olympic gold medal at Rio 2016 in the small country of Singapore and how it has resulted in not just a change in the sport eco-system in Singapore, but also resulted in many significant breakthroughs in psychological barriers for athletes in Singapore. Keywords: mental training, pressure coping, self-control, team culture, Olympics You don’t know when and how mental training will make a difference: A surprise from a windsurfing athlete in Rio OG Liwei Zhang, MeiLing Li (Beijing Sport University) This paper is a case report on one-year mental training of a windsurfing athlete (QO) for Rio Olympic Games.
Based on Zhang & Zhang’s (2011) psychological construction system we made a triple goal for QO’s mental training program: controlling anxiety before competition, keeping positive and stable emotion during long time competition of 12 days and cultivating positive habits in thinking and behavior for long term self- development. Nine forms of intervention were adopted in this program including detailed coping plan, psychological lectures, museum visit, analysis of competition experiences, calligraphy practice, preparation meeting and summary meeting before and during Rio OG, daily self monitoring and monthly mental tests. The effect of this mental training program were evaluated by athletes’ self-evaluation, coach comment and institution assessment.
Some of those evaluations were in accordance of our prediction while others were totally beyond our expectation. In the last part of this paper it was pointed out that the way to combine skill training and spirit nurture in mental training is the feature of Chinese athletes’ mental training. Keywords: mental training, self-control, calligraphy practice, pressure coping, Olympic Games Lessons learned from 2016 Rio Paralympic Games with National Wheelchair Archery Team Yongchul Chung (Sogang University), Seong Taek Hong (Jeonjoo University), Seo Ryung Park (Seoul National University), Kyungju Kim (International Performance Excellence Center), Homook Kim (Korea Paralympic Committee) 18Symposia Tuesday July 11th The purpose of this presentation is to debrief our 6-month psychological skills training with 2016 Rio Paralympic wheelchair archery team.
A total of four mental coaches (2 male and 2 female) has involved with the intervention. Historically, Korean archery team dominated the Olympic stage ever since 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games. During 2016 Rio Olympic Games, the Korean national archery team collected all 4 gold medals.
The national team implemented unique psychological skills training combining cognitive and somatic aspects since 2004 Athens Olympic Games. However, for wheelchair national archery team, this was the first time that mental team was hired exclusively. Additionally, the second author was the one who worked with the national archery team at the Athens Olympic Games.
Seven athletes (4 male and 3 female) participated and the intervention lasted for 6 months prior up to the beginning of Paralympic Games. Specific interventions included goal setting, motivation, relaxation, concentration, and performance routine. Moreover, a couple of newly added devices (e.g., interactive metronome and rescalm) were supplemented.
Furthermore, few unique contexts different from previous Olympic teams were identified and contrasted. This presentation concluded with the Olympic results among the wheelchair archery team and evaluations on the effectiveness of those psychological trainings. Keywords: Paralympic Games, archery, psychological intervention Making a splash in Rio: Psychological support for the Australian Olympic swimming team Georgia Ridler (SportPsychQLD, Australia), Peter Terry (University of Southern Queensland, Australia) The Australian swimming team won 10 medals (3 gold, 4 silver, 3 bronze) at Rio 2016, finishing second in the medal table behind the USA.
Outstanding performances by gold medallists Kyle Chalmers in the 100m freestyle, Mack Horton in the 400m freestyle, and the women’s 4 x 100m freestyle relay squad, were balanced against unexpected performances by pre-race favourites who failed to make the podium. This presentation chronicles the sport psychology support provided to Swimming Australia during the 2013-2016 period including onsite support at the Rio Olympics. Following the challenges faced by the Australian swimming team, both in and out of the pool, at the London 2012 Olympics, where only one gold medal was won, an independent review recommended that Swimming Australia invest in building a culture of pride, respect and success, to replace the “toxic” culture evident in 2012, which was characterised by incidents of bullying and breaching team rules relating to alcohol, prescription drugs and curfews.
A program of culture change based on Lencioni’s (2002) model was implemented throughout the 2013-2016 Olympic cycle to overcome absence of trust, fear of conflict, lack of commitment, avoidance of accountability, and inattention to results (the so-called five dysfunctions of a team). A range of specific initiatives were directed towards coaches, athletes and support staff aimed at enhancing performance, culture and wellbeing, and underpinned by the principles of consultation, connection and communication. The presentation also addresses the specific challenges of life in the Olympic Village and how careful preparation, based on a mantra of “anything can happen at an Olympics,” can ameliorate the impact of infrastructure limitations, such as poor sanitation, non-availability of power, water and food, non-functioning elevators, and inadequate transport and wifi arrangements.
Psychological impact of singapore’s first Olympic gold medal Emily Ortega (SIM University) Sporting history was creating when Singapore won its very first Olympic gold medal at the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. Joseph Schooling created a huge upset in the men’s 100m butterfly event, and he did so in style, setting a new world record in the process. His feat has smashed the glass ceiling of not just sporting aspirations, but also the entire sports eco-system in the tiny island nation of Singapore.
The repurcussions of his historical feat in swimming continue to ripple on till today, and this presentation will focus on the psychological impact of this historical win. Specifically, this feat resulted in many significant breakthroughs in 19Symposia Tuesday July 11th terms of psychological barriers for athletes in Singapore, a nation that once had little belief in elite sports. With some headway made in changing mindsets, this presentation dicusses if Singapore can maintain its momentum and continue to achieve sporting excellence at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics.
Keywords: Olympics, first gold medal, swimming The paradox of the coach-athlete relationship: The cure and the cause of interpersonal issues in sport Chair: Louise Davis (Umea University) “I am exhausted; I just can’t wait to see my coach.” The first words from Ellie Simmonds after winning Paralympic gold in the 400m freestyle provide anecdotal evidence that aligns with a decade of research studying the coach-athlete relationship. Many athletes’ are quick to acknowledge the supportive role of their coach in their development and accomplishments; however, poor quality relationships can also be detrimental to the developmental trajectory, and wellbeing of athletes. Building upon previous research, the aim of this symposium is to exhibit a series of studies that highlight interpersonal factors and outcomes associated with healthy and harmful relationships.
The first presentation takes a person-oriented approach to examine the association between the coach-athlete relationship and burnout in competitive junior athletes. The second presentation uses a quasi-experimental design with a sample of competitive team sport athletes to investigate performance outcomes and psychosocial associations between the quality of the coach-athlete relationship and athletes’ psychophysiological exhaustion. Utilising a cross-sectional research design, the third presentation offers insight into consequences of interpersonal conflict and aims to explore the links between coaches’ and athletes’ conflict responses, performance satisfaction, and efficacy beliefs.
The next presentations shift focus from the negative consequences of the coach-athlete relationship by exploring the “fuel” of good quality relationships. Employing a cross-sectional method the fourth presentation examines communication strategies as potential mediators between relationship quality and athlete satisfaction. The final presentation discusses an intervention aiming to increase young coaches’ effectiveness; specifically, aiming to increase athletes’ performance and satisfaction through the development of both their interpersonal (transformational- relational) and intrapersonal (self-reflection) knowledge.
Keywords: coach-athlete relationship, burnout, communication, conflict, leadership Coach-athlete relationships and burnout: A person-oriented approach Henrik Gustafsson (Karlstad University, Sweden), Louise Davis, Andreas Stenling, Paul Davis (Umea University, Sweden), Sophia Jowett (Loughborough University, UK) The coach-athlete relationship is a central relationship in high performance sport. The quality of this relationship plays an influential role in determining athletes’ wellbeing. Recent research indicates that poor quality relationships can be associated with increased risk of athlete burnout (Isoard-Gautheur et al, 2016).
To gain greater understanding of the links between the component parts underlying the coach-athlete relationships and burnout a person-centered approach may offer new insight. The person-oriented inquiry examines the individual as the unit of analysis and his/her personal characteristics are considered simultaneously in a systemic manner. It is useful when investigating multidimensional constructs such as the coach-athlete relationship and to find profiles or groups with similar attributes.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the coach-athlete relationship in highly competitive junior athletes and the association with burnout using a person-centered approach. In total 352 athletes, (227 males and 124 females) ranging from 15 to 20 years (M = 16.1) completed the exhaustion subscale of Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ; Raedek & 20Symposia Tuesday July 11th Smith, 2001) and the coach-athlete relationship quality (CART-Q; Jowett, & Ntoumanis, 2004). Latent profile analysis (LPA) was used to find homogenous subgroups of athletes with similar coach-athlete relationship profiles but statistically different from other groups (e.g., Marsh, et al, 2009).
In the LPA three different profiles were captured, called low coach-athlete relationship quality, medium-high and high quality coach-athlete relationship quality. Overall we found the low quality group score significantly higher (M =2.41, SE = 0.15) than the high quality (M =1.94, SE = 0.06) and the medium-high quality (M = 2.12, SE = 0.06) groups. The findings suggest that athletes that have poor relationship with their coach also display higher levels of burnout symptoms than peers that report good quality relationships.
Keywords: exhaustion, relationships, person centered Transformational-relational developmental programme for coaches: Quasi-experimental study Ola Krukowska, Sophia Jowett (Loughborough University, UK) Coaches can constitute a source of inspiration and motivation for athletes in the pursuit of their sporting dreams. The transformational leadership (TL) framework has gained interest in the sport psychology field due to its beneficial effect on athletes’ psychological outcomes and performance (e.g. Stenling & Tafvelin, 2013, Bormann & Rowold, 2016).
Also the coach-athlete relationship (CAR) has been shown to contribute to performance enhancement and success (e.g. Jowett & Shanmugam, 2016). Research encompassing both concepts has shown that when TL and CAR are considered together, they better predict the level of athletes’ outcomes (e.g.
Vella, Oades, & Crowe, 2013b). The present study aimed to increase young coaches’ effectiveness, defined as an increase in athletes’ levels of performance and satisfaction, through the development of their interpersonal (transformational-relational) and intrapersonal knowledge. Four young coaches took part in four workshop sessions developing their knowledge and skills on: coaching philosophy, transformational leadership, coach-athlete relationship, and basic needs satisfaction.
Thirty-four athletes in the experimental group and 26 athletes in the control group evaluated their coaches prior to and after psychological workshops. The results of the 2 x 2 fully randomized MANOVA demonstrated that in the post- intervention condition, athletes of the experimental group perceived an increase in the levels of transformational leadership and satisfaction with training, whereas there was no change in the levels of coach- athlete relationship and performance. The findings underline that when applying the TL framework, the transformational leadership dimensions should be differentiated, and when planning intervention programmes aiming to increase CAR quality, the participation of both coaches and athletes should be considered in order to make a significant change.
Keywords: transformational leadership, coach-athlete relationship, coaching effectiveness Efficacy beliefs as mediator in the conflict-performance satisfaction relationship. Svenja Wachsmuth, Sophia Jowett, Chris Harwood (Loughborough University, UK) Previous research suggests that low tripartite efficacy beliefs within coach-athlete dyads may determine sport performance and relationship quality (Jackson et al., 2008). Coaches and athletes may experience higher levels of conflict when they perceive to lack confidence in their own or their respective partner’s competence and skills.
However, research outside sports indicates that efficacy beliefs not only predict interpersonal conflict, but also mediate its effect on conflict outcomes (O’Conner & Arnold, 2001). Therefore, this study aimed at investigating links between coaches’ and athletes’ conflict responses, performance satisfaction and efficacy beliefs. Variables were assessed utilizing the Interpersonal Conflict in Sports Questionnaire, the Individual Performance subscale of the Athlete Satisfaction Questionnaire, and a modified version of the self- /other efficacy scale by Jackson et al.
(2011). It was hypothesized and found that performance satisfaction 21Symposia Tuesday July 11th - - .41; p < .001) conflict responses, whereas problem-oriented conflict responses promoted performance satisfaction < .001). Further, preliminary results show that self- and other-efficacy beliefs fully mediated the relationship between conflict and performance satisfaction (e.g., coaches/self- -.01, p > .05; -efficacy = .64, p < .001; coaches/other- - -efficacy = .34, p < .01).
From these findings it can be concluded that coaches and athletes who are confident in their skills may respond to conflict in a more constructive manner, thus, increasing the likelihood for positive performance outcomes. Moreover, it can be suggested that not only beliefs regarding one’s own competence but also expectations regarding the competence of the other influence conflict responses and outcomes. Keywords: efficacy beliefs, conflict, relationships The “fuel” of good quality coach-athlete relationships Louise Davis (Umea University, Sweden), Sophia Jowett (Loughborough University, UK), Susanne Tafvelin (Umea University, Sweden) Many world class athletes attribute their success and development to high quality relationships with their coach.
Yet relationships can be difficult to manage and poor quality coach-athlete relationships contribute to unfavourable outcomes including dissatisfaction and interpersonal conflict. Jowett & Shanmugam, (2016) have suggested that one way to enhance the effectiveness and maintenance of the coach-athlete relationship is through the use of communication strategies. Therefore, based on the COMPASS model (Rhind & Jowett, 2011), the present study aimed to examine the role of communication strategies (specifically conflict management, motivation and support) as potential mediators between both direct and meta- perceptions of relationship quality (comprising closeness, commitment, and complentarity) and experiences of sport satisfaction (including satisfaction with training and instruction, individual performance, and personal treatment).
Male and female athletes (N =182) representing individual and team sports completed a multisection questionnaire measuring the main variables under investigation. Structural equation modelling revealed positive relationships between perceived relationship quality and sport satisfaction. Analysis of indirect effects revealed that motivation and support communication strategies mediated the associations between direct and meta-relationship quality and satisfaction with individual performance.
The use of support strategies was the only communication strategy to mediate the relationship between direct and meta- perceptions of relationship quality and satisfaction with personal treatment as well as training and instruction. Contrary to expected results, the analysis did not reveal any significant mediation for conflict management strategies. Overall, the findings provide preliminary evidence for the use of communication strategies as a tool and/or framework for supporting high quality coach-athlete relationships.
Keywords: coach-athlete relationship, communication, sport satisfaction The psychosocial impact of coach-athlete relationship quality on athletes’ psychophysiological exhaustion: implications for physical and cognitive performance Ralph Appleby (Northumbria University, UK), Louise Davis, Paul Davis (Umea University, Sweden), Mark Wetherell (Northumbria University, UK), Henrik Gustafsson (Karlstad University, Sweden), Will Vickery (Northumbria University) The study aimed to examine performance outcomes and psychosocial associations between the quality psychophysiological exhaustion in team sports. In particular, the mediating role of perceptions of teammates’ exhaustion between the quality of the coach-athlete relationship and athletes’ psychophysiological exhaustion was investigated. of the coach-athlete relationship and athletes’ Additionally, the relationship between the quality of the coach-athlete relationship and cognitive and physical aspects of sports performance was 22Symposia Tuesday July 11th examined.
Adopting a quasi-experimental research design a sample of competitive male and female athletes (N= 88) representing seven teams across four different sports, participated in the study. Participants completed questionnaires measuring exhaustion, perceptions of teammates’ exhaustion and coach-athlete relationship quality. Participants completed a 5-m multiple shuttle test and undertook a Stroop test (Bajaj et al., 2015) as measures of physical and cognitive performance; additionally, they provided saliva samples measuring cortisol (pre-performance testing, immediately following testing, and 20 minutes post-testing).
Structural equation modelling revealed a positive relationship between the quality of coach-athlete relationship and Stroop performance; negative relationships between coach-athlete relationship quality and cortisol responses to high- intensity exercise, exhaustion, and perceptions of teammates’ exhaustion emerged. Furthermore, the results suggest that perceived teammate exhaustion mediated the relationship between coach-athlete relationship quality and athlete exhaustion. The findings of the study lend support to previous research on socio-cognitive correlates of athlete exhaustion by highlighting associations with the quality of the coach-athlete relationship.
Additionally, the study increases understanding of the mediating role of perceptions of teammate exhaustion and links with cognitive and physical performance. Keywords: coach-athlete relationship, performance, exhaustion Achievement motivation in sports context Chair: Ihsan Sari (Sakarya University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Sakarya, Turkey) Achievement motivation is an important area of motivational research to understand how the achievement related beliefs, values, and goals develop and differ (Wigfield et al., 2015). Studies have shown that achievement motivation is linked to many sport related factors such as intrinsic motivation, subjective vitality, performance and task engagement etc.
(Adie & Jowett, 2010; Reinboth & Duda, 2016). There are many perspectives to examine achievement motivation however achievement goal and expectancy-value theories are both dominant in the relevant literature (Plante, O'Keefe & Theoret, 2013). Therefore, this symposium brings together four studies which employ these two perspectives.
The first study investigates the relationship between perceived motivational climates and goal orientations in adolescent athletes and concludes that parents’, coaches’ and peers’ group behaviours and messages influence athletes’ goal orientations. The second study investigates the correlates of athletes’ moral disengagement and highlights the role of perceived motivational climate and athletes’ valued goals for moral disengagement. The third research is based on Eccles’ Expectancy-Value Model within a gender stereotypes perspective and examines women soccer players’ experiences with a qualitative method.
This research reveals that structure of women soccer players’ environment has some impossibilities, problems, difficulties and deprivations which have influence on women’s expectancy of success, perceived competence, task values, and future plans. The last study investigates the role of physical self-perceptions and mental toughness to predict athletes’ goal orientations and reveals that goal orientation is related to athletes’ self-perceptions and mental toughness. Taken together, the four presentations will focus on the different aspects of achievement motivation and discuss the results in line with the relevant research.
Keywords: achievement motivation, athletes, achievement goals, expectancy-value model The role of perceived parent, coach and peer motivational climates in determining goal orientations in adolescent athletes Atahan Altintas (Baskent University, Sport Sciences Department, Ankara, Turkey), Yesim Karaç (General Directorate of Sports, Department of Sports Services, Ankara, Turkey) 23Symposia Tuesday July 11th The aim of this study was to investigate goal orientation with regard to perceived parent, coach and peer created motivational climates in adolescent athletes. Sixty seven females (Mage=15.91±0.83), 194 males (Mage=16.76±0.97) totally 261 young athletes (Mage=16.54±1.01) voluntarily participated in this study. Parents Initiated Motivational Climate Questionnaire, Peer Motivational Climate in Youth Sport Questionnaire, Perceived Motivational Climate in Sport Questionnaire and The Perception of Success (Child Version) were used to participants.
Stepwise Multiple Regression Analysis was used to assess the relationship between perceived motivational climates and goal orientation in young athletes. Analysis results indicated that the Success without Effort and Learning and Enjoyment Climate were significant predictors of the task orientation on perceived mother climates (R=0.34, R2=0.11; R=0.38, R2=0.15). Mastery climate was significant predictor of both task (R=0.29, R2=0.08) and ego orientation (R=0.17, R2=0.03) on perceived coach climate.
Intra-team competition/ability and Intra-team conflict were significant predictors of the task orientation (R=0.34, R2=0.12) on perceived peer climates. On the other hand, Learning and Enjoyment Climate was significant predictor of the ego orientation for father (R=0.17, R2=0.03). Finally, Intra-team competition/ability, Intra-team conflict and effort were significant predictors of the ego orientation (R=0.34, R2=0.12) on perceived peer climates.
In conclusion, parent’s, coaches and peer group behaviors and messages influence goal orientations of young athletes. Keywords: Parent, Coach, Peer, Motivational Climate, Goal Orientation The relationship of athletes’ moral disengagement to perceived motivational climate and valued goals Ihsan Sari (Sakarya University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Sakarya, Turkey), Gamze Deryahanoglu (Hitit University, School of Physical Education and Sport, Çorum, Turkey) Recent studies have investigated moral disengagement of athletes with regard to many variables (e.g. Jones et al., 2016; Hodge & Gucciardi, 2015; Traclet et al., 2014).
It is also suggested that more research is needed in this topic in different cultures to comprehensively understand the processes of moral disengagement in different environments (Gürpınar, 2015). Therefore, the first aim of this research was to investigate the relationship between athletes’ moral disengagement and their perception of motivational climate. The second aim was to reveal whether athletes’ moral disengagement differ according to their most valued goals in sport (winning, personal development and having fun).
For this purpose three hundred and thirty-five athletes voluntarily completed Perceived Motivational Climate in Sport Questionnaire and Moral Disengagement in Sport Scale (Short). The data was analysed by SPSS version 17 using descriptive statistics, Pearson’s correlation analysis, multiple regression analysis with enter method and one-way ANOVA. Correlation analysis showed that moral disengagement was significantly correlated with athletes’ perception of mastery (r=-.11) and performance climates (r=.37).
Multiple regression analysis revealed that performance climate (β= .223, p < .001) was a significant predictor of moral disengagement, R2=.06, F (2,332) = 10.875, p < .001. Lastly, it was found that there was a significant difference in moral disengagement of athletes with regard to their valued goals, F (2,332) = 7.200, p < .001. Athletes who indicated winning as their most valued goal had significantly higher moral disengagement scores compared to the athletes whose most valued goals were personal development and having fun.
To summarize, while ego and mastery climates significantly correlated with moral disengagement, only performance climate contributed to it. Also, it was found that athletes’ moral disengagement significantly differed according to their valued goals. Keywords: moral disengagement, mastery, performance, goal 24Symposia Tuesday July 11th A qualitative view on women’s soccer experiences within the frame of Eccles' Expectancy- Value Model Safter Elmas, F.
Hülya Asçi (Marmara University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey) The aim of this study was to investigate the women soccer players’ experiences in soccer which has been accepted as male-dominated sport in society. For that purpose, our study was theoretically based on Eccles’ Expectancy-Value Model within a gender stereotypes perspective. The study was carried out in Turkish Women’s Football League in different league levels and women’s soccer experiences were analyzed in accordance with distinctive structure of soccer.
The research group of this study consisted of 6 women who have been playing soccer in three different league level (the three of them in Women's 1. League; the two of them in Women's 2. League; the one of them Women's 3.
League) in Istanbul in Turkey. Data were collected by qualitative research method of in-depth interviews. The content analysis revealed four themes which are: (1) stereotype barriers to expectancy of success: difficulties of structure of soccer based on gender (2) subjective task values: positive attainment and intrinsic feelings (3) instrumental value of soccer: long-term future plans (4) loss of education, time and effort/labor.
Based on these findings, structure of women soccer players’ environment has some impossibilities, problems, difficulties, and deprivations which have influence on women’s expectancy of success, perceived competence, task values, and future plans. Keywords: expectancy-value model, women, stereotype, soccer, gender The role of physical self-perceptions and mental toughness in determining goal orientation of volleyball players Gözde Ersöz, Ilker Özmutlu, Basak Eroglu, Kaan Eroglu (Namik Kemal University, School of Physical Education and Sport, Tekirdag, Turkey) The purpose of the present study was to examine the role of physical self-perceptions and mental toughness in the prediction of goal orientations of volleyball players. 211 athletes (nmale=134; Mage=20.88±2.46 and nfemale=79; Mage = 20.03±1.81) participated in this study.
Physical Self-Description Questionnaire (PSDQ), Task and Ego Orientation in Sport (TEOS) and Sport Mental Toughness Questionnaire (SMTQ) were used as the measure of physical self-perceptions, goal orientation levels and mental toughness, respectively. Independent samples t tests was conducted to test differences in goal orientations, physical self- perceptions and mental toughness with regard to gender. Stepwise Multiple Regression analysis procedure was used to determine whether physical self-perceptions and mental toughness might predict goal orientation of participants.
Gender differences were observed in task orientation, commitment subscale of mental toughness and self-esteem subscale of physical self-perception of participants. Results of Stepwise Regression Analyses indicated that control subscale of mental toughness (β= .16, p<0.01) and global physical self-concept (β= .10, p<0.01) were significant predictor of task orientation in volleyball players. In addition, scores on control subscale of mental toughness (β= .23, p<0.01), global physical self-concept (β= .18, p<0.05) and sport competence (β= .25, p<0.01) were positive associated with ego orientations.
In the light of these findings, it is concluded that volleyball players who could control themselves under pressure and satisfied with their physical appearance in a both task and ego oriented; moreover athletes who consider themselves successful in their profession do sports in an ego oriented way. Keywords: task and ego orientation, mental toughness, physical self-perception 25Symposia Tuesday July 11th The ‘Clean Sport Alliance’: Shaping anti-doping policy and practice through performance-enhancement conceptualization, value-system management, legitimacy perception and self-regulation Chair: Andrea Petróczi (Kingston University London) The symposium showcases doping research by the founding members of the Clean Sport Alliance, which is built on the cumulated strength and complementary portfolios of doping researchers in the UK. The goal of this initiative is to bring contemporary thinkers together to foster high quality doping research and evidence- informed doping prevention.
The Clean Sport Alliance recognises and works with the complexity of the doping problem and prioritises collaboration and co-ordination in moving anti-doping policy and practice forward. Collectively, the work presented in this symposium investigates doping and anti-doping from multiple angles. Using mixed methodology, Backhouse et al.
explore the broad range of enhancement strategies used by schoolboy rugby players. The survey study by Lazuras et al. highlights the importance of reasons in understanding doping behaviour.
Using survey methodology, Boardley et al. examine the explanatory pathways through which moral disengagement in doping use might operate in four different physical-activity contexts (team and individual sport athletes, exercisers and ‘hard-core’ gym users). The emerging themes in the qualitative investigation of anti-doping legitimacy by Petroczi et al.
show signs of the classic ingroup/outgroup biases; and that the overwhelming sense of responsibility at the individual level is coupled with a uniform agreement of leaving the fight for clean sport to the authorities, despite the considerable distrust in top level anti-doping organisations. The case study by Brueckner et al. opens new avenues for doping prevention by juxtaposing the thoughts of elite and adolescent athletes, exercisers and a circus artist about performance- enhancement.
The practical significance and impact of the work presented in this symposium are evidenced by the support from major stakeholders such as the World Anti-Doping Agency, the International Olympic Committee, Rugby Football Union and the European Union ERASMUS+ Programme. Keywords: anti-doping, legitimacy, performance mindset, moral disengagement, self-regulation, behavioural reasoning theory Adolescent athletes nutritional supplement use behaviours and doping vulnerability Susan H. Backhouse (Leeds Beckett University) The essence of sport encourages athletes at all levels to optimise their performance through science, medicine and technology.
Presently, little is known about the enhancement strategies used by adolescents. This research sought to examine the knowledge, beliefs and behaviours of adolescent males in relation to nutritional supplements and banned substances. A two-phased multi-methods study design was employed to secure an understanding of the individual, situational and environmental factors that might combine to influence enhancement practices within our sample.
In Phase 1, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 25 adolescent males and five teachers from four English schools. Phase 2, involved an online survey (n = 771 adolescent males, 16-18 years; n= 135 teachers) comprising nine sections, covering nutritional supplement and banned substance use through to physical appearance, doping willingness and social norms. Non- parametric tests were used (Mann Whitney U, Kruskal-Wallis 2) to examine the data and odds ratios computed to analyse supplement use across groups.
The multi-method approach highlighted that supplement use was commonplace, largely accepted, and “normative”. Schoolboy rugby union appears to be a fertile ground where young players can easily progress from habitual use of legitimate approaches into prohibited substance use. The perception – and reinforcement - that size matters is central here.
Nutritional supplement use goes hand- in-glove with regular gym attendance. Interviews identified ‘the gym’ as a doping risk environment where substance use is embedded within that social and cultural system. Based on our behavioural analysis, education, environmental restructuring and skill-based training intervention functions are needed in the school 26Symposia Tuesday July 11th setting.
In this context, the focus should be on creating a learning culture, rather than a compliance culture driven by legalistic or procedural processes. Keywords: doping, enhancement, vulnerability, adolescence, supplements, behaviour change Empathic and self-regulatory processes governing doping behavior: Testing a hypothetical process model across four key physical-activity contexts Ian Boardley (University of Birmingham), Alan Smith (Michigan State University), John Mills (University of Chichester), Jonathan Grix, Ceri Wynne (University of Birmingham), Luke Wilkins (Newcastle University) Evidence associating doping with Moral Disengagement (MD) has recently accumulated. However, research examining such links has either been qualitative, conducted with convenience samples or has not considered key theoretically-grounded influences and outcomes of MD.
Thus, there is a need for research in relevant populations that purposefully examines the explanatory pathways through which MD is thought to operate. To achieve this, the current study examined a model of doping behavior incorporating empathy, doping Self-Regulatory Efficacy (SRE), doping MD, anticipated guilt and doping (self-reported/susceptibility). Participants were specifically recruited to represent four physical-activity contexts and consisted of team- (n = 195) and individual- (n = 169) sport and hardcore- (n = 125) and corporate- (n = 121) gym athletes representing both genders (nm = 371; nf = 239); Mean age was 26.3 years (SD = 10.8) and self-reported lifetime prevalence of doping was 13.6%.
Each participant completed questionnaires assessing the aforementioned variables. Structural equation modelling indicated strong support for the hypothesized model (χ2 (244) = 407.35, p < .05; CFI = .970; RMSEA = .033; SRMR = .044), and established: (a) empathy (βtotal = –.13) and doping SRE (βtotal = – .16) negatively predicted reported doping; (b) the predictive effects of empathy and doping SRE on reported doping were fully mediated by doping MD and anticipated guilt; (c) doping MD positively predicted reported doping (βtotal = .36); (d) the predictive effects of doping MD on reported doping were partially mediated by anticipated guilt (βindirect = .16). Substituting reported doping for doping susceptibility, multisample analyses then demonstrated these predictive effects were largely invariant between males and females and across the four physical-activity contexts.
These findings aid our understanding of psychosocial processes that may govern doping behavior across key physical-activity contexts. Keywords: moral disengagement, performance enhancing drugs, self-regulatory efficacy, anticipated guilt, empathy Conceptualising the essential ingredients of anti-doping legitimacy perceptions through elite athletes' views in the UK Andrea Petróczi (Kingston University London), Sebastian Brueckner (Kingston University London / Olympic Training Centre Rheinland-Pfalz/Saarland), Lambros Lazuras (Sheffield Hallam University) In recent years, the legitimacy of anti-doping has received increased attention (e.g., Efverström et al, 2016; Overbye, 2016). Anti-doping legitimacy is based on the desire to preserve the integrity and spirit of sport to which doping is seen as being fundamentally contrary.
Challenges to legitimacy research and applications to anti-doping revolve around conceptualising (and ultimately quantifying) anti-doping legitimacy perceptions. The present study is part of the LEGIT project which features athletes in co-researcher roles and aims to explore how clean athletes support anti-doping. The UK study involved focus-group interviews with active (n=14) or retired (n=4) national/international level athletes (12 female; age range = 20 – 41 years; median = 23) representing athletics, canoeing, ice hockey, rowing, swimming volleyball and weightlifting.
All athletes are/were part of the National Registered Testing Pool and have been tested at least once. Anti-doping legitimacy perceptions confirmed to Tyler's (2006) conceptualisation of legitimacy, and separated along the lines of whether anti-doping policies are doing what is right (proper) and whether they are doing it in a right 27Symposia Tuesday July 11th way (just and effective). Additional facets emerged as trust and trustworthiness of the organisations that are responsible for keeping the sport clean.
Yet, the overwhelming sense of responsibility at the individual level was coupled with a uniform agreement of leaving the fight for clean sport to the authorities for a myriad of reasons. These included the sense of being 'outside the athlete's duty', lack of proper knowledge and deliberate self-protective distancing from the doping question in order to preserve focus and motivation for training - the latter deepened by the recent system-wide doping scandals. The results from this study feed into the development of a bespoke multi-construct anti-doping legitimacy inventory to assist targeted research and the evaluation of anti-doping campaigns.
Keywords: anti-doping legitimacy, trust, trustworthiness, coping strategy, responsibility “I don’t train to win!” – A case study of a circus performer’s identity and mindset Sebastian Brueckner (Kingston University London, Saarbruecken Olympic Training Center), Andrea Petróczi (Kingston University London) Circus performance, like performance in domains such as dance, music or the military, is being discussed as a novel area of application in sport psychology literature (Donohue et al., 2016; Galante, 2016). A common factor that competitive athletes and circus performers share is the highly specialized and intense training. Also, overcoming fatigue, getting rest and recovery (from injuries) are shared challenges.
In competitive sports, the aforementioned scenarios combined with the pressure to win, improve performance, deliver results, make it to the big meets, not lose a spot on the team etc. can push athletes to start using legal or illegal performance- enhancing drugs (Woolf & Mazanov, 2017; Pappa & Kennedy, 2012). Based on these findings, the term performance-enhancement mindset (Petróczi et al., 2017) has been coined in relation to athletes’ conceptualization of performance-enhancing drug use.
While the training load and associated physical demands for circus performers are similar to that of competitive athletes, the psychological processes appear to be different. Circus performers do not seem to construct a performance-enhancement mindset like athletes do. The case study from the Safe You project (www.safeyou.eu) highlights the major differences in how a circus performer conceptualizes her training and demands of performing, compared to elite athletes.
As the participant elaborated, circus is competitive in terms of jobs and contracts. However, “you don’t have to be the best of best... it’s whatever you can do, how you can do it, who do you work with” and “being the best you can be” including being good at various circus disciplines rather than specializing on one.
Contrary to competitive sport, "performance drugs are not really common, or even talked about within circus". This striking difference in performance-enhancing practices could result from differing 'performance mindsets' and identities, which subsequently has implications for anti-doping. Keywords: circus, anti-doping, mindset, performance-enhancement, doping Lessons learnt as practitioners in sport and exercise psychology: A case study approach Chair: Stewart Cotterill (University of Winchester) While there has been a significant expansion of continued professional development opportunities in recent years, there has often historically been a reluctance for sport and exercise psychologists to both share, and receive feedback on their professional practice (Cotterill, Weston, & Breslin, 2016).
The new Case Studies in Sport and Exercise Psychology journal (CSSEP), a flagship journal of the Association for Applied Sport Psychology, supports an increasing appetite for this type of dissemination and learning. Building upon these recent developments, this symposium will explore four specific case studies, providing a structured approach to the contextualisation, evaluation, reflection, and discussion of key themes emerging from contemporary 28Symposia Tuesday July 11th applied practice. While there are differing views regarding the specific nature of the case study approach in the social sciences literature, there are specific points that appear to be consistent: (a) the case study comprises a ‘case’ that is the object of study or evaluation; (b) the case is a complex functioning unit; (c) investigation of the case takes place in the case’s natural environment; and (d) the themes emerging from the case are contemporary (Cotterill et al., 2016).
The meta-cognitive approach used in this symposium to communicate the case studies is designed to demonstrate an ability to critically reflect on one's professional practice and stimulate on-going learning and development while working as a practitioner in the field. The 4 presentations in the symposium will delve into the experiences and reflections of an international team of practitioners, showcasing diverse case studies addressing contemporary themes such as involuntary career transitions in ballet; sexism, racism and work-life balance in soccer; and anxiety fear, and withdrawal in elite gymnasts. The final session will consider how to conceptualise case studies and writing for publication in CSSEP.
Keywords: applied practice, reflection, professional development, case study From bouquets to resumes: A Boston ballet dancer’s retirement Sharon Chirban (Harvard Medical School/Boston Children's Hospital; Amplifying Performance Consulting, USA.) This case documents the beginning of a Boston Ballet Company dancer’s transition after dancing with the corps (the group of dancers who are not soloists) for ten years through her complete termination. Her transition began post Achilles tendon surgery, due to a Haglund’s deformity. She danced through her rehabilitation of her ankle for two years post-surgery, modifying role selection, intensity of her seasons and number of performances to manage the chronic pain that ensued post-surgery.
Her transition is considered somewhat involuntary as it was initiated by external factors (chronic pain due to pre- and post surgery of foot) and eventually led to voluntary retirement. Middleton (2016) explores the career transition process of performing artists and has identified three types of transition: transitioning from training to professional work; transitioning due to voluntary or involuntary factors and transitioning due to retirement. This case will be discussed within the context of the existing literature.
Stambulova (2010) has identified a counselling framework for helping athletes with their career transition. Her framework includes mapping out the dancer’s past experiences and integrating it with the present and perceived future. This case will demonstrate some of the stages identified by Stambulova and also how this dancer uniquely staged her own transition to a new vocation.
A fully integrated self, marked by a fully transitioned identity is a bit of a moving target. This case will also be discussed within the context of self-integration from a psychodynamic standpoint. In order to fully integrate the post-dance transition, the dancer is required to make meaning of both autonomous and relational aspects of her self that can be facilitate in the context of a consulting relationship sensitive to those aspects of self-evolution.
On the edge of chaos: Breakups, sexism, performance and the person Richard Keegan (University of Canberra, Australia.) This case story tells the story of one year of work with a female rugby official, as she attempted to enter the elite ranks of officiating men’s international rugby. During our time together, the client experienced many challenges, including the breakup of a long-term relationship, institutional sexism (working in a “men’s game”), episodes of racism, and significant challenges to work-life balance. This series of events rendered much of the initial intake and needs analysis redundant, although important trust had been accrued by generating early impacts on performance.
Based on the philosophical assumptions of client-led practice and fallibilism (cf. Keegan, 2016), we agreed to adopt an approach informed by schema therapy, self-knowledge and mindfulness. Over time, the client identified: (a) her own core values, and her own definition of flourishing; as well as (b) the 29Symposia Tuesday July 11th unquestioned habits, beliefs and assumptions that may be preventing her from realising the experiences and achievements she sought.
By the end of the year, the client was in a new relationship, was still under enormous work pressure, was performing well on the field and had passed all the relevant tests to be selected for elite officiating duties. By introducing ‘intentionality’ to the client’s thinking and life, we created the condition for optimism, and moved from experiences of failure and victimisation towards resilience and empowerment. Reflections focus on the importance of sharing key decisions, managing transference and counter-transference, and the issues raised when working on the ‘edge of chaos’ in a complex world.
Prioritising mental health over performance: An elite gymnast’s 6-month journey with a mental performance consultant to maintain her participation in sport Natalie Durand-Bush, Sofia Baggio (University of Ottawa, Canada.) While psychological skills training to improve performance remains a large component of our work as mental performance consultants (MPC), there is an increasing need to counsel athletes to prioritise their well- being over athletic performance in certain situations to maintain their mental health and sport participation. Using Keyes' (2002) mental health and Zimmerman's (2000) self-regulation frameworks, this case study illustrates my work as a MPC with a gymnast, Sofia, to address her distress resulting from her dissatisfaction with her new training centre and relationship with her coach. Sofia initially discussed her anxiety, lack of enjoyment and motivation to train, fear to compete, and her thoughts of quitting gymnastics.
In consultation with myself and her parents, Sofia chose to prioritise her deteriorating mental health and took a break from training to focus on self-care and reflect on the benefits and drawbacks of continuing to work with her coach at her current centre. After this period, she decided to gradually get back to training and competing with a renewed sense of self. She transferred back to her previous training centre to work with her preferred coach who understood her well and adapted his coaching to meet her needs.
She progressively re-integrated training sessions into her schedule and opted to compete at national events after having initially planned to not compete at all during the season. During this 6-month journey, Sofia and I explored her evolving needs, beliefs, and motives to pursue gymnastics. We also strengthened her self-regulation skills (Zimmerman, 2000), emphasising effective planning and self-efficacy.
This case study showcases how an autonomy-supportive climate and a strong relationship between Sofia, myself, her parents, and her preferred coach increased her well-being (Keyes, 2002). This, in turn, prevented her from abandoning the sport she loves and enabled her to immerse herself in a competitive environment she once feared. Writing case studies for publication and professional development Stewart Cotterill (University of Winchester / Think Performance, UK.) The development of effective communities of practice has been highlighted to be an important aspect of continued professional development across a broad range of professions.
One way in which these communities can engage in the sharing of experience and discourse about approaches and outcomes is through the development of applied practice case studies (Cotterill, Schinke, & Thelwell, 2016). While there are differing views regarding the specific nature of the case study approach in the social science literature there are a number of specific points that appear to be consistent. Specifically, that the case study should have a ‘case’ that is the object of study or evaluation; that the case is a complex functioning unit; investigation of the case should take place in the case’s natural environment; and should be contemporary (Yin, 2003; Stake, 1998; Miles & Huberman, 1994).
While this is true there has been limited consideration within the sport and exercise psychology literature about what constitutes an appropriate case study. Indeed, from a research perspective there are many examples of the case study approach being applied, but from an applied practice perspective this is far more limited. This session will explore the nature of applied practice case studies in the sport and 30Symposia Tuesday July 11th exercise psychology domain.
Specifically exploring the types of case studies that can be produced and the different avenues for the dissemination of this information. The premises, evidence, and application of the Trans-Contextual Model in multiple physical activity and health contexts Chair: Derwin King Chung Chan (University of Hong Kong) Education plays an essential role on individuals’ health behaviours, including physical activity. It is therefore important that students not only perform physical activity during physical education (PE) lessons, but they also apply what they learn in-school and undertake leisure-time physical activity in out-of-school contexts.
Researchers and educators seek to understand how PE teachers may promote students’ development of adaptive motivation of PE in-school and facilitate the transfer into motivation of leisure-time physical activity in out-of-school context. In response to this line of inquiries, the trans-contextual model integrates concepts from the self-determination theory, theory of planned behaviour, and the hierarchical model of motivation, and provides a comprehensive framework to explain the process by which PE teachers’ autonomy support affects students’ autonomous motivation of PE in-school, as well as autonomous motivation, intention, and behavioural adherence to undertake leisure-time physical activity in out-of-school context. Now it has been over a decade of research since its initial test, the trans-contextual model has receiving increasing amount of support and attention from multiple countries and health contexts.
This symposium will present the tenets and premises of the model, together with the cutting edge research that applies that model into physical activity promotion and other health behaviours (e.g., sport injury prevention, healthy diet). A systematic review and meta-analysis will conclude the overall effect, limitations, and future directions of the trans-contextual model. Keywords: self-determination theory, theory of planned behaviour, health education, exercise psychology The trans-contextual model Martin S.
Hagger, Nikos Chatzisarantis (Curtin University) The trans-contextual model is a multi-theory motivational framework that outlines the processes by which perceived autonomy support and autonomous motivation toward activities in a physical education context predict autonomous motivation toward physical activity outside of school, and social cognitive beliefs about, intentions toward, and actual engagement in, out-of-school physical activity. The theory integrates hypotheses from self-determination theory, the reasoned action framework, and the hierarchical model of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. In this contribution, I will outline the fundamental propositions of the model and their theoretical bases.
I will also identify some the outstanding conceptual issues and provide suggestions on how they have been addressed including the generalizability of the model across multiple educational and behavioural domains, criteria for its rejection or failed replication, the role of belief-based antecedents of intentions, and the causal ordering of its constructs. I will outline the current evidence supporting the model and extend this in a meta-analytic synthesis and accompanying path analysis of previous tests of the model. The path analytic meta-analysis supports model hypotheses but also identified substantial heterogeneity in the hypothesized relationships across studies unattributed to sampling and measurement error.
Based on current theory and findings from our meta-analysis, I will outline priorities for future research adopting the model. In particular, I will outline the need for further replications of the model in physical education and settings and tests of the model hypotheses using intervention and experimental methods. I also outline the role of the theory in informing interventions to promote leisure-time physical activity outside of school.
Keywords: motivational transfer, self-determination theory, theoretical integration, autonomous motivation, theory of planned behavior, meta-analysis 31Symposia Tuesday July 11th Application of the trans-contextual model in fruit intake of Chinese college students Chunqing Zhang (Hong Kong Baptist University) The integrated Trans-Contextual Model (TCM) is a social psychological framework that integrates the motivational variables from self-determination theory and social cognitive variables from the theory of planned behavior. The model has been applied to explain behaviors in physical education, physical activity, and many other health contexts. The current study preliminarily applied this model to explain fruit intake behaviors.
In total, a sample of Chinese adolescent students (438 females, 212 males; Mage = 20.05, SD = 1.00) completed all three waves of tests. Participants were asked to complete measures of perceived autonomy support, self- determined motivation, theory of planned behavior variables, and fruit intake behaviors. Path analysis was conducted using Mplus 7 and it was found that college students’ fruit intake at Time 3 was only predicted by their fruit intake behaviors at Time 2.
And, their fruit intake behaviors at Time 2 was predicted by perceived behavioral control but not intention and other socio-social behaviors. Intention was predicted by perceived behavioral control, attitude, and subjective norms, which were predicted by autonomous motivation. Moreover, autonomous motivation was only predicted by perceived parental support and teacher support rather than perceived peers support.
Intention-behavior gap was confirmed and further studies are needed. In conclusion, the TCM might be a useful framework to explain the motivational mechanism underlying how students develop motivation, beliefs, and intention of having healthy diet. Keywords: motivational transfer, self-determination theory, theoretical integration, autonomous motivation, theory of planned behavior, fruit intake The role of school physical education in promoting healthy behaviors outside schools Vassilis Barkoukis, Xristodoulos Maltezos (Aristotle University of Thessaloniki) The purpose of the present study was to investigate the effect of perceptions of teacher-initiated autonomy supportive climate in school physical education on intentions towards adopting of healthy eating habits in adolescent students, and the mediating role of motivational regulations.
The sample of the study consisted of 301 high school students attending typical coeducational schools in Thessaloniki, Greece. Students completed a survey including measures of perceptions of autonomy supportive climate, physical education motivational regulations, intentions, attitudes, perceived behavioral control and subjective norm, as well as measures of intentions for leisure-time physical activity, motivational regulations and intentions towards adopting healthy eating habits. The results of the regression analyses revealed a significant effect of autonomy supportive climate on intentions towards adopting healthy eating habits in one and five years.
In addition, physical education intrinsic motivation significantly predicted intentions towards adopting healthy eating in one but not in five years. Furthermore, autonomous motivation towards adopting healthy eating significantly contributed to the prediction of intentions towards adopting healthy eating in one and five years, whereas the effect of intentions towards leisure-time physical activity was not significant. Finally, motivational regulations in physical education and towards adopting healthy eating habits mediated the effect of autonomy supportive climate on intentions towards adopting healthy eating in one and five years.
These findings support the basic tenets of the Trans-Contextual Model of Motivation and provide valuable information about the role of physical education lesson on the development of beliefs towards healthy behaviors. Keywords: motivational transfer, self-determination theory, theoretical integration, autonomous motivation, theory of planned behavior, health behavior The trans-contextual model and learning safety in sport Derwin King Chung Chan (University of Hong Kong), Martyn Standage (University of Bath), Chris Lonsdale (Australian Catholic University), Martin S. Hagger (Curtin University) 32Symposia Tuesday July 11th Safety in sport is regarded as a critical public health concern in many countries due to the prevalence of sport injury and its related economy and public health costs.
It is important that students learn about safety in sport, and be aware of the importance of preventing sport injury throughout their life. The trans-contextual model has primarily been applied to explain students’ motivation in physical education (PE) and leisure-time physical activity, however, it is postulated that the model has the potential to be applied in sport injury prevention. According to the trans-contextual model, it is expected that when significant others (e.g., PE teachers) provide support (i.e., autonomy support) for students’ autonomous motivation in sport injury prevention in PE lesson, students are more likely to develop autonomous motivation, positive beliefs, and intention to prevent sport injury in out-of-school sport contexts.
In this presentation, a series of studies that examined various tenets of the trans-contextual model in sport injury prevention contexts will be presented. We will discuss the boundaries of existing evidence and present a coordinated program of studies that enhance the level of evidence and practicability of the trans-contextual model in promoting sport safety among students. Keywords: motivational transfer, self-determination theory, theoretical integration, autonomous motivation, theory of planned behavior, health education Physical activity and quality of life across cultures Chair: Diane Gill (University of North Carolina at Greensboro) Enhanced Quality of life (QoL) is both a key outcome and motivator of physical activity (PA) for many participants.
However, research and programs rarely consider the participants’ perspective and cultural context. To better serve participants and potential participants, we must consider PA and QoL from the participants’ perspective, and use that understanding in our programs. This symposium presents findings that extend a long-term project on physical activity and QoL across cultures.
The earlier phases of the project focused on development and validation of a QoL measure designed for physical activity and health promotion, and participant views of physical activity and quality of life with university and community participants in the U.S. We have now extended that research across cultures. Specifically, we have developed a Korean measure and gathered participant views in South Korea.
Most recently, we have focused on PA and QoL with Korean immigrants living in the U.S. The first presentation provides an overview of the long-term project and recent focus on participant views, and sets the framework for the remaining presentations. The next presentation summarizes participants’ views of PA and QoL from open-ended survey responses and focus groups in the U.S.
The third presentation moves across cultures to South Korea, with a summary of the Korean survey findings and emphasis on Korean participant views of PA and QoL. The fourth presentation presents the findings on the relationship between PA and QoL from the perspective of Korean immigrants living in the U.S. Finally, in a closing discussion, the symposium organizer will summarize the findings and discuss continuing efforts to incorporate participant perspectives in community-based physical activity and health promotion programs.
Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Introduction to the symposium Diane Gill (University of North Carolina at Greensboro) Physical activity professionals and participants alike recognize enhanced quality of life (QoL) as a benefit of and motivator for physical activity, but QoL measures are limited, and our research and programs rarely consider the participants’ perspective or the cultural context. This symposium extends a long-term project that began with the development of a QoL measure designed to be relevant to participants and potential participants in physical activity and health promotion programs. The initial 5-year project developed a 33Symposia Tuesday July 11th multidimensional QoL measure with QoL sub-domains (physical, social, emotional, cognitive, spiritual) and overall integrative QoL.
Initial and subsequent follow-up analyses provided good psychometric evidence for the structure, reliability and validity. Still, that survey measure was derived from existing models and measures rather than from participants. We then focused on relevance, and participants’ views of PA and QoL.
We asked open-ended survey questions in the U.S. with a large sample of university students and community participants, and with focus groups of community participants. All that early work was conducted in the U.S.
Subsequently Korean colleagues developed a Korean survey, and also obtained participant views of PA and QoL with Korean students and community participants. Most recently, we have explored the views of PA and QoL with Korean immigrants in the U.S., with both surveys and focus groups. The next three presentations provide the details and findings from each of those research projects.
Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Perspectives of U.S. participants Erin Reifsteck (University of North Carolina at Greensboro) In two previous projects, we focused on U.S. participants’ views of PA and QoL.
In both we asked “what is QoL” and “how does PA relate to QoL.” First, university students (n = 142) and community participants (n = 142) completed the QoL Survey (Gill et al., 2011), PA measures, and open-ended items. Both groups were predominantly women (67%; 74%) and White (57%; 77%). All open-ended responses were listed, cross- checked, and grouped under larger themes by the research team.
Participants were relatively active, and number of days of weekly PA participation (r = .427) was moderately correlated with physical QoL, and significantly correlated at lower levels with emotional, cognitive and social QoL. Both groups reported PA contributions in all QoL domains, with most responses reflecting physical health and emotion/mood. The focus group project included six focus groups of 5-7 community participants, who were predominantly women from a church group, novice running group, clogging group, an activity program for individuals with fibromyalgia, and a senior fitness class.
Sessions were audio-taped, transcribed, reviewed, and coded. All groups cited social and emotional benefits as well as physical, and often emphasized social or emotional benefits over physical. For example, although the runners were in a training program, few responses reflected physical condition; instead they cited confidence, energy, stress relief, time management and feeling better as key contributions.
Many responses emphasized balance or integration of different aspects of QoL in relation to PA. The focus group findings suggest that PA contributes to multiple aspects of QoL, and social and emotional benefits may be primary motivators for community participants. These findings were consistent with results from a follow- up study in which structural modeling confirmed a multidimensional model with QoL subdomains contributing to integrated QoL.
Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Perspectives of South Korean participants SeYun Park (Chungnam National University) We explored the relationship of physical activity (PA) to QoL in South Korea. Community participants (n=281) and university students (n=304) completed measures of PA (International Physical Activity Questionnaire; IPAQ) and QoL and open-ended questions “what is QoL” and “how does PA relate to QoL” (male n=301, female n=284, age M=32.85, SD=13.93). Researchers cross-checked and categorized 848 responses for the meaning of QoL and 752 responses for PA-QoL relation.
Participants responses for meaning of QoL for both community (C) and student (S) participants were mainly in emotional (C=42%, S=35%), physical (C=21%, S=27%) and environmental (C=13%, S=17%) domains. The environmental domain included economic status, leisure 34Symposia Tuesday July 11th time or activity, and rest. In response to the question about PA and QoL, community participants overwhelmingly answered that PA was positively related with QoL (70%), and responses reflected an integrative QoL rather than specific sub-domains.
Other positive responses included feeling vigor (6%), and physical health (6%). The university students also answered with integrative positive responses (50%), as well as physical health (10%), stress relief (7%), and feeling vigor (7%). Based on IPAQ scores, participants were divided into PA levels (high, medium, low).
In the responses to how PA related to QoL, the low PA level group gave fewer responses related to physical health (low=2%, high=11%, medium=7%) and stress relief (low=0%, high=6%, medium 5%) than high and medium PA level groups. However, the low PA group answered ‘negative or no relation’ (11%) more than the high (1%) and medium (4%) PA level groups. Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Perspectives of Korean immigrants in the U.S.
Eungwang Oh (University of North Carolina at Greensboro) A series of studies targeting Korean immigrants in the U.S extended the previous research to a different cultural context. Korean immigrants (n = 201; male = 86, female = 115; age 18-72, M = 42.2, SD = 14.66) completed the QoL Survey and the Godin PA measure. The findings revealed that PA was positively correlated with physical QoL (r = .30) and functional/ADL (r = .18).
Open-ended responses revealed that most participants (35%) viewed PA as positive without citing specific benefits, with others reporting emotional (18%), physical (8%), and cognitive, social and spiritual QoL benefits (2-5%), and only 2% reporting negative effects. Korean immigrants cited emotional and general positive effects more often than physical benefits. Consistent with previous research, Korean immigrants clearly see PA as contributing to their overall quality of life.
Moderated mediation analyses conducted on the QoL survey responses suggested that the relationship between PA and integrative QoL was mediated by physical QoL and functional/ADL, but age moderated the relationships. In continuing research, three focus groups each for young and older adults were conducted to compare patterns and trends. All responses were audio-recorded, transcribed, categorized into main themes, and cross-checked by three coders.
All groups cited contributions of PA in various aspects of QoL. Specifically, participants viewed PA as increasing self-confidence, physical and mental health, and feeling refreshed. Groups mentioned that staying in the U.S provided more opportunity to be exposed to a variety of sports, whereas lack of social support and resources, and difficulty finding an exercise buddy in the U.S were perceived as barriers.
Intergenerational and gender differences were apparent across groups. The findings pointed to the importance of cultural considerations in community PA programs to facilitate PA promotion among Korean immigrants. Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture Physical activity and quality of life across cultures: Conclusions and discussion Diane Gill (University of North Carolina at Greensboro) All findings from all groups and across cultures clearly show that participants see physical activity as contributing to quality of life.
Furthermore, with minor variations, all groups see physical activity as contributing to all domains of QoL, with emotional and social benefits sometimes outweighing physical benefits. These findings suggest that programs that target multiple dimensions of QoL may foster motivation and adherence, as well as health and well-being. Furthermore, the findings suggest that the relationship of PA with quality of life may vary across cultural contexts, as well as by age and gender.
We invite the audience to join in discussion about the role of PA in QoL, and approaches that professionals might take to better address multiple aspects of QoL, while considering participants’ cultural context. 35Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture Sports psychology in South America. Experiences in high performance Chair: Jesús Chalela (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicologia Deporte) The present Symposium shows us different psychological interventions performed with Olympic athletes from Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay, for the Rio de Janeiro Olympic Games, Brazil 2016.
From the psychological works of the Olympic Cycle process, the annual preparations, to specific clinical interventions, the different exhibitors show their contributions of the Psychological Preparation, tending to the improvement of the athletic performance, the health and the life quality of the athletes, so that they can achieve their best performance in accordance with the objectives outlined, carry out the programs developed and the planning devised among the different interdisciplinary teams. The athletes, from different specialties, the rugby referees and the swimmers nourished themselves from the contributions of Sports Psychology, from Biofeedback, from the cognitive techniques of Mental Training, from the breathing techniques, relaxation and visualization, from Psychodrama, to deal with frustrations management, concentration improvement, results acceptance, positive coping of sports variables, perseverance, motivation, anxiety and with the different emotions that can be presented throughout the preparation process, classification and competition of the Olympic Games. The Olympic athletes were able to verify that the psychological work carried out, helped them to carry out their objectives, to value the Psychological Preparation, to hierarchize the different instances of High Performance, to adequately manage their emotions, to take greater account of the Mental Training techniques and to consider the inclusion of the Sports Psychologist for future sports commitments and the contributions that he or her may provide.
Keywords: sports psychology, psychological interventions, Olympic athletes A clinical intervention with Olympic athletes Jesús Chalela (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicologia Deporte) During the last year prior to the Olympic Games, a clinical work was carried out with athletes; discipline Athletics, who presented anxiety disorder, with insomnia and difficulties of interpersonal relationship, producing manifestations of inability to face the problems. The origin of these disorders was directly related to personal issues, family health situations, overload of activities in academic studies, in the realization of the financial contributions of sponsors and social life. A psychotherapeutic intervention program was developed to help Olympic athletes solve emotional disturbances, with Individual Interviews, Psychological Support, provide them with psychological tools, create social strengthening strategies, teaching of breathing and relaxation techniques, in order to be able to perform all their sports and personal activities in a good quality of life and well-being.
The psychotherapeutic space helped to overcome these difficulties, in an environment of health, trust between the athlete and the Clinical Psychologist, creating a link of special importance for personal strengthening. The identification and treatment of the clinical problems that can affect competition athletes constitutes a beneficial space for the mental and physical health of those involved. Keywords: clinical intervention, emotional disorders, Olympic athletes Psychological preparation of international arbitrators in high sports performance Jesús Chalela, Laura Tallano (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicologia Deporte) Argentina Psychodeportological work is usually performed with the athlete, but in order for him to compete within sporting legality, an arbiter is necessary, who as an actor in the sports scene, is involved in 36Symposia Tuesday July 11th psychological issues similar to the athlete but with his specificity.
Your task is to observe, perceive and evaluate at the same moment of action. In most cases they move to the pair of players, and reach similar heart rates. This intervenes at the time of making decisions, influencing the perception, the reading of the game and the analysis that almost simultaneously the play must do having to make a decision in seconds.
Here the psychological variables play a fundamental role and the work of psychic elaboration and mental training, plus the strategic implementation of coping techniques will be those who collaborate with the performance of the referee. The program will be presented with international referees of high performance Rugby sports who were trained to participate in World championships and Olympic Games. The techniques of mental training that were used were peripheral vision exercises, exercises under pressure, stress inoculation, ocular motility, concentration, management and coping of anxiety.
All of them implemented from a psychodeportological diagnosis of each referee and the permanent evaluation of the performances by means of videos and their correlation with variables of heart rate and race rhythm and the statistical analysis, using specific techniques pre and post match. Keywords: arbitration, psychology, training, psychic The psychodramatic method and the psychology of sport: psychological work aimed at participation and performance in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games Jesús Chalela (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicologia Deporte), Marcio Geller (PUC/RS; FADERGS; SOGIPA; Porto Alegre, Brazil) Porto Alegre, Brazil High-performance athletes suffer from high demands on requirements in order to achieve their goals. In many cases there are excellent physical, technical and nutritional preparation, but even with this structure they do not manage to become good athletes.
It is observed that the psychological aspect must be better worked in the sports environment. In this way, through the training of roles, the psychodramatic theory can help athletes to increase their confidence, helping their decision making and also stimulating the capacity of believing in their own potential. The psychodramatic method was able to contribute on the achievement of the Olympic position of an athlete and work for the best performance of another athlete of different sporting modality on the achievement of a Brazilian historical result in the Olympics.
It seems that the psychodramatic method is an effective tool for the psychology of sport, as it develops a more self-efficacious posture in the athlete, making possible to achieve better performance in sports competitions. Keywords: psychodrama, Rio 2016 Olympic Games, athletes The psychological component as a differential variable of sports performance - Olympic Games, Rio de Janeiro 2016 Jorge Ferrari (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicologia Deporte) The purpose of this paper is to present the work done with a 23-year-old female swimmer, who carries multiple national records at the junior, juvenile and senior level. Jorge Ferrari.SUPDE Despite her continuous training for more than 3 and a half years in the United States, this swimmer has not been able to make significant progress or to improve her own or others records in Uruguay.
Having completed her scholarship in the US, she returned to Uruguay in December 2015 and continued her training in our country to participate in the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. In order to classify for the Olympic Games, she needed to achieve certain time records and therefore, she begins her training at Club Bigua. It was in this same club where she started her career, and this time she is offered an interdisciplinary team composed of a coach, a physical trainer, a nutritionist, a physiotherapist and a sports psychologist This swimmer had never worked with a sports psychologist before and already in our first interview symptoms of extreme anxiety could be seen, as well as a lack of awareness of how to handle it.
Also, during her stay in Uruguay she had to deal with several 37Symposia Tuesday July 11th personal issues: pending subjects of her academic career, the bond with her boyfriend residing in the US and some family matters. The psychological work consisted of a Focal Support Therapy to strengthen her from an emotional point of view, and was mainly carried out with Cognitive Techniques and Biofeedback teams. Excellent results were obtained, and 45 days before the Olympic Games the swimmer was able to lower her own national record in 100 m free style twice.
She achieved that once more while competing in the Olympic Games. Keywords: intervention, Olympic athletes, sports psychologist Working stages with Olympic athletes Jesús Chalela (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicologia Deporte), Alexi Ponce (APCD – Chile, National Institute of Sports (Chile, IND), High Performance Center (CAR, Chile)) The psychological preparation that will participate in the Olympics Games, has a very remote begin, considering the Games themselves. Alexi Ponce.CAR.
Chile In the following scrips, it will be announced some of the identified stages, where there are prioritized some psychological interventions: 1) REMOTE STAGE: between 4 and 8 years before the possible participation of the athletes in the games. This stage is when the Athlete “dream” on the possibility to become an Olympic Athlete. It´s important to set some objectives and plan the work schedule, working with the self-expectations of self-efficacy and self-commitment.
2) COMPETITIVE PREPARATORY STAGE: between 2 and 4 years before the Games. Building the “Dream” come true. It´s the period where the athletes must get prepared for the competitions and where they can get their chance to qualified to the games.
This is one of the harder periods of competitions, where the athletes are challenged at the highest level. In this period the motivation, perseverance, routine establishment, frustration tolerance are one of the main psychological areas to develop. 3) QUALIFYNG OR OLYMPIC QUALIFYING STAGE: a period of 2 years before the Games, where the athletes compete to get in the Olympics.
Chasing the “dream”. The main aspects to work are anxiety, stress, relaxation techniques, concentration, decision making, tolerance to frustration and management of the emotions. 4) CLASSIFIED STAGE: period between 12 and 2 months before the Games.
The Athlete it qualified to be in the Games. The “dreams” becomes real. The Athlete must prepared his/her participation and competition.
Here it´s important to keep an eye on the “character” that´s been created by the press and the media, to control the pressure and maintain the correct expectations. 5) OLIMPYC STAGE: already in the Games. Facing the “Dream”.
Here it´s worked emotion self-management, anxiety, concentration, and tolerate the results. Keywords: working stages, psychological preparation, Olympics Games Exam-based certification: What does it mean for the international sport psychology professional? Chair: Jack Watson (West Virginia University - USA) The Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP) will be launching the first exam-based sport psychology credential in October 2017 – decisively moving away from the 25 year old portfolio review system that helped to shape training programs, but one that carried little weight with athletes, coaches, parents and sport administrators.
The new certification will require applicants to complete several courses related to the practice of sport psychology, complete hours of mentored experiences working directly with athletes and performers, and then pass the newly created 100-item certification exam, which will be available in over 5,000 testing centers. This new exam was developed using the findings from a Job Task Analysis conducted with full- time practitioners in the field, and is intended to cover the knowledge and competencies necessary for sport psychology practitioners to know in order to practice effectively. This new certification program is being set up 38Symposia Tuesday July 11th with the goal of having it accredited by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA).
Having an accredited certification program will allow AASP to identify and promote competent practitioners, increase the importance of the certification to the public, and help to grow the number of qualified practitioners in the US and beyond. This session will cover how AASP approved the development of a new certification program, the struggles of transitioning from a portfolio based system to an exam based system, the development of a certification exam, the benefits of moving to a competency-based examination, exam delivery channels/accessibility to professionals, how an accredited certification moves the profession forward, impact on developing standards within graduate programs, and the possibilities for implementation of this program internationally. Keywords: certification AASP certification program – from inception to a commitment to update Jack Watson (West Virginia University - USA) The Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP) was formed in 1986 to promote science and ethical practice in the field of sport and exercise psychology while providing an opportunity for individuals to share information related to theory development, research, and the provision of psychological services to consumers.
The organization’s certification program (Certified Consultant – Association for Applied Sport Psychology or CC- AASP) was initiated in 1992 as a means of identifying the perceived criteria for advanced practice in the field of applied sport psychology. The eligibility requirements for this certification included the completion of a graduate degree from a program closely related to sport psychology, the completion of 12 specified courses and 400 hours of mentored experiences working in an applied sport psychology area. From the program’s inception until very recently, AASP certification had experienced few changes while the profession had evolved substantially.
In 2011, then President Jack Lesyk created the Future of Certification Ad Hoc Committee (FCAHC) to review all aspects of certification with the goal of developing a plan to update the program. In 2014, the FCAHC made several recommendations for changes to substantially overhaul the certification program. This presentation will provide an overview of the processes used for the review of CC-AASP certification as well as the specified suggestions for change with the goal of modernizing the certification program.
AASP Certification Program – Impact on Jobs, Marketability & Graduate Training Natalie Durand-Bush (University of Ottawa - Canada) Within its last two strategic plans, the Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP) has identified a strong need to improve upon its current certification program and bring this program in line with current national standards in the United States. This focus relates to a desire to make the AASP certification more valuable to professionals as well as to the athletes, coaches, parents and performers who seeks their services. It will likely result in a large step towards enhancing the marketability of applied sport psychology professionals.
In addition, a stronger certification should create more employment opportunities for professionals and the students looking to enter the field. A new certification program should lead to enhancement of sport psychology training programs. AASP’s current strategic plan includes a goal of “creating a framework of competency-based standards for graduate training leading to AASP Certification and distribution to membership and graduate programs” and to “develop Graduate Program Recognition”.
These identified goals should be seen as initial steps towards the potential development of graduate program accreditation and the formalization of graduate programming in sport psychology. The purpose of this presentation will be to highlight the impact of the new certification program on employment opportunities for professionals, outline the development of standards to guide graduate program curricula (based on the Job 39Symposia Tuesday July 11th Task Analysis) and how these might be best implemented. This talk will be future oriented, as this process has not yet been undertaken.
AASP certification program – international initiatives Traci Statler (Cal State Fullerton - USA) The overhaul of AASP’s Certified Consultant program is nearly complete as it is scheduled to be rolled out in October 2017. The credential is strongly tied to the job task analysis conducted in 2015 that used only North American-based sport psychology professionals. The decision to do so was based upon recommendations from the Future of Certification Ad Hoc Committee (FCAHC), as it was determined that a regionally focused certification that did not need to be as concerned about language and cultural specific issues would be the logical first step in the creation of a new certification program.
It was, however, the recommendation of the FCAHC that future versions of the certification should consider international expansion. Therefore, the purpose of this presentation will be to identify and discuss the possibilities for implementation and access to CC-AASP certification by professionals all over the world. This presentation will provide an open discussion section designed to allow audience members to discuss the perceived benefits and challenges associated with such a plan.
AASP certification program –implementation logistics & challenges Angus Mugford (Toronto Blue Jays - Canada) One of the Association for Applied Sport Psychology’s (AASP) Future of Certification Ad Hoc Committee’s (FCAHC) most important suggestions was to align the CC-AASP certification with the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA) accreditation criteria. As a result, the creation of a certification exam became necessary. In 2015, AASP made the decision to move forward with the creation of an exam and conducted a job task analysis (JTA) to outline the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to effectively work as an applied sport psychology professional.
Upon completion of the JTA, a 4 step process was taken to construct the exam: 1) Item Writers wrote individual questions based upon the JTA content, 2) Item Reviewers reviewed, modified and approved questions, 3) Subject Matter Experts reviewed a draft exam, and 4) Subject Matter Experts determined a passing score criterion. At the 2016 AASP Conference, the membership voted overwhelmingly in favor of the creation of a Certification Council and empowering it to create the policies and procedures for the certification and exam development. Since this vote, an Interim Certification Council was established to work on the selection of the permanent Certification Council, the initial creation of a Council Governance Charter, Policies and Procedures document for the Certification Council, as well as the eligibility and recertification requirements for the new certification program.
The purpose of this presentation will be to focus on the political and logistic issues related to the development of a new certification program, as well the perceived benefits of making such a move. The Andalucian Center of Sport Medicine: A multidisciplinary approach to support high performance athletes Chair: Leocricia Jiménez López (Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte CAMD, Sevilla) The aim of this Symposium is to make known and disseminate the multidisciplinary approach of the Andalusian Centre of Sports Medicine (Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte, CAMD) as an entity attached to the Ministry of Tourism and Sport of the Andalusian Government, whose mission is to prevent and program everything concerning the sport health of the andalusian citizens, offering their services to both the high 40Symposia Tuesday July 11th performance and federated athletes of very different sports, as well as to promote organization of Scientific events, research, teaching, advice and training in the field of Sports Medicine. As part of their responsibilities, professionals who work in the institution provide medical examinations for the practice of competitive sport, develop programs to monitor and control the high competition athletes.
Also, the institution carry out research programs in the field of sports medicine, in collaboration with public or private entities, organize different courses and educational programs for specialists in sports medicine and edit the Andalusian Journal of Sports Medicine (Revista Andaluza de Medicina del Deporte, RAMD) as an instrument for the dissemination of knowledge in the field of Medicine and Sports Sciences.CAMD, also establish strategies to prevent and control the use of prohibited substances or methods that artificially enhances the physical or mental capacity of athletes and offers medical care in its different Units: Locomotor system, Biomechanics, Physiology, Internal Medicine and Cardiology, Cineanthropometry, Nutrition and Biochemistry, Sports Psychology and Functional Recovery. Keywords: medicine, sport, high-performance, multidisciplinary approach Medicine. Sport.
Multidisciplinar. Performance Juan de Dios Beas Jiménez (Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte CAMD, Sevilla) In recent times in the area of Medicine and Sports Sciences there are taking place inter-professional conflicts by the dispute of various competencies related to the attention of the athletes and the prescription of exercise. In most cases, these conflicts are motivated by the lack of definition of roles and encroachment of competences, but in many the cause is the loss of perspective of professionals who put their professional interests above those of the athletes, citizens or patients so it is very important to understand how Sports specialists have to work together.
The multidisciplinary work directed to achieve the best results for athletes, citizens and patients, is the solution to these conflicts and provides a high quality care to users and a professional satisfaction to the different professionals who assist them. The purpose of the Symposium is to show the benefits of the multidisciplinary approach in the care of the athletes, in the exercise prescription in Medicine and Sports Sciences. In fact, the different behaviours and situations that generate conflicts between the professionals of Medicine and Sports Sciences and the consequences of the resolution of these conflicts in an individualist or multidisciplinary way will be analyzed.
In the development of this Symposium, the "Island Syndrome or Robinson Crusoe Syndrome" or the "Diabetic Diana Disease" will be defined as emerging pathological entities that affect medical and sports sciences professionals.. Sports injuries. Functional recovery.
Psychological intervention. Consuelo García Antunez (CAMD, Sevilla) From a holistic perspective, the human being is considered as a bio-physiological, energetic, psycho- emotional, spiritual and social unit that interacts with itself and also with its environment. From this perspective, the injury of an athlete must not be approached from a physical perspective only, since its causes, repercussions and recovery can hardly be separated from the other aspects that compose it as a person.
The emotional and psychological impact of the sports injury makes it essential the participation of Psychology professionals in the multidisciplinary team, which must entirely address the functional recovery of the same. The presentation will show how the Locomotor System Unit of the Andalusian Centre of Sports Medicine (Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte, CAMD) participates together with the Sports Psychology Unit in the recovery of injuries, addressing factors as urgent as the pain management, therapeutic adherence, self- confidence, symptoms of anxiety and depression or catastrophic thoughts that can impair both the evolution and the recovery time of the athlete. It will be presented several clinical cases of multidisciplinary intervention 41Symposia Tuesday July 11th in the functional recovery of injuries carried out in the CAMD, which illustrate the contribution of professionals in Sports Psychology in the recovery of the athlete's injury.
Keywords: sport injuries, functional recovery, psychological intervention Sport and exercise physiology Ramón Antonio Centeno Prada (Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte CAMD, Sevilla) To the Exercise Physiology Unit come two types of athletes: those that, after a medical examination in the Internal Medicine Unit, are observed that they present good health and that only demand an evaluation of the performance level, and those that, after this examination, are observed or suspected that they suffer a disease. Healthy athletes perform different effort test with the aim of assess their fitness level and prescribe areas of exercise intensity to let their trainers to be able to schedule their workouts. The main tests performed are spirometric ergo-tests with determination of the maximum oxygen consumption, aerobic and anaerobic thresholds and level of aerobic resistance.
Besides, force tests are performed to valuate the different characteristics of the explosive and maximum force, to provide to the coaches data in relation to the level of optimal force of their athletes. On the other side, athletes suspected of suffering a disease perform a type of test called cardiac or clinic tests, almost always in cycle ergometer, as it is the best way of objectify the electrocardiogram. It can be performed with or without analysis of ventilation.
When a cardiac pathology is suspected, the athlete is referred to the cardiologist of the CAMD, and if it is about other pathology, the athlete is referred to the appropriate specialist. The Exercise Physiology Unit is in direct contact with the Sport Psychology Unit, and the most usual cases that requires of the mutual collaboration are: blackouts, anxiety, athletes with poor results despite the fact of performing good trainings and effort tests without pathology signs, athletes whose cardiac frequency during the effort test present very high values relation to the effort required and athletes who have a bad management of the respiratory ventilation (mainly in the control and elimination of the CO2). Ten years of psychological intervention in a High Performance Center José Carlos Jaenes Sánchez (Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte CAMD, Sevilla) Psychological attention and training is a form of intervention to allow athletes to cope with different situations where athletes of different sports need some help.
We present the implementation of a psychological training programme whose goal is for athletes and coaches to learn and apply techniques and strategies in order to improve his/her psychological skills (Jaenes, 2010). Our clients basically come from individual sports (track and field, rowing, canoeing, triathlon, swimming. combat sports and others who compete from local to international competitions even the Olympics.
We approach the athletes from different point view as cognitive-behavioural psychology to Short Term Psychotherapy, Dual Carrier or Orientation to cope with different situations. More than just working in an office face to face with athletes, coaches, or referees, we have the opportunity to work directly with the athletes in competitions with evaluation, and intervention in the field. More than this, part of our responsibility is the organization of International Seminar of Sport Psychology, Conferences, and Educational programs for young Sport Psychologist.
Publishing is other important goal. We present how the Sport Psychology Unit of the Andalusian Centre of Sports Medicine (Centro Andaluz de Medicina del Deporte, CAMD) participates together with other Units and the different aspects and characteristics of the intervention program in the last ten years. How we began offering this service to the athletes one day per year and currently we are working three days in a week and how the Unit has been very active in the organization of different Sport Psychology events.
It will be presented several 42Symposia Tuesday July 11th clinical and Sport cases, which illustrate the contribution of professionals in Sports Psychology in the development of the athlete career. Keywords: anxiety, performance, rowing, short term psychotherapy, psychological intervention Current studies on personality, physical activity and sport Chair: Alejo García-Naveira (Universidad Pontificia de Comillas) The study of personality, physical activity and sport continues to be an issue of interest among the different professionals in the area. Specifically, from a two-way perspective, researchers tend to analyze the relationship between personality characteristics, sports practice, health and sports performance.
This is why the objectives of this symposium are to establish relevant and current topics of study and research in personality in the field of sport, developed by representative professionals in Sport Psychology. In the first report, Lesly Castellanos Cepeda, Félix Guillén García, Abril Cantú-Berrueto, Dahiana Salazar-González y Rosendo Berengüí-Gil, will present a study entitled “Relation between resilience and sport practice in mexican athletes”. Secondly, Roberto Ruiz-Barquín, Alfredo Marchant, Ricardo de la Vega Marcos y Attila Szabo, will show the results of the research “Contributions of the model of the five personality factors for burnout prediction in competition soccer players”.
In the third report, Félix Guillén y Sylvain Laborde, will carry out a review entitled “Mental Toughness: a perspective based on positive personality-trait-like individual differences”. In fourth place, Alejo García-Naveira y Roberto Ruiz-Barquín, will present a study called “Optimism, general self-efficacy and competitiveness in young high-performance athletes”. Lastly, Francisco Batista Espinosa, Iván Pérez Carlos y Roberto Ruiz-Barquín, will show the results of their study “Differences in personality characteristics as a function of the category by age and competitive level in Canarian wrestlers”.
Keywords: personality, physical activity, sport Relation between resilience and sport practice in Mexican athletes Lesly Castellanos Cepeda (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), Félix Guillén García (Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria), Abril Cantú-Berrueto (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), Dahiana Salazar- González (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), Rosendo Berengüí-Gil (Universidad Católica de Murcia) The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between resilience and characteristics of sport practice. The resilience is a personality characteristic that moderate negative effects of stress and promotes adaptation. The participants of this study was of 253 athletes (143 males and 110 females), of an age range of 17 to 27 years old, mean age of 20.13 years old (SD = 2.20), practicing individual sports (athletics, tennis, aerobic gymnastics and swimming) and team sports (indoor soccer, rugby, soccer, basketball and volleyball), a mean age of start practicing in their sport of 11 years old; training mean 5 days per week and training sessions of 3 hours.
The 99% of coaches are males and 1% are females. The athletes have a mean of 2 years training with their coach (SD = 1.38). The scale used was Spanish version from Resilience Scale with 25 items designed to asses two factors (Personal Competence and Acceptance of Self and Life), all items are score on a 7-point scale from 1 (disagree) to 7 (agree), the possible score range from 25 to 175 with higher scores reflecting higher resilience, all items are worded positively.
The results show statistical differences between factor 2 (Acceptance of Self and Life) and days of training on (t = -2.47) and (gl = 251) and significance of .014, in training hours there’s no significate differences, in years competing in the sport show statistical differences with resilience (global scale) (p = .043), factor 1 (Personal Competence) with (p = .011) and factor 2 with (p = .015). In conclusion the hours of training doesn’t promotes resilience, instead years competing in the sport that promotes resilience, that mean with more time of practicing their sport more resilient person become. 43Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: resilience, sport, mexican Contributions of the model of the five personality factors for burnout prediction in competition soccer players Roberto Ruiz-Barquín, Alfredo Marchant, Ricardo de la Vega Marcos (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), Attila Szabo (Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest) There are a number of studies carried out in the last two decades where the Burnout is analyzed in competition sports.
Descriptive and correlational studies have been performed. However, predictive studies being scarce. The present study aims to determine the predictive capacity of personality traits in each of the factors that compose "the burnout syndrome" in soccer.
One of the most used evaluation systems in the study of Burnout and Sport has been the one proposed by Maslash and Jackson Maslach (1981; Garcés, 1999; 2004). In the field of personality and sport, one of the most used has been the Five Factor Model of Personality (Costa and McCrae, 1985; Caprara et al., 1993; MPBFQ). Ruiz-Barquín et al.
(2016) analyzed the predictive ability of Burnout in soccer from Resilience levels. In the present study, the predictive capacity of the Five-Factor Model will be determined. The study consists of 98 male competition players (Medad = 17.02; SDedad = 2.49), distribuited in three sports categories (cadet, junior and senior).
All the players belong to a Spanish elite club. The tests administered were: BDI Questionnaire from Garcés de los Fayos (1999, 2004) and the five dimensions belonging to BFQ personality questionnaire (Caprara et al., 1993; Bermúdez, 1995,1998). Results show significant regression models with p<.001.
The dimensions Tenacity, Emotional Stability and Extraversion predict Emotional Exhaustion by 20.4%. The Extraversion predicts 11.9% the low Realization in the Sports Activity. Tenacity and Afability predict 16.9% predict the Depersonalization.
Therefore, each personality trait has a specific influence on each Burnout factor. These percentages of variance increase substantially when the variable sport age category is controlled. Likewise, the predictive capacity of the MPBFQ is greater than those obtained for Resilience.
Keywords: burnout, personality model of the five factors, BFQ personality questionnaire, soccer, prediction Mental toughness: a perspective based on positive personality-trait-like individual differences Félix Guillén García (Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria), Sylvain Laborde (Institute of Psychology at the German Sport University, Cologne) Studying the psychological characteristics of expert athletes was one of the first steps to study mental toughness in the seventies. The topic of mental toughness really started to get momentum at the end of the 20th century and at the beginning of the 21st century, with the work of several authors. Mental toughness was then defined as “a collection of values, attitudes, emotions, and cognitions that influence the way in which an individual approaches, responds to, and appraises demanding events to consistently achieve his or her goals”.
Despite the fact that in the past 10 years the study of mental toughness increased, there is still many aspects that deserve the attention of researchers, given the importance of the topic for sport and exercise psychology. Currently, the main discrepancies regarding mental toughness theories are related to its nature, for example whether it has to be considered as a trait or state, or as multidimensional or unidimensional. So far, the majority of authors considered it as a trait and with a multidimensional nature, formed by values, attitudes, cognitions, and emotions.
Considering attributes, it seems that there is a consensus with self-confidence, positive attitudes, resilience, and self-motivation… To consider the possibility of developing mental toughness, we present here an approach based on positive personality-trait-like individual differences , such as self- efficacy, resilience, hope, perfectionism, and perseverance. Keywords: positive personality, trait, mental toughness, sport 44Symposia Tuesday July 11th Optimism, general self-efficacy and competitiveness in young high-performance athletes Alejo García-Naveira (Universidad Pontificia de Comillas), Roberto Ruiz-Barquín (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid) Optimism, self-efficacy and competitiveness are three important variables of study regarding sports and performance of people. The objectives of this study were to determine the optimism, competitiveness and self- efficacy of adolescent athletes high performance, their relationship and differences according to sex.
To do so, the LOT-R, Competitiveness-10 and General Self-efficacy questionnaires applied to a sample of 95 athletes (45 men and 50 women) high performance with an age between 14 and 16 years. The main results indicate that athletes are optimistic, competitive and confident in their general skills; men are more competitive and confident in their general skills than women; and optimism is positively related to competitiveness and general self-efficacy, while also competitiveness does positively with the general self-efficacy. We conclude that young high-performance athletes are optimistic, competitive and confident in their general skills, aspects related to sports performance; there is a social and sporting gap based on sex in competitiveness and general self- efficacy; and positive expectations for the future (optimism) could be linked to the expected result or probability of success associated with self-efficacy and competitiveness.
Keywords: psychological features, high performance, athletics, sex Differences in personality characteristics as a function of the category by age and competitive level in canarian wrestlers Francisco Batista Espinosa (Máster en Psicología de la actividad física y el deporte (UAM-COE)), Iván Pérez Carlos (Colegio Oficial de Psicología de Santa Cruz de Tenerife), Roberto Ruiz-Barquín (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid) The objectives of the present study are: to describe the personality characteristics of a sample of Canarian competition wrestlers and to establish the possible differences in personality according to the sports age category (youth vs. senior) and the competitive classification of the wrestlers (unrated, destacado and puntal). The sample consists of 67 men wrestlers (M = 23.32; SD = 5.79).
The instruments used were: NEO-FFI, Lot-R, General Self-Efficacy Scale and Resilience scale. The results show that 25.40% of the sample (n = 17) presented high levels of resilience, with average global levels of resilience (M = 134.75; SD = 16.20) compared to other studies (Ruiz-Barquín et al., 2015). Average levels of general self-efficacy (M = 31.36; SD = 4.75) are shown, with lower scores than general population (Schwarzer, and Baessler, 1996).
Moderate levels of optimism (M= 2.46, SD = 3.04) are exhibited compared to a sample of football players (De la Vega et al., 2012). In comparison with other studies with football players and non-athletes (García-Naveira et al., 2011), the results show similar values in neuroticism (M = 20.73, SD = 8.18), lower scores on openness to experience (M =26,16; SD=5.48) and higher values in extroversion (M = 33.49, SD = 5.93), cordiality (M = 30.91, SD = 5.15) and responsibility (M = 32.30, SD = 6.49). According to the category, results show superior scores of the youth (p<.05) in neuroticism and extraversion.
Concerning the level of performance, significant differences were found (p <.05) in openness to experience and personal competence, obtaining the group puntal higher scores. It is concluded that Canarian wrestlers present a profile of differential personality compared to other samples of athletes, non- athletes and general population, existing differences depending on the category of age and performance level. Keywords: canarian wrestling, personality five factor model, resilience, optimism, self-efficacy 45Symposia Tuesday July 11th Symposia Session 2.
(14.30-16) Gold in education and elite sport (GEES): 2. The competences of dual career support providers Chair: Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) This second part of the symposium ‘Gold in Education and Elite Sport’ focuses on the competences of the dual career support provider (DCSP), defined as “a professional consultant, related to an educational institute and/or an elite sport organization – or certified by one of those – that provides support to elite athletes in view of optimizing their dual career.” A lack of competent DC support may lead to elite athletes dropping out prematurely (Wylleman & Reints, 2010). This part of the GEES project provides an overview of the competences that 321 DCSPs from 9 different EU Member states perceived to require in order to optimize their support provision to athletes in their dual ‘elite sport and study’ career pathway.
In the first presentation, the competence framework of DCSPs will be presented, focussing on the importance of the different competences. The second presentation will present the evaluation of DCSPs’ competences in the Swedish context, showing how the results contributed to improvements in practice. The third presentation will zoom in DCSPs’ competences to empower DC athletes, including suggestions how DCSPs can contribute to the development of elite pupil- and student-athletes’ successful dual career competences.
In the fourth presentation, the importance of self-regulation competences for DC athletes is emphasized. The fifth presentation will discuss how athletes’ needs could be matched to the competences of DCSPs in two specific scenarios. Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, professional development, support team, elite athlete A European perspective on the importance of Dual Career Support Providers’ (DCSPs) competences Simon Defruyt, Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Koen De Brandt (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) Although the need for quality and competent dual career support is clear and emphasized in the EU Guidelines on Dual Careers of Athletes (2012), previous research has mainly focused on the structural and organizational aspects of dual career support.
Therefore, the GEES project aimed at identifying the competences that are important for dual career support providers (DCSPs). Based on the literature and expert’s panel discussions, a framework of 35 DCSP competences was clustered into the following six factors: 1) reflection and self-management competences, 2) advocacy and dissemination competences, 3) organizational competences, 4) empowerment competences, 5) awareness of DC athlete’s environment, and 6) relationship competences. A confirmatory factor analysis confirmed the factor structure of this competence framework (Defruyt et al., 2016).
Using an online survey, 321 DCSPs (mean age 44.7 ± 11.2 years; 49% female) rated the list of 35 competences on importance (1=unimportant – 5=very important). Results revealed that the calculated competence factor averages ranged from important up to very important (min 4.16 – max 4.39), underscoring the importance and relevance of the competence factors for DCSPs. Statistical analyses will be presented on the importance scores of the factors, also comparing different subgroups (e.g.
full time vs. not full time). Findings assist in discovering developmental and educational needs for DCSPs.
Future research should aim at linking the competences to behavioural anchors and then tailor these to the different levels of development. Defruyt, S., Wylleman, P., Torregrossa, M., Schipper-van Veldhoven, N., Debois, N., Cecic Erpic, S., De Brandt, K. (2016).
A competence framework for dual career support providers: A European perspective. Manuscript in preparation. 46Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, elite sport, professional development, support staff Promoting dual career support services: Swedish perspectives and actions taken Lukas Linnér, Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University), Kent Lindahl (Swedish Sport Confederation) In this presentation we share: (a) key findings on experiences and competences of Swedish dual career support providers (DCSP) from the European Project “Gold in Education and Elite Sport”, and (b) insights into the actions derived from the Project and taken to advance the dual career (DC) support services in Sweden.
Across the country, 31 DCSPs (mean age= 47.4) completed the DCSP survey that measured perceptions of 35 competences to facilitate student-athletes’ development (e.g., be an active and supportive listener) and explored experiences of, and coping with, six DCSP’s scenarios (e.g., supporting a student-athlete when missing days in school). Additionally, six DCSPs took part in a focus group discussion on how they work and what methods they use to support their student-athletes. Overall, the results revealed that the DCSPs demonstrated high awareness of DC and related challenges, possessed necessary competences, managed the relevant scenarios, and reflected on their work in congruence with a whole person perspective.
Results also indicated that the DCSPs worked mainly part time, held higher education degrees, but lacked specific DC education and networks. When positioning the findings within the Swedish DC context two major actions were initiated. First, as a DCSP is a new job profile in Sweden that should be developed, planning efforts for a national DCSP education system and a complementary national digital DC support service are currently in progress.
Second, with the recent expansion of the Swedish DC system to include the higher education level, a shared basis is needed for sustainable development. Therefore, the Swedish Sport Confederation initiated the action of developing Swedish national DC Guidelines. The Guidelines will be briefly outlined with strategies to facilitate student-athletes’ DC development including different transitions and their search for optimal balance between sport, studies, and private life.
Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, competences, dual career support, national guidelines Successful in sports and education: empowerment of the Dutch student-athlete Anne Spitse, Nicolette Schipper-van Veldhoven (Windesheim University of Applied Sciences), Ingrid Van Gelder, Irith Kist, Peter Wiggers (Dutch Olympic Committee NOC*NSF) The aim of this study was to gain insight in the needed competences of Dutch student-athletes (DC athletes) for a successful dual career and the needed competences of their support providers (DCSPs) for successful support providing in dual careers. Focus is especially towards empowerment, the process whereby ‘DC athletes gain knowledge by themselves, develop skills and abilities to take control over their own life and body, to act in an autonomous way’. 350 DC athletes (age: 18.7±3.3 years; 58% male, 42% female; 26% secondary education, 74% higher education), completed an online questionnaire, in which perceived importance and possession were measured on a 5-point scale for each competence in a list of 38 DC competences.
The difference between importance and possession shows the degree of need to develop these competences. Especially assertiveness (diff = .99), ability to cope with stress in sport and study (diff = .98) and ability to use your time efficiently (diff = .95) are found to be the most needed competences to be developed. 77 DCSP’s (age 46.4±11.5 years; 32% employed in sport, 68% in education) completed a questionnaire including a list of 35 DCSP competences.
Results show that empowerment competences (e.g. ‘ability to stimulate autonomy in dual career athletes’; diff = .63) are the most needed DCSP competences to develop. This finding is confirmed by the focus group (11 DCSP’s), which stated in a 2-hours-interview that only DC athletes with appropriate Self-regulation and Resilience competences (e.g.
using setbacks as a positive stimulus) will overcome challenging situations in their DC. The DCSPs are aware of the importance of self-regulation and resilience in DC athletes, but are not able yet to specify how they ‘empower’ the DC athletes. Now more is 47Symposia Tuesday July 11th known about the necessary competences for a successful DC, future research should focus on development of evidence-based education for DCSPs, especially towards empowerment of the DC athlete.
Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, empowerment, dual career, elite sport, study Working with French DC athletes: opportunity to pay attention to self-regulation competences Nadine Debois, Léonore Perrus, Véronique Leseur (Institut National du Sport, de l'Expertise et de la Performance) Within the framework of the Erasmus+ European Project « Gold in Education and Elite Sport », 584 French dual career athletes (DCAs) and 51 dual career support providers (DCSPs) participated to a study focused on (1) competences required by elite athletes to manage their dual career and, (2) competences required by DCSPs to optimize their dual career support provision. Results revealed dissimilarities between DCAs and DCSPs’ evaluation regarding self-regulation competences. DCAs tended to evaluate self-regulation competences as important and low possessed whereas DCSPs evaluated dual career management competences as the most important for DCAs.
DCAs perceived a high support from DCSPs at the dual career management level but a low support at the affective level. Lastly, the highest gap between perceived importance and perceived possession of DCSPs’ competences was found on empowerment competences. These results emphasize in research as well as in an applied perspective the need to focus not only on dual career management competences but also on self-regulation competences when considering competences to be developed by dual career athletes in order to successfully manage their dual career.
In an applied perspective, initial as well as continued educational programs for DCSPs should be developed to educate them more consistently on the DCAs self-regulation competences issue. Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, self-regulation competences, dual career support provider Matching athletes’ needs with dual career support providers’ competences Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Susana Regüela (Centre d'Alt Rendiment), Andrea Perez-Rivases (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Berta Veiga (Centre d'Alt Rendiment), Salvador Miró (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Anna Benito (Centre d'Alt Rendiment), Anna Jordana, Yago Ramis, Susana Pallarès (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) The purpose of this work is to match Dual Career Support Providers’ (DCSP) competences with Dual Career (DC) athletes’ needs to cope with two specific scenarios (i.e., relocate from family home for sport and/or studies, make the best study plan). Embedded in the European Erasmus+ project Gold in Education and Elite Sport (GEES), 44 DCSP (13% of the European sample) and 265 DC athletes (9% of the European sample) from Spain answered an online survey on their needed competences.
DCSP answered about competences needed to support DC athletes to combine education and elite sport, and DC athletes answered about competences needed to follow a dual career in sport and education. Results show that DCSPs’ competences related to the work with the athletes can be grouped in: (a) Empowerment competences, (b) Awareness of DC athletes’ environment, and (c) Relationship competences. Referring to DC athletes instead, competences can be grouped in: (a) DC management, (b) Self-regulation & resilience, (c) Social, and (d) Career planning.
To make their best study plan, athletes in the study mainly considered DC management and career planning competences. To relocate from family home for sport and/or studies DC athletes mainly considered social and DC management competences. Considering the results of the study, we conclude that the more the DCSPs possess the competences considered as needed by the athletes to cope with these scenarios (mainly empowerment and relationship competences) the more helpful they will be perceived by DC athletes.
Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, dual career support provider, competences, scenarios 48Symposia Tuesday July 11th Cultural competence in sport and exercise psychology: extending the issp position stand Chair: Noora J. Ronkainen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, United Kingdom) The ISSP position stand on cultural competence (Ryba, Stambulova, Si, & Schinke, 2013) challenged researchers and practitioners to rethink sport and exercise psychology (SEP) through a culturally reflexive approach. Ryba et al.
(2013) explained that cultural competence involves recognizing the ethnocentric assumptions that underpin much of current theorizing, research, and practice in addition to being knowledgeable of cultural differences. This symposium will present examples of culturally reflexive research projects as well as highlight the real world challenges associated with engaging in culturally competent research and practice. Ryba et al.
proposed three different research designs (i.e., cross-cultural, cultural psychology, and cultural praxis) for culturally competent research. The first presentation adheres to the cross- cultural research design and explores how cultural competence is developed and promoted within SEP graduate programs. The second presentation uses the cultural psychology approach and explores the challenges of a ‘cultural outsider’ in conducting a narrative study on runner identity construction in Shanghai.
The third presentation exemplifies a cultural praxis research design by focusing on methodological choices and results of a study on female judokas’ identities in Finland and Greece. The fourth presentation will discuss culturally competent practice by focusing on common issues within culturally diverse sport teams and suggesting best practices for sport psychology practitioners who work in culturally diverse environments. The fifth presentation focuses on applied practice, exploring coaching practices through a culturally reflexive lens.
Each presentation builds upon the ISSP position stand to highlight its main postulates and adds further recommendations for promoting cultural competence in SEP. Keywords: cultural psychology, cultural praxis, identity, reflexivity, positioning Cultural competence development in sport and exercise psychology graduate programs Sae-Mi Lee (Ithaca College, Ithaca, NY, U.S.A.) Researchers have argued that cultural competence is essential for ethical and effective practice in sport and exercise psychology (SEP; Butryn, 2002; Martins, Mobley, & Zizzi, 2000; Ryba, Schinke, & Tenenbaum, 2010). Despite growing research on the importance of cultural competence, limited research exists on how SEP graduate programs are integrating cultural competence development within their curricula.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine how SEP graduate programs develop and promote cultural competence within their programs. A survey inquiring about cultural competence development opportunities was distributed to 110 Anglophone SEP graduate programs; thirty-five program coordinators responded to the survey. Eighty-nine percent of programs offered at least one opportunity for cultural competence development; nevertheless, only 11 programs (31.4%) required students to participate in the opportunity.
Moreover, only 45% of the programs offered applied practicum opportunities that explicitly integrated cultural competence development into students’ supervision and practice. The focus of SEP education appears to remain on gaining cultural awareness and knowledge, but lacks discussion on cultural praxis of integrating knowledge into theory and practice. More experiences targeting behavior and attitudinal change are needed for students to become culturally competent and proficient (Wells, 2000).
Graduate programs should integrate the nine postulates and recommendations offered in the ISSP position stand on cultural competence (Ryba, Stambulova, Si, & Schinke, 2013) within their curriculum through course work, research, and practice opportunities Keywords: cultural development model, diversity, cultural praxis 49Symposia Tuesday July 11th Exploring gendered construction of runner identities in Shanghai through narrative inquiry Noora J. Ronkainen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University; Liverpool John Moores University) Long-distance running has long been a popular non-elite sport activity in other parts of the world, but it has only recently become a fashionable form of ‘serious’ leisure in China. In this presentation, I examine the challenges I encountered as a cultural outsider exploring the gendered construction of non-elite runner identities in Shanghai.
Using the guidelines of ISSP position stand on conducting a cultural psychology research project (Ryba et al., 2013), I explore how my project developed in terms of (1) seeking to understand various dimensions of participants’ cultural identity and their influence on running narratives; (2) exploring the role of my own cultural situatedness and taken-for-granted assumptions on the research process and interpretations made from the stories; (3) attempts to ensure that my methodology is appropriate for the cultural context; and (4) collaborations with the cultural insiders in the research group and learning from their expertise. I first discuss my challenges in designing the study, communication and practical research work. I will then focus on the analysis and highlight some of the local narratives that runners drew upon in identity construction.
While I found that runners in Shanghai share much of the narrative resources circulating the global running culture, local and changing gender narratives tied to the country’s rapid economic and societal changes were also important for understanding participants’ experiences. Shanghai’s cosmopolitan culture served as a backdrop for contesting cultural ideals surrounding gender and the body, and running was used to signify a ‘modern’, middle/upper class way of life. Keywords: gender identity, serious leisure, narrative inquiry, distance running Female judoka’s identities in Greece and Finland: A cultural praxis study Anna Kavoura, Tatiana V.
Ryba, Marja Kokkonen (University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland), Stiliani Chroni (Inland Norway University of Applied Science, Hedmark, Norway) This presentation discusses findings and methodological choices of a cultural praxis research on female judoka’s identities. Based on ethnographic data (interviews and participant observations) gathered in Greece and Finland, the research aimed at exploring the influence of the cultural context on female judoka’s experiences and identity negotiation. A discursive analytic procedure was employed which enabled us to trace the discourses through which female judoka articulate and make sense of their experiences.
Drawing on dominant cultural discourses, such as a female biological inferiority discourse, female judoka strategically construct multiple identities, each serving different purposes. For example, a naturally born fighter identity was employed to differentiate themselves from “ordinary” women who were thought as being soft, fragile, and incapable of fighting and competition. The findings reveal that gender hierarchies and inequalities persist in martial arts and are discursively constructed and reproduced.
We conclude that it is only by disrupting oppressive discourses that we might move towards gender equity. These findings have important implications for those who are interested in advancing the inclusivity and social justice agenda in martial arts. This study showed that the increased presence of women is not always enough to challenge persisting and powerful discourses that construct fighting as a masculine activity and martial arts as a male domain.
There is a need for discursive interventions. The call for the future is moving from theory to praxis and exploring what strategies and initiatives might prove more effective in disrupting and challenging these oppressive discourses. Keywords: discursive identity, ethnography, feminist poststructuralist theory, gender, martial arts ‘Nobody said it was easy’: Conducting research within culturally diverse teams Anastasiya Khomutova (University of Brighton, Eastbourne, UK) 50Symposia Tuesday July 11th Elite sport has increasingly become a multicultural phenomenon due to globalisation and sport labour migration within the last few decades.
Scholars in sport psychology have been addressing this ‘cultural turn’, acknowledging the importance of continuous research in this area as well as culturally informed applied practice (e.g. ISSP position stand on culturally competent research and practice in sport and exercise psychology). The first part of this presentation will focus on a relatively under-researched phenomenon in the area of cultural sport psychology - the functioning of culturally diverse teams, using the example of six professional basketball teams in Europe.
Particular focus will be given to the relationships between local and migrant athletes, discrepancies in their cultural orientations as a potential source of conflicts, and other factors that can influence team functioning. The second part of the presentation will discuss the experiences of the presenter in researching culturally diverse sports environment and of applied work with such sport teams. The presentation will conclude with recommendations for practising sport psychologists who would like to expand their cultural competence.
Keywords: cultural diversity, cultural sport psychology, ISSP position stand Cultural competence in sport and exercise psychology: Extending the ISSP position stand Brian Gearity (University of Denver) The ISSP position stand on culturally competent research and practice in sport and exercise psychology (Ryba, Stambulova, Si, & Schinke, 2013) and a wealth of research on sociocultural issues of sport (Coakley, 2015) shows us the ubiquity of culture in sport. In psychology, several scholars have identified the importance of culturally competent therapists to improve client outcomes and proposed multiple models on how to develop culturally competent practitioners (Cornish, Schreier, Nadkarni, Henderson Metzger, & Rodolfa, 2010). Unfortunately, the intersection of numerous social identities such as race, class, gender, amongst many others, have been identified as a missing component from the sociology of sport coaching (Gearity, 2012).
Although researchers generally agree that the coach-athlete relationship is vital to athletic performance and positive psychological functioning of athletes (Gearity & Murray, 2011), including mental health (Baker, Cote, & Hawes, 2000), only one recent study (Gearity & Henderson Metzger, in press) has examined issues of intersectionality, microaggressions, and inclusivity in sport coaching. To overstate, perhaps, our current present time’s conundrum—clinical psychology gets it, sport and exercise psychology is getting closer, and sport coaching is just showing up. So, how does a sport psychology consultant (SPC) juggle these complexities?
How do we engage sport coaches as culturally aware SPCs and advance the field of sport coaching to enhance their cultural competence? This presentation seeks to address these issues by reviewing related literature on culturally competence in sport psychology and sport coaching, offer the presenter’s experience delivering culturally aware mental skills training to teams and organizations, and suggest a framework for sport coach education to develop coach’s cultural competence. Keywords: coach, consultant, praxis, micro aggression, culture Sport psychology applications in Asia Chair: Emily Ortega (ASPASP) Following from the success of the earlier published e-book, Secrets of Asian Sport Psychology, this symposium brings together practitioners from Hong Kong, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, who will share how sport psychology has been applied in these countries not just to enhance sports performance, but also beyond the realm of sport to improve well-being.
Huang Zhijian shares the effectiveness of implementing a long-term intervention focusing on mindfulness for the Hong Kong Wushu team. Similarly, Emily Ortega shares a successful integrated approach in combining mental skills with biofeedback training for youth sport shooters 51Symposia Tuesday July 11th in Singapore. Naruepon Vonjaturapat reveals the unique approach used in mental training in Thailand that combines methods such as body scanning, meditation, and mixed relaxation technique.
Dilip Kumar Dureha, Priyanka Sharma, and Lalit Sharma present their research on Indian athletes, looking at how athletic intelligence and imagery influence athletic performance across athletes from different sports. Beyond elite sports, Maria Luisa Guinto-Adviento and Margarita Asuncion Zavala share their qualitative research study on the power of sport through dragon boat, in improving the quality of life of breast cancer survivors in the Philippines. Keywords: mental training, biofeedback, psychological interventions Effect of long-term mindfulness intervention on wushu training and competition: the case of Hong Kong wushu team Zhijian Huang (Hong Kong Sports Institute) The case of mindfulness-based long term applied sport psychology service with Hong Kong Wushu team was introduced with a systematic perspective in the present study.
Seven athletes who was preparing for the 13th World Wushu Championship took part in a 12-month mindfulness intervention program which can be divided into four stages. The content of the sport psychology practice was introduced in detail. The combination of mindfulness based interventions and the specificity of Wushu sport, as well as the adaptation of long-term sport psychology practice with the characteristic of the team was emphasized.
The effect of the intervention was also examined in both objective and subjective ways. Suggestion for the further mindfulness- based intervention program in elite sport is discussed. Keywords: mindfulness training, wushu, world championship, long-tern sport psychology intervention Integrating mental skills & biofeedback training for youth sport shooters in Singapore Emily Ortega (SIM University) The importance of psychological factors in sports is believed to be of great importance that separates the winners from the losers as winning margins narrow in competitive elite sports.
In closed skill accuracy sports in particular, management of psychological and physiological states are critical to ensure optimal performance. This intervention study examines the effectiveness of a sport-specific mental skills and biofeedback training program on youth athletes in Singapore. Fifty air rifle and air pistol shooters from a school air weapons team were divided equally and matched into control and experimental groups.
The experimental group participated in an intervention program focused on self-talk, relaxation, imagery, and automaticity (or routines), together with HRV biofeedback training. Post-intervention, the experimental group had significantly higher pre- performance HRV and had higher scores for self-talk, relaxation, imagery, and automaticity compared to the control group. Although self-efficacy and shooting scores improved at the end of the intervention, the increase was not statistically significant.
The improvement in HRV together with the higher shooting scores post- intervention shows the effectiveness of integrating mental skills with a short biofeedback training session – the shooters showed improved psychophysiological control which was translated into better performance. Keywords: heart rate variability, mental skills, biofeedback, shooting Secrets of Asian sport psychology: A unique way of mental training in Thailand Naruepon Vongjaturapat (Burapha University) Throughout the world, sport for excellent psychologists search for the best way to help athletes to reach their peak performance. This intention is no exception in Thailand.
Even though contemporary sport 52Symposia Tuesday July 11th psychology started less than a 30 years ago in Thailand, but psychology had been applied to our traditional athletes long before. Many of our Thai number one players of the world have practiced and worked with sport psychologists. This practice makes them different among the others.
We apply and test our mental training techniques through research and practice. Our way to work with start from the special and unique way of analyzes athletes’ need up until choosing the techniques for their need. Our body scanning, meditation and mixed relaxation techniques will be main parts of this presentation.
These practical phenomena are important and unique that sport psychologists need to understand clearly and practice their athletes accordingly. I will share with you also how to do from the beginning until their performance on the field. Keywords: psychological interventions, Thai athletes, peak performance Interactive effect of athletic intelligence, imagery and level of performance among sportspersons Dilip Kumar Dureha (Deemed University, India), Priyanka Sharma, Lalit Sharma (University of Delhi, India) The purpose of this study was to understand the effect of athletic intelligence, imagery and level of performance among sportspersons belonging to different games and sports i.e.
Badminton, Football, Gymnastics, Handball and Volleyball. One hundred and fifty subjects (30 from each games) were selected representing different games and having different levels of performance (10 players of each level, i.e. beginner, inter-mediate, and advance players) from the different colleges who were currently studying in various colleges and participating in games and sports aged from 17- 25.
“Attributing Rating Scale” for Athletic Intelligence which is developed by Johann Erikson (2007) and “SIAQ” Imagery questionnaire for assessing the imagery was developed by Martens (1982). The data was analysed by computing descriptive statistics and one-way ANOVA. The level of significance was set at 0.05.
The result of the study found that the athletic intelligence was higher among advance level of players which indicates that the players with higher athletic intelligence will have every possibility to excel in selected sport (Sharma & Kaur, 2013). Similarly, the high performers have shown better Imagery capabilities than the beginner and inter-mediate levels. Hence, it could be concluded that at the talent selection level Athletic Intelligence could be taken as a variable because if an athlete is selected with higher Athletic Intelligence there are chances that an athlete could efficiently be trained as the athlete is having better intelligence capabilities (Haslam, 2008).
Keywords: athletic intelligence, imagery, level of performance and sports person “I am a complete woman:” A qualitative study on the meaning of dragon boat to breast cancer survivors Margarita Asuncion Zavala, Maria Luisa Guinto-Adviento (University of the Philippines) Being diagnosed with breast cancer is likened by many of its survivors to receiving a death sentence. While some surrender to their fate with diminished meaning of life, others manage to accept the challenges of their condition and move on with greater appreciation of life. This qualitative study examined the experiences of breast cancer survivors whose engagement with dragon boat facilitated the improvement of their quality of life despite the radical surgeries and complex treatment regimens they had to undergo.
A focus group discussion was conducted with three female survivors of breast cancer who were actively engaged in dragon boat paddling. The in-depth discussion among these women provided rich data on their survival of breast cancer and how dragon boat provided them physical and psychosocial benefits. Thematic analysis of the transcription from the focus group discussion yielded the following themes: (1) strength from family support, (2) increased personal control, (3) meaningful social relationships, (4) improved physical health and (5) renewed body image.
All three women survivors agreed that dragon boat became instrumental in their 53Symposia Tuesday July 11th experience of meaningful and active lives, and a greater sense of being a “complete woman” despite having one breast less. Keywords: breast cancer, dragon boat, focus group discussion, thematic analysis Cross-cultural examinations of the consequences of the coach-created motivational climate Chair: Isabel Balaguer (University of Valencia) Research has confirmed that athletes' optimised as well as diminished health and functioning are impacted by the social psychological environment created by the coach. These past studies have tended to pull from two of the contemporary theories of motivation, namely achievement goal theory (AGT; Ames, 1992; Nicholls, 1989) and self-determination theory (SDT; Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2007).
Pulling from Duda’s proposal (2013) of a theoretically integrated view of the motivational climate, three presentations define the climate as multidimensional in nature and differentiated by the degree to which the environment is more or less ‘empowering’ and ‘disempowering’. Castillo and colleagues present a longitudinal study involving young footballers, predominantly boys, from 5 European countries. Appleton et al‘ research is conducted with female athletes from England and Spain.
In both studies, a model is presented testing the predictive power of empowering and disempowering dimensions of the climate on variables of interest. In a study of young soccer players from Spain and England, Hall et al, examine the relationship of dimensions of perfectionism to adaptive and maladaptive outcomes. Also tested the potential moderator effect of the empowering and disempowering climate in the links between perfectionism and basic psychological needs.
As coaches are likely to engage in both controlling and autonomy-supportive behaviours simultaneously and to differential degrees, Tristan and colleagues, consider the interaction between autonomy-supportive and controlling features of the coach- created social environment predicting athletes’ well and ill-being. Stemming from Bandura’s theoretical conceptualisations of moral disengagement (1991) and self-efficacy (1997), Boardley and his colleagues examine processes linking Australian, British and American athletes’ perceptions of their coaches’ doping confrontation efficacy and susceptibility to intentional and inadvertent doping. Keywords: motivational climate, self-efficacy, sport, cross-cultural, adaptive, maladaptive Relationships between motivational climates, goal orientations, perceived competence and self-determined motivation in soccer players from five European countries Isabel Castillo, Inés Tomás (University of Valencia), Oddrun Samdal (University of Bergen), Philippe Sarrazin (Université Joseph Fourier), Yngvar Ommundsen (University of Oslo), Jaume Cruz (Autonomous University of Barcelona), Howard Hall (York St John University), Athanasios Papaioannou (University of Thessaly), Isabel Balaguer (University of Valencia), Joan Duda (University of Birmingham) Based on the Self-Determination (Deci & Ryan, 1985, 2000) and the Achievement Goal (Nicholls, 1989) theories, this study tested structural process models specifying hypothesized relationships of features of the coach-created motivational climate (how empowering and disempowering at the beginning of the season, T1) to goal orientations (at the end of the season, T2), to perceptions of competence (T2), to the level of self- determined motivation (T2).
Participants were 1684 young soccer players from five different European countries (France, n = 253; Greece, n = 206; Norway, n = 184; Spain, n = 784; UK, n = 257) aged 10-14 years. A time-lagged design with two waves of data was used; and models were tested by means of Structural Equation Modeling using Mplus. The fit indices were acceptable in all 5 countries.
Results revealed that empowering climate and disempowering climate were positively related to task orientation and ego orientation respectively in Norway, Spain and UK. Whereas in Greece, only the expected positive relationship between empowering 54Symposia Tuesday July 11th climate and task orientation was statistically significant. In all countries, task orientation showed a positive relationship with perceived competence and self-determined motivation.
Additionally, ego orientation was negatively related to self-determined motivation in all countries except for Norway. Ego orientation was positively related to perceived competence in Greece and Spain. Finally, perceived competence was positively related to self-determined motivation in Spain and UK.
Overall hypothesized model was holding when testing in each country albeit some differences in particular paths were noted. More work is needed to see if such differences can be replicated and subsequent analyses are warranted which test for invariance across the 5 countries. Keywords: motivational climates, goal orientations, perceived competence, self-determined motivation, soccer players, European countries Anxiety and enjoyment in sport: A test of the basic psychological needs theory among English and Spanish female athletes Paul Appleton (University of Birmingham, UK), Lorena González (European University of Valencia, Spain), Joan Duda (University of Birmingham, UK) Guided by basic psychological need theory (Deci & Ryan, 2000) and Duda’s (2013) multidimensional conceptualisation of the motivational climate, this project tested whether the coach-created motivational climate – basic psychological needs – outcome sequence was invariant in female athletes from two countries (England and Spain).
590 English (M age = 17.1, SD = 4.0) and 552 Spanish (M age = 15.5, SD = 3.8) female athletes completed measures of the coach-created empowering and disempowering motivational climate (EDMCQ-C; Appleton et al, 2016), psychological need satisfaction (McAuley et al, 1989; Richer & Vallerand, 1998; Standage et al, 2005) and thwarting (Bartholomew et al, 2011), anxiety (Smith et al, 2006) and enjoyment (IMI; McAuley et al., 1989) experienced in sport. Data were analysed using path analyses in Mplus. The hypothesised model showed an acceptable fit to the data: χ2 (df = 4) 42.497; p<.001; CFI=.96; RSMEA=.09 (CI 95% = .07 −.13); SRMR = .03.
Analyses revealed that empowering climate positively predicted need satisfaction and negatively predicted need thwarting. In contrast, disempowering climate negatively predicted need satisfaction and positively predicted need thwarting. Need satisfaction positively predicted enjoyment and negatively predicted anxiety, whereas need thwarting was a negative predictor of enjoyment.
These findings were invariant across the two countries. Conversely, the association between need thwarting and anxiety was negative and significant in Spain but non-significant in England, indicating a non-invariant path. Finally, indirect effects were supported except in the climate (both empowering and disempowering) – need thwarting – anxiety sequence.
Based on the findings, this study provides partial support for basic psychological needs theory as a framework for understanding determinants of anxiety and enjoyment among English and Spanish female athletes. Keywords: motivational climate, anxiety, enjoyment, basic psychological needs, cross-country invariance, female athletes Perfectionism and psychological needs satisfaction in youth soccer: The moderator role of motivational climate Howard Hall (York St John University), Francisco Atienza, Isabel Castillo (University of Valencia), Lorena González (European University of Valencia), Paul Appleton (University of Birmingham), Isabel Balaguer (University of Valencia) The study had three objectives. First, to examine the psychometric properties of the Spanish version of the MIPS (Stoeber, Otto, & Stoll, 2006).
Second, to analyze the association between perfectionism and adaptive and maladaptive variables. Third, to explore whether the motivational climate moderated the relationship 55Symposia Tuesday July 11th between perfectionism and basic psychological needs. The Spanish version of the MIPS was analyzed in a sample of 419 Spanish soccer players (M age =11.48; SD = 1.2).CFA indicated that a two-dimensional model of the MIPS provided a good fit with the data, sub-scales internally consistent and with concurrent validity.
The second and third objective of the study, were analyzed in a sample of 239 Spanish (M age = 11.50; SD = 1.10) and 202 English (M age = 12.31; SD = 1.41) soccer players. Athlete perceptions of the coach created environment (empowering and disempowering climate; Appleton et al., 2016), perfectionism (MIPS and MPS (Cox, Enns & Clara, 2002), and various adaptive (enjoyment, vitality, psychological need satisfaction) and maladaptive (anxiety & drop out) variables were assessed. The findings differed by country.
Perfectionistic concerns was positively associated with maladaptive outcomes in the Spanish and English samples and negatively associated with adaptive outcomes in the English sample. Perfectionistic strivings demonstrated associations in the opposite direction. In the Spanish sample, the disempowering climate moderated the relationship between Striving for Perfection (SP) and psychological needs satisfaction.
As the disempowering climate decreased, the relationship between SP and needs satisfaction became more positive. However, in the English sample, the disempowering climate moderated the relationship between the Self-Oriented Perfectionism (SOP) and psychological needs satisfaction. In contrast to the Spanish sample, as the disempowering climate increased, the relationship between SOP and needs satisfaction became more positive.
Keywords: motivational climate, perfectionism, adaptive, maladaptive, needs satisfaction Interaction of the players’ perceptions of the coaches’ interpersonal styles and implications for athletes’ well- and ill-being in Mexico and Spain José Tristán (Autonomous University of Nuevo León, Mexico), Inés Tomás (University of Valencia, Spain), Jeanette López-Walle, Felipe Reynoso, (Autonomous University of Nuevo León, Mexico) Isabel Castillo, Isabel Balaguer (University of Valencia, Spain). This study examines the relationship between players’ perceptions of the coaches’ autonomy support and indicators of well- and ill-being (self-esteem and burnout), testing the moderating role of players’ perceptions of the coaches’ controlling style in two countries. 725 Spanish young soccer players aged between 11 and 13 years, and 688 Mexican athletes from different sports aged 18-26 years, completed a questionnaire package tapping the variables of interest.
In both countries, the results using moderated regression analysis (PROCESS macro for SPSS) showed that the perceived controlling coaching moderated the relationship between the perceived autonomy support coaching and athletes’ well-being (self-esteem). Furthermore, in both countries, perceived controlling coaching moderated the relationship between autonomy support coaching and athletes’ ill-being (burnout). Concretely, in the Spanish sample, when low levels of perceived controlling coaching (-1SD) were observed, perceived autonomy support coaching was negatively related to burnout.
As far as perceived controlling coaching increased, this relationship became non-significant. In the Mexican sample, the relationship between perceived autonomy support coaching and burnout was not statistically significant for low levels of perceived controlling coaching (-1SD), but became positive and significant for high levels of perceived controlling coaching (+1SD). In sum, in Spanish soccer players and in Mexican athletes, potential beneficial effects that autonomy-supportive interpersonal style could have on well- and ill-being, are diminished, and even blocked or reversed when the social environment is highly controlling.
Keywords: autonomy support, controlling style, self-esteem, burnout, Mexico, Spain Athletes’ perceptions of their technical and strength and conditioning coaches’ doping confrontation efficacy and susceptibility to intentional and inadvertent doping Ian Boardley (University of Birmingham, UK), Nikos Ntoumanis (Curtin University, Australia), Alan Smith (Michigan State University, USA) 56Symposia Tuesday July 11th Coach doping confrontation efficacy may deter athlete doping (Sullivan, Feltz, LaForge-MacKenzie, & Hwang, 2015). Thus, we examined a model in which doping self-regulatory efficacy (SRE) and doping moral disengagement (MD) mediated relations between athletes’ perceptions of their technical and strength and conditioning (S&C) coaches’ doping confrontation efficacy and their susceptibility to intentional and inadvertent doping. Athletes (N = 258; age M = 22.0 years) from Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States completed psychometric measures assessing the study variables.
Structural equation modeling supported the fit of the model, (χ2 (212) = 298.16, p < .05; CFI = .954; RMSEA = .040; SRMR = .049). Athletes’ perceptions of the two coaches’ doping confrontation efficacy had a moderate-to-strong correlation (i.e., r = .41). Perceptions of technical coach doping confrontation efficacy positively predicted doping SRE (β = .22) and perceptions of S&C coach doping confrontation efficacy negatively predicted doping MD (β = –.25).
Doping SRE negatively predicted doping MD (β = –.41) and susceptibility to intentional doping (β = –.33). Finally, doping MD positively predicted susceptibility to intentional (β = .31) and inadvertent (β = .42) doping. Mediational analyses identified significant indirect negative predictive effects of perceptions of technical and S&C coaches on susceptibility to intentional (βTechnical = –.14; βS&C = –.13) and inadvertent (βTechnical = –.13; βS&C = –.14) doping.
The strength of the association between athletes’ perceptions of the two coaches, and divergent predictive effects for perceptions of the two coaches, support the potential importance of both types of coach for our understanding of coaching influences that may impact intentional and inadvertent doping. Data collection is ongoing; once complete (target N = 600) multisample analyses will determine the invariance of model effects across athletes from the three countries. Keywords: coach doping confrontation efficacy, moral disengagement, performance enhancing drugs, self- regulatory efficacy, cross-country invariance Psychological features and interventions in endurance performance Chair: Maurizio Bertollo (University G.
d'Annunzio of Chieti-Pescara) Endurance performance can be mentally demanding and athletes have reported psychological demands, related to training and competition, that require a variety of mental strategies (McCormick, Meijen, & Marcora, 2017). Early research suggested that there are primarily two coping strategies that can be used to enhance performance in endurance tasks (a) association and (b) dissociation. More recently associative and dissociative thoughts during endurance performance were classified as inward monitoring (e.g., fatigue), outward monitoring (e.g., strategy), inward distraction (e.g., daydreams), or outward distraction (e.g., scenery; see Brick, MacIntyre, & Campbell 2014).
Persistence, effort or perseverance are often reported as signature behaviors of mentally tough individuals involved in endurance sport. During the symposium, a practical application of psychological support for runners, defined psyching team, will be presented as well as the influence of natural settings on cognition and the effect of human nature interactions. Moreover, mental toughness in aerobic activity will be discussed as well as the influence of mindfulness training on running economy.
Finally, the psychophysiological features related to associative strategies will be presented as well as some preliminary evidence suggesting that anodal tDCS increases exercise tolerance in a cycling. Keywords: endurance, attentional strategies, psyching team, mindfulness, mental toughness, green exercise Attentional focus in endurance activities: The influence of natural settings on cognition Tadhg MacIntyre (University of Limerick), Noel Brick (Ulster University) Endurance activity in sport has been the subject of study by researchers from a cognitive perspective for almost four decades (Morgan, 1978). Recently research has employed a range of methodologies from naturalistic observations to laboratory based studies to explore the cognitions of athletes.
New models have 57Symposia Tuesday July 11th been developed which provide a more comprehensive account than early accounts grounded in an internal and external dichotomy of association versus dissociation. Brick et al. (2014) has proposed that metacognitive processes augment the active self-regulatory processes and both internal sensory and outward monitoring.
Additionally, active and involuntary distraction play a role and we argue that the setting in which the activity occurs may have a key role in this process. To explain, many endurance activities and events occur in natural settings ranging from forest trails to lakeside paths. Researchers have become increasingly interested in the effect of human nature interactions.
One topic of interest has been ‘green exercise’ or physical activity in natural settings (Pretty, 2003). Tentative evidence from attention restoration theory has suggested that this human nature interaction enhances cognitive function (Hartig et al. 2014).
The theory posits that natural stimuli require effortless attention and thus enable rest from our more typical directed attention system. One question for researchers is whether exposure to natural stimuli is enough for these potential ergogenic effects? Is noticing nature, a more demanding level of engagement with the multi-sensory stimuli, required for these effects to emerge?
How do these demands, for example in visual cognition, interact with the competing task demands of endurance running (e.g., pace control and self-regulation). Evidence for the benefits of contact with nature at a cognitive and emotional level are reviewed. Future research directions are outlined and the need for a transdisciplinary approach is advocated.
Keywords: attentional focus, endurance, cognition, green exercise, attention restoration Dealing with psychological demands in endurance performance: Brief contact interventions as a practical application in long-distance running events Carla Meijen (University of Kent, Medway, United Kingdom) Long-distance running events such as a marathon can be mentally demanding. Recreational athletes in various endurance sports have reported psychological demands related to training and competition, these demands involved time investment and lifestyle sacrifices, commitment to training sessions, pre-event stressors, exercise sensations, optimising pacing, and remaining focused despite adversity (McCormick, Meijen, & Marcora, 2017). To help deal with psychological demands that endurance athletes may experience, sport psychologists can draw on a variety of mental strategies.
A practical application of psychological support for runners is the concept of psyching teams. Psyching teams provide brief mental support to runners before, during, and after long-distance running events such as half and full marathons. This use of brief, non-traditional interventions includes strategies such as mantras and anchoring (Meijen, Day, & Hays, 2017).
In this presentation, there will be a critical reflection of the potential benefits of a psyching team. In addition, an overview of variables that may help to explain the potential effectiveness of psychological strategies used in psyching teams will be provided. Finally, the challenges of testing the effectiveness of psychological strategies in a real-life setting such as a psyching team will be discussed.
Keywords: running, psyching teams, qualitative research, psychological support Mental toughness and behavioural perseverance among Australian rules footballers Brandon Giles, Dylan Warner (School of Sport Science, Exercise and Health, The University of Western Australia), Paul Goods (Western Australian Institute of Sport), Dale Quain, Peter Peeling (School of Sport Science, Exercise and Health, The University of Western Australia), Kagan Ducke, Daniel Gucciardi (School of Physiotherapy and Exercise Science, Curtin University) Persistence, effort, or perseverance are often reported as ‘signature’ behaviours of mentally tough individuals. Although recent work has provided preliminary evidence to support this theoretical expectation, no study to date has examined the association between mental toughness and behavioural perseverance while accounting for an individual’s aerobic capacity. To address this gap in the literature, 31 well-trained, male 58Symposia Tuesday July 11th Australian Rules footballers aged 18 to 28 years (21.65 + 2.93) completed two testing sessions separated by 7 days.
One week prior to the first session, participants self-reported their mental toughness. Session 1 consisted of a graded exercise test (GXT) to measure participants’ V ̇O2peak. Session 2 involved the completion of a standalone 20 m multistage shuttle run test (MST).
Blood lactate (BLa), heart rate (HR) and a rating of perceived exertion (RPE) were collected at various stages of each testing session. Psychological (RPEsession1 18.87 + 1.31; RPEsession2 17.84 + 1.46) and physiological (HRsession1 193.23 + 7.41; HRsession2 191.84 + 8.63; BLasession1 10.33 + 2.75; BLasession2 8.96 + 2.68) data indicated that participants exerted high effort during both testing sessions. Bayesian path analysis with informative priors from past research indicated that V ̇O2peak (B = .47, CI95 = .22, 73) and mental toughness (B = .20, CI95 = .01, .38) but not age or height were substantive indicators of MST performance.
Sensitivity analyses revealed a discrepancy between results obtained using informative versus uninformative priors; the incongruence between prior beliefs and the data could be a result of theory, the population, or other study features. As such, these findings require replication (e.g., diverse sample of athletes) and extension (e.g., manipulation of mental toughness) in future research to clarify the nature of the association between mental toughness and behavioural perseverance. Keywords: Bayesian statistics, beep test, psycho-physiological, maximum oxygen uptake, mental toughness Psychophysiological features associated with associative strategies in endurance performance Selenia Di Fronso, Laura Bortoli, Silvia Comani, Claudio Robazza, Maurizio Bertollo (BIND-Behavioral Imaging and Neural Dynamics Center, Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, “G.
d'Annunzio” University of Chieti-Pescara) Associative and dissociative thoughts during endurance performance are usually classified as inward monitoring (e.g., fatigue), outward monitoring (e.g., strategy), inward distraction (e.g., daydreams), or outward distraction (e.g., scenery; Stevenson & Biddle, 1998). There is general agreement about the importance of studying how different attentional strategies influence performance in sport settings (see Brick, MacIntyre, & Campbell 2014). Drawing on Stevinson and Biddle’s (1998) classification, Brick et al.
(2014) suggested that the associative dimension in attentional studies should include active self-regulation (i.e., thoughts related to cadence, pacing, technique, strategy, or maintaining a relaxed state) and internal sensory monitoring. Recently, in an endurance task Bertollo et al. (2015) showed that both external strategies (focus on outward pacing) and internal strategies (focus on core components of the task) can exert functional effects on performance compared to an attentional focus directed toward irrelevant components.
Moreover, Comani et al.’s (2014) findings indicate that specific functional connectivity patterns may be associated with different types of attentional strategies. Further psychophysiological patterns related to internal and external associative strategies will be also presented, as well as some preliminary evidence suggesting that anodal tDCS increases exercise tolerance in a cycling. Keywords: focus of attention, attentional strategies, Internal and external associative strategies The influence of mindfulness training on running economy and flow in trained runners Antje Hill, Linda Schücker, Julian König (University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany), Norbert Hagemann (University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany) Although attentional focusing in endurance sports is a well investigated topic, there is not yet a consensus on which focus can be regarded as the most optimal one.
Recently, the role of mindfulness training has been discussed to play an important role in terms of maintaining a beneficial focus of attention (Bortoli et al., 2012), as well as to promote flow experience (Gardner & Moore, 2004). The current study examines the impact of a mindfulness program to optimize attentional focusing in running. 17 trained runners attended a 4-week 59Symposia Tuesday July 11th mindfulness program.
Before (T1) and after (T2) the program, they were asked to run on a treadmill at moderate intensity under three attention conditions that have been proven to be beneficial in the literature (internal focus on running movement, external focus on video, focus on core component of the movement). T1 and T2 were compared in terms of running economy (objective measurement) and flow experience (subjective measurement) to examine if training of mindfulness 1) promotes flow experience and 2) leads to lower oxygen consumption values among all attention conditions. Running economy was assessed via spiroergometry.
Repeated measures ANOVA indicated a significant increase of flow experience for T2 among all attention conditions (F(1,16) = 7.77, p=.01, ɳp2=.19). No significant difference could be found regarding running economy. This study shows benefits of a mindfulness training program on subjective flow experience.
Future studies should be conducted with a higher number of participants and an extended mindfulness program. Keywords: running economy, flow experience, mindfulness Perceptions and concepts of working with elite athletes and coaches Chair: Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) The symposium aims at introducing a systematic and evidenced-based approach of implementing mental support for elite athletes. Five presentations comprise this symposium, which consists of practitioners/researchers from North America and Asia describing their research findings and practical lessons in working with elite athletes.
The symposium begins by examining Israeli athletes' and coaches' perceptions of the London 2012 Olympic Games as a career change-event, and the mental support provided prior, during, and following the Games. Lessons to be learned are emphasized. The second presentation takes a cultural approach to mental service delivery.
Specifically, issues such as race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, education, and nationality must be considered when working with athletes and coaches preparing for world events and the Olympic Games. The third presentation centers on different methods practitioners use to transform research findings and theoretical knowledge into actual situations to instill determination, optimization, persistence and effort leading to enhanced performance in Malaysian athletes. The fourth presentation is devoted to practical principles derived from theory and research to the mental strategies with the Canadian water polo female National team.
The final presentation is devoted to practices which help athletes become active participants in their personal development, aimed at enhancing intrinsic motivation and controllable causal attributions. Together, the presentations emphasize the important role of delivering mental services to elite athletes, and highlight the scientist-practitioner perspective while considering personal and cultural needs of the athletes and coaches we collaborate. Keywords: mental preparation, performance enhancement, research-based practice, psychological support, cultural sport psychology, Olympic Games Israeli athletes' and coaches' perceptions of London 2012 as a career change-event Roy David Samuel (Kibbutzim College of Education Technology and the Arts, Florida State University), Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University), Hila Gil Bar-Mecher (Binyamina Givat-Ada Local Council Sport Department, Binyamina, Israel) The Olympic/Paralympic Games (OGs) represent the highest professional ambition of many athletes (Wylleman, Reints, & Van Aken, 2012).
Recently, researchers have begun considering the OGs as a multifaceted within-career transition (Stambulova, 2016). Yet, existing research of this transition mostly applied qualitative designs. This study used the Scheme of Change for Sport Psychology Practice (SCSPP; Samuel & Tenenbaum, 2011a) to examine athletes' and coaches' perceptions of, coping with, and outcome of the London 2012 OGs.
A cross-sectional and retrospective design was applied. Sixty one Israeli Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches completed the Change-Event Inventory (Samuel & Tenenbaum, 2011b) and Athletic/Coaching Identity 60Symposia Tuesday July 11th Measurement Scale (AI/CI; Brewer & Cornelius, 2001) two years after the London 2012 OGs. Athletes and coaches reported comparable levels of motivation and AI/CI.
The OGs experience was perceived as a highly significant and positive change-event in athletes' and coaches' careers. The perceived significance was associated with AI/CI. At the time of Olympic qualification the participants tended either to ignore this change- event or cope with it independently; however, most participants reported making a subsequent decision to change.
Professional resources of support were mainly available prior to and during the OGs, but less after the OGs. During this experience the participants did not consider using sport psychology services, but retrospectively, valued the usefulness of this type of support. Athletes' motivation after the OGs significantly decreased and was predicted from their satisfaction of coping.
Athletes' perceived outcome of this change- event was predicted from their satisfaction of competition results. Both athletes and coaches should be given psychological support throughout the Olympic cycle, especially in promoting a decision to change as well as maintaining realistic expectations of results. A creative theory-driven practice to increase team functioning in preparation to Olympic Qualification and World Championship Veronique Richard (Florida State University) In this presentation, I describe my psychological work with the Canadian water-polo team preparations for the Rio Olympics and the World Championship.
I illustrate how mental performance interventions were conducted in that specific context. Guided by the Optimal Team Functioning (OTF) model (Collins & Durand- Bush, 2015), several creative theories driven interventions were implemented in the team. Structural team processes were developed through extensive workshops following an innovative version of the 3-stage goal setting approach protocol.
Team regulation processes were improved using comic improvisation oriented by coping effectiveness training concepts. Communication skills were fostered in short 10 minutes’ locker room interventions. Finally, individual regulation processes were reinforce using an imagery script developed by the team and recorded on an inspirational instrumental music for every player to attend to it on their own.
Intervention outcome was reflected in an increased sense of cohesion in the team allowing athletes to overcome set backs and difficulties in a much more adaptive manner. Players became more performance- oriented which in turn influenced positively training efficiency and performance enhancement. Communication during plays, openness to feedback from teammates, and persistence during games were only a few performance factors that have benefited form the OTF.
Steering 'numbers' to performance: D.O.P.E approach (Determination-Optimization- Persistence-Effort) for performance Jolly Roy (Sport Psychology center, National Sport Institute of Malaysia) Of major concern is how research findings published in the scientific assets can be transformed into the practitioners' and athletes' practices in actual competition. While research findings contribute immensely to our understanding of the psychological dimensions of competitive sport, the methods by which these can be implemented remains an art rather than a science. I introduce different methods practitioners use to transform research findings and theoretical knowledge into actual situations to instill determination, optimization, persistence and effort leading to enhanced performance.
More specifically, the presentation centers on (1) creating appropriate self-determination for sport engagement by inculcating identified responsibility, (2) keeping athletes in individual optimal zone throughout the competition period by maintaining constructive thoughts and emotions, (3) encouraging athletes to strive in adversity and persist until achieving one's goal, and (4) enhancing the quality of effort. The presentation includes examples from real competitive situations and demonstrates the importance of research-based practices. Research informed practice with the Canadian Olympic boxing team Robert J.
Schinke (Laurentian University, Canada) 61Symposia Tuesday July 11th Sport psychologists have often utilized a mono-cultural approach to research and practice. Though many scholars have viewed their approaches as race blind, where they treat all sport participants the same, recent literature has debunked this viewpoint of sameness being commensurate with equality. Over the span of 10 years, CSP has developed rapidly, borrowing from cultural psychology.
There are now multiple sport psychologies, infused with race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, education, and nationality. These idiosyncratic “approaches to the field” contribute to heightened relevance at the practical level for athletes, coaches, and sport scientists. Within this presentation, I focus on a sub-cultural and contextualized research – practice dialectic situated within the context of the Canadian National Boxing Team over the course of successive Olympic cycles.
I draw upon my practical work in the field and its tie back to federally funded research focused particularly on (a) Canadian Aboriginal, then (b) immigrant, and finally (c) marginalized athlete identities. This practice to research linkage will be situated within applications at major games training camps, leading to Olympic birth and performance. Using the Canadian boxing context as a springboard, I consider how I developed into a cultural sport psychology scholar – practitioner who utilizes ontological, epistemological, and methodological alignment, and how these contribute to performance enhancement and holistic athlete development.
Recommendations are briefly proposed regarding how to develop a scientist – practitioner model that is uniquely your own, situated within the elite sport context where you wish to work over the long-term. Implementation and utilization of post-event reflection in collegiate athletes Graig M. Chow, Matteo Luzzeri, Stinne Soendergaard (Florida State University) The underlying basis of many psychological interventions is self-awareness.
Moreover, self-awareness is a fundamental staple of optimal sport performance (Ravizza & Fifer, 2014), and is thought to facilitate self- reflection and self-monitoring, which are essential skills for self-regulation and correction (Kirschenbaum, 1997). Athletes vary in their ability to comprehensively self-reflect on their performances and may at times over rely on feedback provided by coaches and others. Helping athletes become more active participants in their personal development is theorized to improve intrinsic motivation and result in more internal and controllable causal attributions (Allen et al., 2010; Butler & Hardy, 1992).
While there is ample research on pre- competition and pre-performance routines to guide applied practice, there is a lack of research and associated techniques on routines that are beneficial for athletes to utilize post-competition. Within this presentation we introduce a tool—the Post-Event Reflection—that sport psychology practitioners can use with their athletes to assist them in critiquing their performances in a productive, improvement-focused manner. With both open- ended reflective questions and self-assessment quantitative items, the Post-Event Reflection was structured for athletes to constructively reflect on their competition or practice performances in order to maximize learning and adjusting.
Specific sections and steps for implementing the Post-Event Reflection will be detailed as well as potential variations depending on the client’s presenting concerns and needs. We will share our experiences using the tool with collegiate athletes, including highlighting its purposes, strengths, and challenges. Data from athletes who have completed the Post-Event Reflection will be presented, and adaptations and extensions of the technique will be advanced.
Bridging the research-practice ‘gap’ in sport and exercise psychology: three strategies for reconciliation Chair: Richard Keegan (University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia) The research-practice ‘gap’ in sport psychology has been recognized and critiqued by Martens (1979) and Vealey (2006). The ‘gap’ refers to failures in transferring research findings into practice, and/or in establishing the efficacy of key practice decisions and interventions. Such ‘gaps’ exist in many fields of science, and have similar causes and consequences – which will be examined in the first presentation.
Most notably, the purposes, contexts and reward structures of research and practice are markedly different (cf. Norman, 2010). A serious consequence of permitting such a gap is that the legitimacy of well-regulated and highly ethical applied 62Symposia Tuesday July 11th practice can still be questioned if the underpinning research base is lacking.
This symposium will seek to characterize the research-practice gap in sport psychology and offer clear, readily implemented routes to achieving a ‘reconciliation’. The presentations in the symposium will provide examples and reflections on three different approaches to ‘bridging’ the research-practice gap: (a) researching applied practice, (b) delivering practically useful research, and (c) research-informed practice. Our presentations will come from a diverse international team of researchers and practitioners, who themselves embody the bridging of the ‘gap’.
First, Richard Keegan will overview the landscape of this topic, and provide key insights into how we might address the problem. Second, Vana Hutter will report on her research examining how well research is utilised by trainee practitioners in sport psychology (themes a+c). Third, Toby Woolway reports on two research projects examining the ways that sport psychology practitioners are recruited (theme a).
Fourth, Renee appeal presents the findings and reflections from the ongoing 'Stay Healthy' injury prevention project at the AIS (themes b+c). Fifth, Richard Keegan reports on a detailed process evaluation of a state sport academy’s psychological support service (themes a + b) Keywords: Applied practice, scientist-practitioner, consultancy, practitioner, research-informed practice Practice-based evidence on evidence-based practice Vana Hutter (Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands.) ‘Scientific knowledge and methods’ was labelled as one of the foundational competency domains in the competency benchmarks for professional psychology (see Rodolfa et al., 2005; Fouad et al., 2009). The question remains however: to what extent is evidence-based practice actually practiced in applied sport psychology?
I will shed light on this question from my experience at a postgraduate program in applied sport psychology. I will discuss to what extent trainee sport psychologists find research and literature helpful and to what extent trainees seem capable of applying research in their professional practice. First, findings from interviews with graduates on the use of literature and conferences will be presented.
Content review of 58 quotes from the interviews (N=16) illustrate that students and graduates mainly used literature and presentations on professional practice and professional development. They seemed to use literature to build a scientific foundation of professional practice, as apposed to a scientific foundation of psychology and sport sciences. Second, an analysis of the assessment scores on the case reports of trainees (N=18) will be presented.
Supervisors and exam committee members scored the extent to which trainees substantiated their application of interventions with their clients with recent and relevant literature. The exam committee members deemed this competency to be under par in half of the cases. Supervisors, on the other hand, only scored 10% of the cases as insufficient in this regard.
Although the sample size is very limited, this points to the question whether trainees are appropriately trained to substantiate their practice with evidence, and whether this competency is sufficiently endorsed in supervision. Keywords: trainee, training, qualitative, competencies Gaining entry as a Sport Psychologist: a review and extension of current knowledge Toby Woolway (Loughborough University, Loughborough, United Kingdom) Gaining entry to practice is the precursor to subsequent service provision for any Applied Sport Psychologist. Understanding the factors that influence this process can aid in the development of educational training programs, marketing tools for the field as a whole and what is necessary to gain entry.
As part of a two-piece research project, a systematic narrative review was conducted on studies that investigated the preferred characteristics of the Sport Psychology Consultant (SPC) in terms of a clients’ likelihood to seek services. However, the majority of participants were prospective, non-decision making individuals. Building on the findings of this study, with particular regard to the limitations of past research, a qualitative study was 63Symposia Tuesday July 11th undertaken.
Seven ‘gatekeepers’ directly involved with the hiring of SPCs within the United Kingdom participated in interviews guided by an interpretive phenomenology approach. The participants’ experiential data revealed four superordinate themes that influenced their historic hiring decisions. Consultant affability, confidence in sport psychology, the ability to find common ground, and the ability to effectively promote one’s consultant competencies.
The findings of this study provide the applied practitioner with a detailed account of the gatekeepers’ perspective on the gaining entry process and what is important to this group of individuals when choosing a practitioner to grant entry. Keywords: gatekeepers, hiring, marketing, competencies, practitioner attributes, review Stay healthy to prepare and perform: Opportunities for sport psychology research and practice Renee N. Appaneal (Australian Institute of Sport) This presentation describes the integration role of sport psychology within an innovative interdisciplinary project at a national sports institute, to promote athlete athletes’ health.
The project seeks to ensure as many athletes as possible reach international competitions having lost as few training days as possible to injury or illness. Recent data showed that 56% of illnesses among a sample of the nation’s elite athletes occurred within the final two months before key events (Raysmith & Drew, 2016); where none of the athletes who fell ill during this period achieved their performance goals. To be proactive in the management of potential risks during the final year of an Olympic/Paralympic cycle, a multifaceted research program was developed across key streams thought to contribute to athletes’ illness risk.
The Stay Healthy Project represents expertise from across the institute’s performance support division, and includes research streams in genetics, medicine, psychology, nutrition, training load, sleep and wellbeing. This project created an opening for sport psychology to participate in the identification of risk factors, and ultimately, the prevention of illness/injury, to enable athletes’ uninterrupted preparation. An overview will be given of the psychology stream that reflects links to resilience and stress-recovery balance.
A simple framework that ties together mental and physical health, preparation and performance will be offered, including specific ways it links health to performance, and unifies sport psychology research and practice. Also to be highlighted are the ways in which involvement in this project has created a more aligned and strategic research agenda as well as fostered relationships with universities that may nurture and connect the sport psychology community. Qualitative process evaluation of a state sport academy’s psychology service Richard Keegan, Lena Kessler, Sarah Jack (University of Canberra, Australia) Process evaluations have an important role in assessing the fidelity and quality of program implementation; clarifying causal mechanisms and identifying contextual factors associated with variation in outcomes (Dieppe et al., 2008; Moore et al., 2015).
While the effectiveness of a program can be assessed by examining outcomes, effect sizes do not provide managers and policy makers with information on how efficacy is being achieved in individual instances of support (Moore et al., 2015). For these reasons, a qualitative process evaluation was conducted to identify the current strengths, opportunities, and threats in the psychology service offered by a state sports academy. Semi-structured interviews focused on core theme identified in the Medical Research Council model: (i) aims of service; (ii) context and environment; (iii) implementation – what is done by the sport psychs?; (iv) attributes of the sport psychologists; (v) mechanisms of impact; (vi) outcomes generated.
Seven interviews and one focus group were conducted, including all current psychologists, managers, athletes, and one full time coach. Several themes permeated the analysis, including an apparent tension between the aims of supporting performance versus supporting ‘the human’; the specific context and constraints of providing a service to a wide array of talented, ‘pre-elite’ and elite athletes; 64Symposia Tuesday July 11th a diverse range of support strategies; flexibility in underlying assumptions and models; autonomy and support from management; and an imbalance of time spent on service delivery over strategic planning and reflection. Notably, the ‘outcomes’ that were highly valued by athletes, coaches and managers were not closely aligned to the ‘headline’ outcomes that were expected of the service.
Findings are differentiated into those that might generalize versus those that are likely to be unique to the context. Conclusions focus on key features that were perceived to make the service effective, and the potential for process evaluations in understanding sport psychology service delivery. Advances in perfectionism research in sport, dance and exercise: The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism Chair: Andrew P.
Hill (York St John University, UK) Perfectionism is a multidimensional personality trait that includes two board dimensions: personal standards perfectionism (PSP) and evaluative concerns perfectionism (ECP). These dimensions have been found to predict a range of motivation (e.g., achievement goals), wellbeing (e.g., self-esteem), and performance (e.g., seasons best performance) related outcomes in sport, dance, and exercise. Most research to date has focused on the independent and additive effects of the two dimensions of perfectionism.
However, following the proposal of the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism (Gaudreau & Thompson, 2010), researchers have begun to examine the interactive effects of the two dimensions. In the 2 × 2 model, this entails examining four subtypes perfectionism, non-perfectionism (low PS/low PC), pure PSP (high PSP/low ECP), pure ECP (low PSP/high ECP), and mixed perfectionism (high PSP/high ECP). Four hypotheses can be tested in the model.
Hypothesis 1 has two versions which state that pure PSP will either be associated with better (H1a) or worse (H1b) outcomes compared with non-perfectionism. Hypothesis 2 states that non-perfectionism is associated with better outcomes than pure ECP (H2). Hypothesis 3 states that mixed perfectionism will be associated with better outcomes than pure ECP (H3).
Finally, hypothesis 4 states that pure PSP will be associated with better outcomes than mixed perfectionism (H4). The symposium includes a series of studies that test these hypotheses and, in doing so, provides new insights into the 2 × 2 model. The studies include a re-analysis of all existing perfectionism research in sport, dance, and exercise using the 2 × 2 model as an analytical framework (presentation 1), examination of hitherto unexamined criterion variables (namely, attitudes towards doping, athletic performance, and self-criticism; presentations 2 to 4), and the first test of the 2 × 2 model under conditions of repeated competitive failure (presentation 5).
Keywords: personality, perfectionism, motivation A test of the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism following repeated interpersonal failure on a cycle ergometer task Thomas Curran (University of Bath, UK), Andrew P. Hill (York St John University, UK) The diathesis-stress model of perfectionism proposes that perfectionism is a vulnerability factor for psychological, motivational, and performance difficulties under conditions of stress. Few studies have tested this model in sport and those that have done so have examined the effects of dimensions of perfectionism separately.
This study provides the first test of the diathesis-stress model in context of the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism (Gaudreau & Thompson, 2010) and guilt, shame, and pride in sport. Participants were 60 university students (M = 20.77, SD = 3.57) who completed the Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (Hewitt & Flett, 1991) and the State Pride, Shame, and Guilt Scale (Marschall, Saftner, & Tangney, 1994) during an experimental protocol aimed at evoking stress via perceptions of competitive failure. The experimental protocol involved groups of three and four participants competing in three 4-minute sprint trials on a cycle 65Symposia Tuesday July 11th ergometer.
To induce perceptions of competitive failure, after each trial, participants were instructed that they had performed the worst of all competitors. Moderated multilevel regression revealed perfectionism predicted within-person baseline variability in pride, shame and guilt. For pride, hypothesis 1a and hypothesis 3 were supported (but not hypotheses 2 or 4).
For guilt and shame, hypothesis 4 was supported (but not hypotheses 1a/1b or 2). In addition, hypothesis 3 was contradicted as mixed perfectionism was associated with greater within-person deviations in guilt and shame than pure ECP. Results support the diathesis-stress model of perfectionism and suggest that negative reactions to achievement stress are greatest when mixed perfectionism is exhibited.
Keywords: personality, perfectionism, motivation The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism and athletic performance Gareth E. Jowett (Leeds Beckett University, UK), Andrew P. Hill (York St John University, UK) Research has found evidence of a relationship between perfectionism and athletic performance (e.g.
Stoeber, Stoll, Pescheck & Otto, 2008). In these studies, personal standards perfectionism (PSP) is typically positively related to athletic performance whereas evaluative concerns perfectionism (ECP) is typically unrelated to athletic performance. While these studies highlight the independent effects of perfectionism dimensions, the interactive effects of dimensions of perfectionism have yet to be examined.
Consequently, the aim of the present study was to provide the first tests of the hypotheses of the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism (Gaudreau & Thompson, 2010) in regards to athletic performance. Participants were 129 undergraduate sport students (M age = 19.10, SD = 1.58) who completed the Multidimensional Inventory of Perfectionism in Sport (Stoeber, Otto, & Stoll, 2006), and then performed a novel sprinting task on five occasions with standardised rest periods. Moderated hierarchical regressions revealed that perfectionism significantly predicted performance on two occasions (in the last trial and overall improvement in performance).For performance in the last trial, hypotheses 1a, 2, and 4 were supported (but not hypothesis 3).
For overall improvement in performance, hypotheses 1a and 4 were supported (but not hypotheses 2 and 3). The findings suggest that subtypes of perfectionism are associated with different levels of athletic performance with pure PSP associated with the best athletic performance. Keywords: personality, perfectionism, motivation The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism and attitudes towards doping in junior athletes Daniel J.
Madigan (York St John University) A recent study found that perfectionism predicts junior athletes’ attitudes towards doping (Madigan, Stoeber, & Passfield, 2016). Specifically, personal standards perfectionism (PSP) was found to negatively predict more positive attitudes toward doping whereas evaluative concerns perfectionism (ECP) was unrelated. The present study continues this line of research by testing the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism (Gaudreau & Thompson, 2010) in relation to attitudes towards doping.
In doing so, the interactive effects of dimensions of perfectionism rather than the independent effects of dimensions of perfectionism are focused upon. Participants were 119 junior athletes (M age= 17.1 years, SD = 0.82 years) who completed the Sport Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (Dunn et al., 2006), the Multidimensional Inventory of Perfectionism in Sport (Stoeber, Otto, & Stoll, 2006), and the Performance Enhancement Attitude Scale (Petróczi & Aidman, 2009). Moderated hierarchical regressions revealed that, as in the previous study, perfectionism significantly predicted attitudes towards doping.
In regards to the hypotheses of the 2 × 2 model, hypotheses 2 and 3 were supported (but not hypothesis 1a/1b or 4). The findings suggest perfectionism may in some circumstances contribute to immoral behaviours in sport. However, this is only likely to be the case when high ECP is exhibited.
66Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: personality, perfectionism, motivation The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism and self-criticism in athletes Sarah H. Mallinson-Howard, Andrew P. Hill (York St John University, UK) Personal standards perfectionism (PSP) is primarily related to self-criticism based on internal standards (ISC) and evaluative concerns perfectionism (ECP) is primarily related to self-criticism based on comparative standards (CSC) (Thompson & Zuroff, 2004).
The relationship between PSP and ISC is one possible explanation for why, when testing the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism (Gaudreau & Thompson, 2010), hypothesis 1b (and not 1a) is sometimes supported and why hypothesis 3 is sometimes contradicted. That is, the presence of high PSP also brings with it high ISC that will be exacerbate (not ameliorate) ECP and be more (not less) problematic for athletes, dancers, and exercisers. The present study examined this possibility by testing the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism in regards to ISC and CSC in athletes.
Participants were 240 adult athletes (M age = 24.52, SD = 9.43) who completed the Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (Hewitt & Flett, 1991) and the Levels of Self- Criticism Scale (Thompson & Zuroff, 2004). Moderated hierarchical regressions revealed that perfectionism significantly predicted both ISC and CSC. For ISC, as expected, hypotheses 1b, 2, and 4 were supported and hypothesis 3 was contradicted.
For CSC, hypotheses 1a, 2, 3 and 4 were all supported. The findings suggest that the presence of internal standards based self-criticism may explain why pure PSP will not always be associated with better outcomes than non-perfectionism and why mixed perfectionism will sometimes be worse than pure ECP. Keywords: personality, perfectionism, motivation The 2 × 2 model of perfectionism in sport, dance and exercise: A review and reanalysis Andrew P.
Hill, Sarah H. Mallinson-Howard (York St John University, UK), Gareth E. Jowett (Leeds Beckett University, UK) Initial research examining the 2 x 2 model of perfectionism (Gaudreau & Thompson, 2010) suggests that a focus on combinations (or subtypes) of perfectionism dimensions can further our understanding of the likely consequences of perfectionism.
However, to date, there have been only seven studies to directly examine the 2 × 2 model of perfectionism in sport, dance and exercise. In the absence of more studies on which to assess the value of the model, we reviewed and re-examined all perfectionism studies in sport, dance, and exercise using the 2 × 2 model as an analytical framework. In total our review comprised 80 studies and 454 tests of each hypothesis of the 2 × 2 model.
In regards to each hypothesis, our review indicated that hypothesis 1a was supported on 319 occasions (70% of the time) and hypothesis 1b on 137 occasions (30% of the time). Hypothesis 2 was supported on 427 occasions (94% of the time) and contradicted on only 27 occasions (6% of the time). Hypothesis 3 was supported on 314 occasions (69% of the time) and contradicted on 140 occasions (31% of the time).
Finally, hypothesis 4 was supported on 427 occasions (94% of the time) and, like for hypothesis 2, was contradicted on 27 occasions (6% of the time). Overall, the findings suggest that the 2 x 2 model is a valuable approach to understanding perfectionism in sport, dance, and exercise. However, further examination of when (and why) hypothesis 1a and hypothesis 3 are likely to be contradicted in sport is required.
Keywords: personality, perfectionism, motivation Emotions and psychobiosocial states in sport Chair: Montse C. Ruiz (University of Jyväskylä) 67Symposia Tuesday July 11th This symposium reports theoretical and research developments surrounding the area of emotions, emotion regulation and self-control in the context of sports performance. In the first presentation, Ruiz and colleagues outline the conceptualization of emotions as the core modality of psychobiosocial states, and recent developments in the assessment of athletes’ functional and dysfunctional experiences.
The procedures include individual-, and task-relevant items and can be used for idiographic and standardized assessments. In the second presentation, Robazza and colleagues present a model based on the interaction between performance and action control levels. The model serves as a framework to develop intervention plans aimed to help athletes reach and maintain their optimal performance states.
The third presentation by Appleton and colleagues reports the results of a study examining the relationship between motivational climates (i.e., empowering vs. disempowering), the intensity and perceived functionality of athletes’ psychobiosocial states. Their findings highlight the importance of developing coach education programs aimed to foster empowering climates to ensure that athletes experience functional states.
In the final presentation, Sylvain and colleagues overview motivational and neurovisceral approaches as applied to the study of self-control, and indicate how this combined perspective can be used in the context of sport to develop interventions. It is hoped that these presentations will increase the participants’ knowledge and understanding regarding conceptualization and measurement of psychobiosocial states, and will be useful for the development of effective interventions aimed to increase athletes’ well-being and well-functioning. Keywords: invited IAAP symposium, emotion, performance state, self-regulation, IZOF model, MAP model, self- control Individualized and standardized approaches for a multimodal assessment of psychobiosocial states Montse C.
Ruiz (University of Jyväskylä), Claudio Robazza (Università degli Studi G. d'Annunzio Chieti e Pescara), Asko Tolvanen (University of Jyväskylä), Juri Hanin (KIHU-Research Institute for Olympic Sports) A psychobiosocial state is defined as a situational and multimodal manifestation of total human functioning. Psychobiosocial states can be manifested through psychological (emotional, cognitive, motivational, volitional), biological (bodily, motor-behavioral), and social (performance, communicative) components, which can exert beneficial (functional) or detrimental (dysfunctional) effects on performance process and outcome.
Psychobiosocial states have been assessed through individualized and standardized methods. An advantage of these methods is the inclusion of person and task-relevant items, for intra-individual as well as inter-individual analyses of athletes’ functional and dysfunctional states. Individualized Profiling of Psychobiosocial States (IPPS; Ruiz, Hanin, & Robazza, 2016) is a procedure used for the assessment of athletes' subjective experiences (emotional and non emotional) forming a psychobiosocial state.
This procedure has been applied to assess functional and dysfunctional experiences of high-level athletes related to their individually successful and unsuccessful performances. Psychobiosocial States Scale in its trait (PBS-T; Robazza, Bertollo, Ruiz, & Bortoli, 2016) and state (PBS-S; Ruiz, Robazza, Tolvanen, & Hanin, submitted) versions, based on IPPS, is used for individual and group comparisons. Both trait and state versions of the scales revealed good reliability and psychometric characteristics for the standardized assessment of athletes’ psychobiosocial states.
Data collected using individualized and standardized methods have important theoretical and applied implications. Keywords: emotion, performance state, idiographic assessment, nomothetic assessment, factor analysis Psychobiosocial states in sport performance Claudio Robazza (Università degli Studi G. d'Annunzio Chieti e Pescara), Montse C.
Ruiz (University of Jyväskylä), Maurizio Bertollo, Laura Bortoli (Università degli Studi G. d'Annunzio Chieti e Pescara) 68Symposia Tuesday July 11th The individual zones of optimal functioning (IZOF; Hanin, 2010) model embraces a holistic perspective in the description, prediction, explanation, and control of psychobiosocial (PBS) states related to performance. PBS states are conceived as situational, multimodal, and dynamic manifestations of the total human functioning in which emotion has a central role.
A number of studies across several sports, competitive levels, and age groups have supported the theoretical strengths and the applied advantages of using a comprehensive description of the athlete’s emotional experiences (Ruiz, Raglin, & Hanin, 2017). From an applied perspective, sport psychology interventions are aimed at helping athletes regulate their emotional states to better cope with the competitive pressure and achieve a consistently high level of performance in training and competition. Based on the tenets of the IZOF model, the multi-action plan (MAP; Robazza, Bertollo, Filho, Hanin, & Bortoli, 2016) intervention model has been recently proposed as a framework for emotion- and action-centered, self- regulation strategies to optimize the athlete’s states and reach optimal performance.
In the MAP model, four types of performance situations are identified from 2 × 2 interactions of performance impact by hedonic tone, and performance impact by action control: Type 1, functional-pleasant emotions and/or optimal-automatic performance; Type 2, functional-unpleasant emotions and/or optimal-controlled performance; Type 3, dysfunctional-unpleasant emotions and/or suboptimal-controlled performance; and Type 4, dysfunctional- pleasant emotions and/or suboptimal-automatic performance. According to this view, athletes can use emotion-centered and/or action-centered self-regulation strategies to control their emotions, attentional focus, or both. Keywords: emotion, self-regulation, IZOF model, MAP model, emotion-centered strategies, action-centered strategies Examining the interactive effects of coach-created empowering and disempowering climate dimensions on athletes’ psychobiosocial states Paul Appleton (University of Birmingham), Montse C.
Ruiz (University of Jyväskylä), Joan Duda (University of Birmingham) Based in Duda’s (2013) hierarchical and multidimensional conceptualisation of the motivational climate, the purpose of this study was to examine whether a coach-created disempowering motivational climate moderated the relationships between a coach-created empowering climate and athletes’ self-reported functional and dysfunctional psychobiosocial states. Athletes (N = 130, M age = 24.6 years; 53% male) completed questionnaires assessing their perceptions of coach-created empowering and disempowering climates created in training and competition, and psychobiosocial states (functional-intensity; functional- impact on performance; dysfunctional-intensity; dysfunctional-impact on performance) in sport. Following the recommendations of Hayes (2013) and Dawson (2014), and using PROCESS (Hayes), moderated regression analyses showed that the interaction between empowering and disempowering climate dimensions was significant and predicted 4.6% unique variance in functional-intensity states.
The Johnson-Neyman technique was employed to plot and probe the significant interaction, which revealed the relationship between empowering climate and functional-intensity states became non-significant at disempowering climate scores of >2.7. The findings from this study have implications for education programmes aimed to help coaches understand how to avoid (or dramatically reduce) disempowering climates and create empowering climates, which would increase athletes’ functional psychobiosocial states. Keywords: coach-created climate, motivational climate, emotion, experience The case for a motivational neurovisceral perspective on self-control in sports Sylvain Laborde, Sven Hoffmann (Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln), Chris Englert (Universität Bern), Markus Raab (Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln) 69Symposia Tuesday July 11th Evolutionarily, self-control may be the most important characteristic that enabled humans to survive.
It is no surprise, given its crucial role in adaptation, that self-control plays also an important role in sports (e.g., fast- paced decision making, stress management, chocking under pressure). A careful look at the self-control research revealed a “tale of two literatures”, that self-control has being investigated from different perspectives that barely connected to each other so far. Consequently, the aim of this overview is to establish the basis of a motivational neurovisceral perspective on self-control, and to detail how it can be applied to the sport domain.
We combined two main approaches to the study of self-control that have been developed independently in different fields: a motivational account coming from cognitive and social psychology, based on the process model (Inzlicht, Schmeichel, & Macrae, 2014), the opportunity cost model (Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable, & Myers, 2013), the integrative theory of self-control (Kotabe & Hofmann, 2015), and the strength model of self-control (Baumeister, Vohs, & Tice, 2007); and a neurovisceral account coming from neurophysiology, based on the neurovisceral integration model (Thayer, Hansen, Saus-Rose, & Johnsen, 2009). The new perspective will make it possible to integrate and extend the motivational and neurovisceral accounts, develop new research questions and hypotheses, and set the stage for integrated interventions in sports aimed at enhancing self-control and preventing its failure. Keywords: self-control, self-regulation, heart rate variability, vagal tone, executive functions, emotions Cultural sport psychology: Expanding understandings of sociocultural issues and identities within sport Chair: Amy Blodgett (Laurentian University) Given the increasing globalization and mobility of society, sport practitioners are now, more than ever, working with diverse participants from myriad cultural backgrounds.
Although a lack of consideration of culture and marginalized identities has been problematized in sport psychology for many years (Duda & Allison, 1990; Fisher, Butryn, & Roper, 2003), recent efforts have been reinvigorated to foster greater inclusivity within the domain and develop cultural competencies amongst practitioners and scholars. Unfurling as a new genre of scholarship and practice termed cultural sport psychology (CSP), the intent is to challenge the ethnocentric biases of traditional sport psychology which have long overlooked the needs and experiences of minority groups (Ryba, Schinke, & Tennenbaum, 2010; Ryba, Stambulova, Si, & Schinke, 2013). This symposium reveals how CSP projects are currently taking up "culture" and novel interpretivist methodological approaches to facilitate new understandings of sociocultural issues within sport.
The first presenter explores how sport psychology professionals from seven different countries define and understand the concepts of “culture” and “cultural competencies”, and discusses implications for effective practice. The second presenter emphasizes how researchers’ own cultural standpoints shape the ways we interact with and produce knowledge about others. The presenter’s experiences engaging in a culturally reflexive research process with Indigenous athletes is shared.
The final two presenters provide examples of innovative, interpretivist methodologies within CSP projects. Empirical findings are presented on the acculturation experiences of immigrant athletes and the intersectionality of female boxers’ identities. Sport psychology professionals are encouraged to re-think their own research and practice through a culturally reflexive lens in order to facilitate more inclusive and engaging sport spaces.
Keywords: cultural diversity, identity, reflexivity, interpretivist methodologies Reflexive engagement: Locating our human selves in cultural sport psychology research Amy Blodgett, Robert J. Schinke (Laurentian University) 70Symposia Tuesday July 11th If we, as sport psychology researchers, are to present honest and comprehensive accounts of the lives we study, it is imperative that we continually engage in reflexive research processes that help us examine our subjectivities and positionings as co-constructors of knowledge (McGannon & Johnson, 2009; Schinke, McGannon, Parham, & Lane, 2012). Challenging notions of researcher objectivity, reflexivity is about reflecting on our researcher power to perceive, interpret, and produce knowledge about others in ways that can be either marginalizing or affirming (McGannon & Johnson).
While conceptual writings on reflexivity and examples of reflexive forms of research presentation can be found within the sport psychology scholarship (e.g., Butryn, 2009; Douglas & Carless, 2010), in-depth practical accounts of “how to” engage reflexive processes are scant. In this presentation, the first author (Amy) shares her journey delving into the “how to” of a reflexive research process as part of a larger cultural sport psychology (CSP) project with Indigenous athletes in Canada. The project explored the acculturation experiences of Aboriginal athletes as they moved off reserves to pursue sport in “mainstream” contexts, with the aim of identifying support strategies.
An innovative, arts-based reflexive process is overviewed, with emphasis on the allure of a context-driven process. The challenges of being self-reflexive are highlighted, along with the critical insights that can be gained through this process. Through an increasing (and ever-evolving) reflexive awareness researchers can work more supportively with marginalized community members, becoming more conscious of the cultural power dynamics at play (Pringle, 2005) and our role in eliciting or subverting participants’ identities and experiences.
Implications are revealed for researchers looking to challenge tacit power imbalances in their research and facilitate more socially just and affirming CSP projects. Keywords: reflexivity, power, identity, Indigenous research The culturally competent sport psychology professional: A qualitative exploration of the meaning attributed to culture by practitioners and scholars Alessandro Quartiroli (University of Wisconsin – La Crosse), Justine Vosloo (Ithaca College), Lia Gorden (Ithaca College), Leslee Fisher (University of Tennessee – Knoxville), Robert J. Schinke (Laurentian University) Increased attention has been dedicated to the development of a clear model of professional competencies for psychology practitioners.
Rodolfa et al. (2005) developed the Cube Model of Competency, recently applied to sport psychology (SP) (Fletcher & Maher, 2013), identifying individual-cultural diversity as one of the functional competencies. They defined this competency as “awareness and sensitivity in working professionally with diverse individuals” (Rodolfa et al.
p.351). The need for culturally safe understandings and appreciation of clients’ cultural backgrounds has recently become the focus of many SP practitioners and scholars (e.g., Ryba & Wright, 2010; Schinke et al., 2016). This interest led to the recognition of the necessity to understand diverse cultures and to be aware of one’s own cultural assumptions to work effectively in multicultural settings (Chao et al., 2011).
The current study consisted of an in-depth examination of how SP professionals defined and understood the concepts of culture and “cultural competencies.” Through semi- structured interviews, the authors investigated the personal meaning attributed to these constructs and the experiences of 25 SP professionals from seven countries who had been actively engaged as SP consultants or scholars with three to 40 years of experience. The authors analyzed the interviews using Hill’s (2012) Consensual Qualitative Research Method. Five main conceptual domains were identified: Definition of culture; Internal Development; External Development; Effective and Ethical Practice; and Challenges to Cultural Competencies.
Summarizing ideas ( organized in categories within each domain, helping to understand how SP professionals experience “culture” in their profession. Suggestions for the development of a framework for SP professionals interested in engaging in culturally competent applied and scholarly activities are provided. Keywords: cultural competence, diversity, ethical practice 71Symposia Tuesday July 11th The intersecting sociocultural identities of Canadian national female boxers Yang Ge, Robert J.
Schinke, Amy Blodgett, Kerry McGannon, Jacob Latour Dupuis (Laurentian University) Understanding sport participants as having multifaceted, fluid, and ever changing identities is a new approach in cultural sport psychology (Schinke & McGannon, 2015). Based on an intersectionality framework from critical feminist scholarship (Crenshaw, 1989), we interviewed 10 national female boxers with diverse sociocultural backgrounds about their cultural identities and their sport experience on the Canadian national team. Mandala drawings (Henderson, Rosen, & Mascaro, 2007) and conversational interviews were used to collect data.
Interpretive thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2016) and creative nonfiction (McGannon & Smith, 2015) were then used to organize the data around two research questions: (1) how do female boxers view themselves within the sport context and what meanings or experiences do they associate with their identities? (2) What are the implications of the athletes’ identities for sport performance? Based on the thematic analysis, three clusters of intersectional identity categories are revealed as influential in the boxing context: (1) gender- sexuality-physicality; (2) socioeconomic status-education-occupation-age; and (3) race-ethnicity-religion- language.
Diverse identity intersections within each group are explored through the participants’ stories, centralizing the following: a) the challenges of being a female boxer in a male-dominant sport; b) the White identity privileges and institutional power that shapes boxers’ sport careers; and c) the impacts of identity marginalization and “difference” on sport performance and team dynamics. Throughout the presentation we endeavor to facilitate a mutual understanding between coaches and athletes about how to promote diversity- inclusiveness within sport teams. Keywords: intersectionality, cultural studies, sociocultural locations, identity The permanent relocation of elite level immigrant athletes into the Canadian sport system Odirin Oghene, Thierry Middleton, Robert J.
Schinke (Laurentian University) The number of people moving homes worldwide has steadily increased over the past 15 years (i.e., 173 million in 2000 to 244 million in 2015; United Nations, 2016). Although the reason for relocating varies for newcomers, they all experience the challenge of navigating between a home and a new (i.e., receiving) culture, and how to interact with the host society as part of a reciprocal, shared process (Schinke, McGannon, Battochio, & Wells, 2013). Within our study we sought to examine the acculturation experiences of immigrant athletes both within and outside of the sport context from a critical acculturation lens (Chirkov, 2009; Schinke & McGannon, 2014).
We also examined the challenges faced by immigrant athletes during their adaptation, the impact of such challenges and the resources they utilized to overcome these challenges. Our research was framed through a social constructionist epistemological stance (Crotty, 1998) and employed a variety of qualitative methods. Moving stories (Czarniawska, 2007; Jiron, 2011) were collected via shadowing and conversational interviews (Patton, 2002), which were then subjected to an interpretive thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2016) and developed into composite vignettes (Spalding & Phillips, 2007).
The vignettes revealed two major themes surrounding athlete acculturation: the role of family and the sense of community. These themes were present throughout athletes’ stories about their acculturation. Understanding the acculturation experiences of immigrant athletes and the role that other people in their lives play within these experiences deepens our understanding of acculturation as a dynamic process.
This deeper understanding further enables us to develop practical recommendations for practitioners, leading to effective interventions that address challenges immigrant athletes might encounter post-relocation. Keywords: acculturation, athlete relocation, immigrants, moving stories 72Symposia Tuesday July 11th Is need for novelty the fourth basic psychological need? Extending self- determination theory in physical activity settings Chair: David González-Cutre (Sport Research Center, Miguel Hernández University of Elche, Spain) Self-determination theory is currently one of the main motivational theoretical frameworks that research is using to explain physical activity behaviour.
For decades, a lot of studies have shown that the satisfaction of the three basic psychological needs (autonomy, competence, and relatedness) during physical activity participation is associated with autonomous motivation and positive outcomes in different settings (physical education, sport, exercise). Recently, novelty has been proposed as another basic psychological need from the self-determination theory perspective, but research about this variable is still scarce in all contexts of life. The objective of this symposium is to provide evidence that novelty could be a basic psychological need that we should incorporate in sport and exercise psychology research to understand physical activity participation better.
The authors present four studies that show the antecedents and outcomes of novelty need satisfaction and frustration in physical education, sport and exercise settings. The results reveal that novelty is a different construct from autonomy, competence, and relatedness, which is promoted by an autonomy-supportive context, and it is related to positive consequences such as vitality, flow, satisfaction, and intention to be physically active in physical education; and to intrinsic motivation, enjoyment, physical activity levels, and mental health in exercise settings. The results also show that a controlling context is negatively related to novelty in physical education and sport, and that novelty need frustration is linked to amotivation.
These findings are in line with self-determination theory postulates showing that need for novelty could be a basic psychological need. We can conclude that: 1) Novelty should be included in motivational research about physical activity; 2) Physical education teachers, coaches, and instructors should promote a novelty support context to reach positive consequences. Keywords: self-determination theory, novelty, basic psychological needs, motivation, well-being Antecedents and outcomes of need for novelty in physical education using a self- determination theory framework Javier Sevil, Alberto Aibar, Ángel Abós, Eduardo Generelo, José A.
Julián, Luis García-González (University of Zaragoza, Spain) A large body of research points out that the interpersonal style adopted by teachers plays a role on students’ motivation and (mal)adaptative outcomes. Grounded in self-determination theory, the aim of this study is to show that two interpersonal styles adopted by physical education (PE) teachers (need supportive and controlling styles) could be antecedents of the need for novelty. A total of 942 students, aged 12 to 19 years, participated in this study.
Students’ perception of basic psychological need support, controlling teaching, basic psychological need satisfaction and intention to be physically active were measured. Structural equation modeling showed that students' perception of basic psychological need support from PE teacher predicted positively satisfaction of basic psychological needs (competence, autonomy, and relatedness) and need for novelty. Students' perception of controlling teaching predicted negatively satisfaction of need for novelty.
Furthermore, satisfaction of basic psychological needs and need for novelty predicted intention to be physically active. These findings are consistent with the bright and dark side of motivation where interpersonal styles could fulfill or undermine the basic psychological needs, including novelty. Such findings indicate that autonomy support from PE teachers could stimulate students' inherent tendency to seek out novelty because they provide students with opportunities to participate and choose activities.
Competence support from PE teacher could provide feedback to the students to try different possibilities while relatedness support could influence students’ integration and the quality of social relationships to seek new experiences. Moreover, controlling teaching could represent a source of pressure that could limit the capacity to explore and bring new 73Symposia Tuesday July 11th challenges. Results suggest that the interpersonal style could help to satisfy the need for novelty (e.g., introducing new activities in each teaching unit).
Keywords: physical education, novelty need satisfaction, interpersonal style Perceived coaching behaviours and motivation in rhythmic gymnasts: the mediating role of perceived need for novelty Triin Põder, Henri Tilga, Andre Koka (Institute of Sport Sciences And Physiotherapy, University of Tartu, Estonia) Grounded in self-determination theory, this study aimed to examine the mediating role of athletes’ experiences of novelty need satisfaction and frustration alongside with other basic psychological needs in associations between perceived coaching behaviours and athletes’ motivation in the context of rhythmic gymnastics. Specifically, we tested two models. The first model tested association between autonomy supportive coaching behaviour and athletes’ intrinsic motivation mediated by need satisfaction.
The second model tested association between controlling coaching behaviour and athletes’ amotivation mediated by need frustration. Female rhythmic gymnasts (N = 128) aged 11-20 years completed measures of coaching behaviours for autonomy support, negative conditional regard, and intimidation. Additionally, athletes completed measures of satisfaction and frustration of the needs for autonomy, competence, relatedness, novelty, and motivation.
Results of the confirmatory factor analysis for the six-item rhythmic gymnastics-modified version of the Novelty Need Satisfaction Scale demonstrated adequate fit after setting error covariance to be free between some of the items. Six items devised for use in this study to assess novelty need frustration showed also adequate psychometric properties. Results of multiple mediator models revealed that none of the four perceived need satisfaction variables acted as mediators between the relationship of perceived autonomy support and athletes’ intrinsic motivation.
The perceived frustration of the need for novelty (indirect effect = .09) and relatedness (indirect effect = .05), however, revealed to be partial mediators between the relationship of perceived negative conditional regard from the coach and athletes’ amotivation. Findings of this pilot study support the utility of novelty need frustration as a means of understanding how perceived coaching controlling behaviour is related to rhythmic gymnasts’ amotivation towards training. Keywords: sport, novelty need frustration, amotivation The experience of novelty in exercise and its relations with motivation, enjoyment, vitality, physical activity levels, and mental health David González-Cutre, Alejandro Jiménez-Loaisa, María Romero Elías, Eduardo Cervello (Sport Research Center, Miguel Hernández University of Elche, Spain) The aim of this study was to analyse the relations between novelty need satisfaction and different motivational variables in exercise from a self-determination theory approach.
Participants were 101 adults (52 men and 49 women), aged between 20 and 69 years, who completed questionnaires about the satisfaction of four basic psychological needs, autonomous motivation, enjoyment and vitality in exercise, physical activity levels, and mental health. First, to show that novelty could be a basic psychological need, we asked the participants to rate the importance of novelty, autonomy, competence and relatedness in a direct (asking for the importance in their general life) and an indirect (asking for a satisfactory event of their life) way. Second, we carried out regression analyses to show the predictive relations from basic psychological need satisfaction in exercise to different consequences.
Descriptive statistics reflected mean scores from 6.64 of autonomy importance to 5.86 of novelty importance in general life, and from 6.09 of novelty importance to 5.52 of competence importance in a satisfactory life event (range 1-7). Regression analyses showed that novelty need satisfaction in exercise positively predicted intrinsic motivation (β = .23), enjoyment (β = .29), vitality (β = .30), 74Symposia Tuesday July 11th and vigorous physical activity (β = .25). Novelty was the second strongest predictor of these four variables after competence satisfaction, and it was the only predictor of moderate physical activity (β = .37) and mental health (β = .25).
These results strengthen the inclusion of novelty need in self-determination theory postulates and show its importance in an exercise context. Keywords: exercise, novelty importance, vitality The importance of novelty need satisfaction to achieve multiple positive outcomes in physical education David González-Cutre (Sport Research Center, Miguel Hernández University of Elche, Spain), Álvaro Sicilia (Faculty of Educational Sciences, University of Almería, Spain) The purpose of this study was to show the important role of novelty need satisfaction in physical education from the perspective of self-determination theory. Secondary school students (N = 764, 383 girls and 381 boys, Mage = 14.26 years, SD = 1.56) from a Spanish province completed measures of basic psychological need satisfaction (autonomy, competence, relatedness, and novelty), the three types of intrinsic motivation (to know, to accomplish, and to experience stimulation), and different outcomes (vitality, dispositional flow, and satisfaction) in physical education classes.
First, a preliminary analysis of the psychometric properties of the Novelty Need Satisfaction Scale (NNSS) was carried out because this scale has been recently developed. Second, a structural equation modeling was performed to analyse the direct and indirect (through intrinsic motivation) predictive relationships of need satisfaction on different outcomes. Confirmatory factor analysis showed a high correlation between autonomy and novelty satisfaction.
The problem of discriminant validity was solved removing an item from the original version of the NNSS (“I have the opportunity to innovate”) due to its overlapping with the autonomy construct. This modification contributes to improve the psychometric properties of this scale. Structural equation modeling showed that competence and novelty need satisfaction were the strongest predictors of intrinsic motivation: novelty for intrinsic motivation to know (β = .39), and competence for intrinsic motivation to accomplish (β = .43) and to experience stimulation (β = .39).
Positive direct effects from novelty need satisfaction to vitality (β = .10), dispositional flow (β = .09), and satisfaction with physical education classes (β = .22) should be highlighted. These results show the importance of teachers developing strategies to provide novelty support with the objective to achieve multiple positive outcomes in physical education. Keywords: physical education, novelty need satisfaction, intrinsic motivation Using an enactive and phenomenological approach for intervention in sport Chair: Roberta Antonini Philippe (Institute of Sport Science of the University of Lausanne, CH) The symposium integrates contributions from three countries (Switzerland, Belgium and USA).
According to the paradigm of enaction, cognition is embodied and expresses the history of the asymmetrical relations of an individual with his/ her environment. The dynamic of actor/environment interactions portrays both the actor’s own organisation and the environment with which he/she is interacting (Weber & Varela, 2002). This symposium will propose different studies using this approach completed with a proposition of practical applications in terms of preparation and management in accordance with the embodied dimension of the activity.
The objectives are: (a) to present four recent papers in different sports and (b) to engage the audience in a discussion about the current status of research in this area and future research and intervention directions. The first study (Rochat, Antonini Philippe & Hauw) analyzed runners’ experience by using an enactive approach during trail and ultra trail races that permits to distinguish withdrawers from finishers and propose practical recomandations for the runners, especially for the withdrawers. Secondly, in Tomlinson, Jaeschke, and Sachs’ 75Symposia Tuesday July 11th study, the essence of mental toughness in a long-distance running was assessed by using the phenomenological approach.
The emerged themes afforded the need of a comprehensive definition of mental toughness in such of sports but also to improve psychological interventions. Gesbert & Hauw's study highlighted with an enactive approach the description of the coordination between soccer players in order to better understand and improve an efficient collective organization Finally, Fincoeur & Hauw present a situated approach to help to better understand the use of illegal products in elite cycling athletes. Six main explaining factors were identified and some proposal to furth develop more effective prevention and education strategies have been developed.
Keywords: enaction, phenomenology, experience, sport-performance, intervention How to be a finisher? An enactive and phenomenological approach for intervention in trail and ultra trail running Nadège Rochat, Roberta Antonini Philippe, Denis Hauw (Institute of sport sciences, University of Lausanne (CH)) Previous studies identified some inherent constraints of trail running like extreme fatigue, injuries, or gastro-intestinal problems (e.g., Holt et al. 2014; Hurdiel et al., 2015) but their effects on performance outcome (i.e., finish vs withdraw) is unclear.
In this talk, we will present two studies that analyzed finishers and withdrawers’ experience from an enactive and phenomenological approach to provide some practical recommendations. The first study analyzed runners’ experience during ultra trail races to distinguish finishers from withdrawers and showed that finishers completed the race with significantly more sequences in states of vitality preservation (SVP) (59.5% for finishers and 39.8% for withdrawers, t(39)=6.782, p=0.000) and significantly fewer sequences in states of vitality loss (SVL) than withdrawers (18.7% for finishers and 42.2% for withdrawers, t(39)=-7.853, p=0.000) (Rochat et al., 2017). The second study analyzed withdrawers’ experience during an ultra trail race and identified seven stages that qualified withdrawals: feeling pain; putting meaning to those feelings; adjusting one’s running style; attempting to overcome the problem; other runners’ influences; assessing the situation; and deciding to withdraw (Antonini Philippe et al., 2016).
Taken together, the results of these studies suggest that finishers could exit SVL by enacting a preservation world whereas withdrawers remained in SVL and, despite attempting to find adaptations, they were confronted to situations in which withdrawal was the only alternative. As recommendations, runners should try to delay the emergence of SVL by preserving themselves at the beginning of the race and should immediately interpret the emergence of physical alerts to find suitable adaptations. We encourage runners to develop a reflective practice about their races by sharing their experience on online blogs to understand the processes that led either to the achievement or the withdrawal of a trail race.
Keywords: enaction, phenomenology, experience, adaptation, trail running, intervention 100,000 miles closer to defining mental toughness: The use of the phenomenological approach Rachel Tomlinson, Anna-Marie Jaeschke, Michael Sachs (Temple University, West Virginia University, USA) To assess the essence of mental toughness, the phenomenological approach was used to obtain the perceptions of ultramarathon runners. Mental toughness, as a phenomenon, gives ultramarathon runners the “psychological edge” in long-distance running (Jones, Hanton, & Connaughton, 2002). In the original study, snowball sampling and social networking were employed to obtain the 408 participants.
Initially, the participants were asked an open-ended question regarding their definition of “Mental Toughness,” which resulted in 476 definitions of mental toughness. Using these criteria, each participant then completed an online survey in which they used a five-point Likert scale to assess the extent to which they agreed with the 76Symposia Tuesday July 11th descriptive characteristics of mentally tough ultramarathon runners. The following themes emerged from the responses: persistence and perseverance, psychological skills, and external/environmental factors and preparation.
Through thematic analysis, a comprehensive definition of mental toughness emerged, specifically within the scope of ultramarathon running. “Mental toughness in ultramarathon running is the ability to persist and utilize mental skills to overcome perceived physical, psychological, emotional, and environmental obstacles in relentless pursuit of a goal” (Jaeschke, Sachs, & Dieffenbach, 2016, p. 251).
Due to the nature of ultramarathon running, consultants can employ this understanding to better work with this unique population and focus on pushing them beyond normal expectations through various psychological skills training. During this symposium, the methodological process will be featured, along with the resulting themes and how these themes can be incorporated into specific psychological interventions, encompassing imagery, self-talk, and other strategies, to enhance mental toughness among ultramarathon runners, athletes, and exercise enthusiasts alike. Keywords: phenomenological qualitative methodology, mental toughness, interventions Accessing soccer players’ own-world to better understand and enhance individual and team performance Vincent Gesbert, Denis Hauw (University of Lausanne, Institute of Sports Sciences) Understanding how team members' actions are successfully coordinated is a key challenge for sports psychologists today (Eccles, 2010).
The purpose of this study was to gain greater insights into the coordination between soccer players. Using an enactive approach, coordination is explained by the building of shared meaning between team members (Araujo & Bourbousson, 2016). Firstly, we aimed to access and describe the players’ sense-making process.
This process fits with the enacted worlds that were linked to what perturbed the players in their situation. As these worlds were not intelligible from an extrinsic point of view (e.g., video- recording), it required to pay attention to the players’ lived experience. After having collected behavioral traces of players’ activity, we carried out elicitation interviews that allowed us to re-build their experience.
Secondly, we synchronized these players’ experiences in order to analyze how the meanings that each player built corroborated with the meanings simultaneously built by one’s teammates. The results highlighted the interest of integrating player's enacted worlds in the performance analysis framework. Our results indicated how, in certain situations, two players sharing the same objective (e.g., to rapidly attack the opponent's goal) might nevertheless have divergent expectations on how best to do so: the player with the ball (Andrew) expected his teammate to call for a long pass whereas he, in turn, was expecting to beat the defender in front of Andrew by using a simple form of return pass move.
These results allowed us to better understand the dynamics of shared meanings among teammates. From a practical point of view, these data made sense to understand how a breakdown in coordination may occur. These results emphasize the need for future sport psychological intervention in order to promote an efficient collective organization (i.e., the development of a common referential).
Keywords: enactive approach, lived experience, sports performance, intervention Towards a better understanding of the doping behavior in elite cycling: from situated activity to Wikström’s Situational Action Theory Bertrand Fincoeur (University of Liege, Centre de Recherche et d’Interventions Sociologiques & University of Lausanne, Institute of Sports Sciences), Denis Hauw (University of Lausanne, Institute of Sports Sciences) The anti-doping policy has always been largely grounded on deterrence-based strategies (i.e. anti-doping tests, invasive surveillance programs, law enforcement activities) against athletes and, increasingly, their suppliers. However, these efforts have a limited impact on the use of illegal enhancers by (elite) athletes.
In 77Symposia Tuesday July 11th order to protect the athletes against the temptation to use illegal performance-enhancing drugs (PEDs), the situated activity approach seems to be a fruitful option for designing anti-doping lifelong education programs (e.g. Hauw & Mohamed, 2015; Hauw, 2016). The doping behavior then emerges from specific contexts (i.e.
the dynamics of actor/ environment interactions) and may be considered, both from a sociological and psychological standpoint, as the result of a sense-making process. During the presentation, we will show how Wikström’s Situational Action Theory (SAT, i.e. an overarching sociological theory of crime using the person- setting interaction to explain the rule-breaking process) combines with the situated activity approach and, therefore, may help to better understand the use of illegal PEDs.
Indeed, we identified six main explaining factors (i.e. the role of peers & staff members, family & education background, lure of money & precariousness, need for prestige/recognition, concern with health, perception of social control) which impact the decision on whether or not to use illegal PEDs. Taking into account these vulnerabilities could then help professionals supporting the athletes (sport psychologists, coaches, etc.) to further develop more effective prevention and education strategies.
This presentation will be mainly based on the results from a PhD research about doping in elite cycling, in which 77 interviews were realized with Belgian and French elite riders, staff members (physicians, managers) and policy-makers (e.g. Fincoeur, 2016). Keywords: doping, cycling, prevention, education Moving beyond the coach – athlete leadership within sports teams Chair: Katrien Fransen (KU Leuven, Belgium) It has long been argued that effective leadership is central to team functioning and to high performance in elite sport.
Historically, vertical leadership has been foregrounded in both research and practice. In line with this approach, leadership research has focused on the impact of coaches on their athletes. In the last years, however, a shift has occurred away from this traditional emphasis on vertical leadership towards the idea that leadership can, and should, be shared.
This approach asserts that leadership does not only emanate from the coach, but also from the athletes within the team (i.e., the athlete leaders). The present symposium will present novel and pioneering work that pushes this research line on shared leadership forward. To start, Katrien Fransen will reveal how athlete leaders impact teammates’ team confidence and performance.
Cliff Mallett corroborates these findings by revealing that high-quality athlete leadership in professional football teams does not only impact team effectiveness but also nurtures the health and well-being of the team members. Niels Mertens will close this first part of the symposium by comparing the impact of athlete leaders with the impact of the coach. The second part of the symposium focuses on the identification of athlete leaders.
First, Stewart Cotterill will provide more insight on the role of the team captain, by interviewing elite rugby coaches. Finally, Katrien Fransen will argue that the team captain is highly overrated at the expense of informal leaders. She will demonstrate the usefulness of social network analysis to map the informal leadership structure within the team.
To conclude, our findings revealed that shared leadership is a more powerful predictor of team effectiveness than vertical leadership. By mapping the leadership structure in the team and promoting shared leadership, coaches can not only maximize the team’s effectiveness, but also nurture the health and well-being of their team members. Keywords: athlete leadership, peer leadership, shared leadership, team captain, social network analysis Leading from within: The impact of athlete leaders on their teammates’ confidence and performance Katrien Fransen (KU Leuven, Belgium), Alexander S.
Haslam, Niklas K. Steffens (The University of Queensland, Australia), Norbert Vanbeselaere, Bert De Cuyper, Gert Vande Broek, Filip Boen (KU Leuven, Belgium) 78Symposia Tuesday July 11th We will discuss two experimental field studies in sports teams that investigated the impact of leaders’ positive feedback on athletes’ competence satisfaction, intrinsic motivation, and performance. More specifically, the impact of coaches and athlete leaders was compared.
In Study 1 (N = 120), teams of five male basketball players were asked to complete an interactive basketball task twice, where the first test session served as baseline measure. In the second test session, each of the teams was randomly allocated to either a control condition (i.e., no competence support) or one of three experimental conditions in which either (a) the coach (i.e., a research confederate); (b) the athlete leader (identified through social network analysis); or (c) both provided competence-supportive feedback to their team. Study 2 (N = 126) adopted a similar design but strived for a higher ecological validity by using complete teams and the real coach of the team.
The results showed that by providing positive feedback both coaches and athlete leaders affected athletes’ competence satisfaction, their intrinsic motivation, and their performance. It should be noted though that the positive impact of the coach on competence satisfaction and intrinsic motivation was only found in Study 1, in which feedback was provided by an external research confederate who was trained in providing competence support. We can thus conclude that coaches need to have received a specific training in order to provide effective competence-supportive feedback.
In contrast, asking athlete leaders on the spot to provide positive feedback caused an immediate effect on both the motivation and performance of their teammates. The study findings thus highlight that, besides the coach, also athlete leaders can play an important role in fostering teammates’ competence satisfaction, thereby nurturing their intrinsic motivation, and enhancing their performance. Keywords: athlete leaders, collective efficacy, team identification, social identity approach Australian football players’ leadership: Impact on team effectiveness and health/well- being Clifford J.
Mallett, Alexander S. Haslam, Niklas K. Steffens, Kim Peters (The University of Queensland, Australia), Filip Boen, Katrien Fransen (KU Leuven, Belgium) Leadership is considered an important determinant of team effectiveness in sport.
In particular, there are high expectations of players’ leadership both on- and off-field to foster team functioning and performance. Furthermore, there is increasing concern about the rising incidence of mental health and suicide in professional team sports. In the pursuit of successful performance outcomes in elite sport, players experience significant and increasing demands to compete in this highly contested context.
Hence, in this study, we investigated the relationship between effective players’ leadership, team effectiveness, and players’ health and well-being. Three professional football teams (N = 120 players) in the Australian Football League (n = 2) and the National Rugby League (n = 1) participated in this study. Players and coaches assessed players’ leadership quality in four leadership roles (on-field [task, motivation] and off-field [social, external]).
As hypothesised, the team with the highest athlete leadership scores on each of the four leadership roles performed best in all indicators of team effectiveness. In regards to health and well-being, the findings showed that (a) being a good athlete leader, and (b) having good athlete leaders in the team were associated with better player health and buffered against burnout. In conclusion, the findings support the contention that high quality player leadership contributes to team effectiveness that, in turn, underscores the salience of empirically-based leadership programs.
Furthermore, creating a sense of shared identity contributed to health and well-being of team members, highlighting the need to create a strong team identity. Keywords: shared leadership, social network analysis, social identity approach Leaders’ impact on motivation and performance: Coaches versus athlete leaders Niels Mertens, Filip Boen, Gert Vande Broek (KU Leuven, Belgium), Maarten Vansteenkiste (UGent, Belgium), Katrien Fransen (KU Leuven, Belgium) 79Symposia Tuesday July 11th We will discuss two experimental field studies in sports teams that investigated the impact of leaders’ positive feedback on athletes’ competence satisfaction, intrinsic motivation, and performance. More specifically, the impact of coaches and athlete leaders was compared.
In Study 1 (N = 120), teams of five male basketball players were asked to complete an interactive basketball task twice, where the first test session served as baseline measure. In the second test session, each of the teams was randomly allocated to either a control condition (i.e., no competence support) or one of three experimental conditions in which either (a) the coach (i.e., a research confederate); (b) the athlete leader (identified through social network analysis); or (c) both provided competence-supportive feedback to their team. Study 2 (N = 126) adopted a similar design but strived for a higher ecological validity by using complete teams and the real coach of the team.
The results showed that both coaches and athlete leaders affected athletes’ competence satisfaction, their intrinsic motivation, and their performance by providing positive feedback. It should be noted, though, that the positive impact of the coach on competence satisfaction and intrinsic motivation was only found in Study 1, in which feedback was provided by an external research confederate who was trained in providing competence support. We can thus conclude that coaches need to have received a specific training in order to provide effective competence-supportive feedback.
In contrast, asking athlete leaders on the spot to provide positive feedback caused an immediate effect on both the motivation and performance of their teammates. The study findings thus highlight that, besides the coach, also athlete leaders can play an important role in fostering teammates’ competence satisfaction, thereby nurturing their intrinsic motivation, and enhancing their performance. Keywords: shared leadership, intrinsic motivation, self-determination approach, competence support An exploration of the coach’s perceptions of the role of captain in professional rugby Stewart Cotterill, Richard Cheetham (University of Winchester, UK) Effective leadership in sport at the elite level can make the difference between success and failure.
Indeed, effective leadership has been highlighted as a factor both influencing and determining team performance under pressure (Cotterill & Fransen, 2016). The coach has been suggested to be crucial in the success of formal leadership roles within teams (Cotterill & Cheetham, 2016). However, the specific implications are still to be fully understood.
As a result, the aim of this research was to explore the coaches’ perspectives on the function, selection, and development of team captains in professional rugby union. The participants were seven elite (professional) rugby coaches. The participants were purposefully selected for their knowledge and experience of coaching at the elite (professional) level within the sport of rugby union, and associated experience working with a range of captains.
Participants were interviewed individually to gain an understanding of each participant’s perspective on the role and influence of the team captain relating to team performance. The data were thematically analysed using interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) to highlight emergent themes and to identify links between themes. Results suggest that there is a lack of clarity regarding the specific knowledge, skills, expertise and character traits required to undertake the role.
This in turn can be problematic in the selection and development of the most appropriate team leaders. Greater clarity regarding the role of the captain is required to maximise the ability of the selected leaders to fulfil the role. Keywords: team captain, rugby, interviews, interpretative phenomenological analysis Great man or great myth?
Moving beyond the team captain by mapping the leadership structure within the team. Katrien Fransen, Filip Boen (KU Leuven, Belgium) When it comes to athlete leaders, the team captain is often considered as the best and sole leader within the team. Study 1 investigates whether this assumption is indeed correct or whether informal leaders might be 80Symposia Tuesday July 11th more important.
An online survey was completed by 4,451 participants within nine different team sports. Players (N = 3,193) and coaches (N = 1,258) were asked to indicate the player with the best leadership quality on four leadership roles; two roles on the field (i.e.., the roles of task and motivational leader) and two roles off the field(i.e., the roles of social and external leader). The results revealed that almost half of the participants (44%) did not perceive their captain as the principal leader on any of the four leadership roles.
These findings underline the fact informal leaders rather than the captain take the lead, both on and off the field. If informal leaders take the lead, it is important to identify who they are. Therefore, in Study 2 and Study 3, we present a new technique that uses social network analysis to map the leadership structure within the team.
These studies included respectively 25 teams (N = 308; Mage= 24.9 years old) and 21 teams (N = 267; Mage= 24.3 years old). The study findings corroborated the existence of shared leadership in sports teams. More specifically, with respect to the roles of task and external leader, no significant differences were observed between the leadership quality of coaches and athlete leaders.
However, athlete leaders were perceived as better motivational and social leaders than their coaches. Furthermore, both the team captain and informal athlete leaders shared the lead on the different leadership roles. Social network analysis was found to be a pioneering but valuable tool for obtaining a deeper insight in the leadership structure within sports teams.
Keywords: team captain, shared leadership, informal leadership, social network analysis, leadership mapping An Asian approach to physical activity research: Is it closing a gap within the field’s knowledge? Chair: Youngho Kim It is well documented that physical activity is one of the most important health behaviors not only to prevent various health problems, but also to promote healthy lifestyles. However, recent statistics indicate that many people around the world are insufficiently active to obtain the many health-related benefits of physical activity.
In this regard, a large number of studies have indicated that initiating and maintaining physical activity are significantly associated with various psychological variables. Although much information on physical activity and its related psychological factors has been published in the Western countries, little information of Asian countries is available. Recently, an increasing effort has been paid to aim at identifying the broad range of psychological correlates of physical activity in many Asian societies.
The current symposium tries to introduce various research outcomes carried out by different research designs (i.e., experiment, cross-sectional and longitudinal, and intervention etc.) in various Asian countries. Therefore, it is sure that this symposium will be a very meaningful academic bridge to connect Asian and Western scholars. Keywords: asian viewpoint, sport and exercise psychology, physical activity, motor behavior, sport Acute Exercise and Cognitive Function: An Update from Asia Yu-Kai Chang Ansignificant amount of studies have examined whether acute exercise, or a single bout of exercise,may affect cognitive performance, whereas two meta-analyses have concluded that acute exercise produces a small, significant, positive effect on a variety of types of cognitive function(Chang, Labban, Gapin, & Etnier, 2012; Lambourne & Tomporowski, 2010).
Regarding the issue of acute exercise and cognitive function, researchers in Asia were also actively involved. The purpose of this presentation was to report on the current developments examining the investigative progress of this issue,by providing three updated studies from our laboratory. These studies emphasized:a) examining the dose-response relationship between acute exercise duration and cognitive function (Chang et al., 2015b); b) identifying the role of moderators between acute exercise and cognitive function (Chang, Chu, Wang, Song, & Wei, 2015a); as well as c) investigating the 81Symposia Tuesday July 11th potential mechanism of how acute exercise affects cognitive function from a neuroelectric perspective (Chang, Pesce, Chiang, Kuo, & Fong, 2015c).
Lastly, the possible and recommendeddirections for further examination will be also discussed. Generally, along with various scholarsfrom around the world, researchers in Asian have devoted their efforts to filling out the knowledge gap regarding the issue of acute exercise and cognitive function. Artificial and active modulation of perception in human behaviour Ji-Hang Lee Artificial and active modulation of perception, if possible, could open up many interesting possibilities in human behaviour.
While there are worrisome perspectives regarding the negative consequences such as brain doping, this has been, indeed, what sport psychologist were trying to do for years. A thought of decreasing the perception of fatigue or enhancing the visual perception could be something hard to resist for many practitioners. Although there have been many practical cases reporting the changes in perception correlated with various intervention, the evidence for the causal relationship between the changes in performance and intentional modulation of cortical activityis needed.
In this presentation, the kinesthetic perception will be discussed to illustrate this possibility. We can elicit this kinesthesia by applying tendon vibration at wrist joint. Also, by applying the repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) on the primary somatosensory cortex, we can artificially facilitate or inhibit its function.
Thus, changes in kinesthetic perception after the rTMS would indicate the bi-directional modulation of both cortical activities and behaviors. Results showed that the inhibitory effects of 1Hz rTMS on kinesthetic perception induced by tendon vibration illusion were observed.Both the movement amplitude and velocity decreased. On the other hand, the facilitatory effects of 5Hz rTMS were demonstrated only with the mean movement velocity variable.1Hz or 5Hz rTMS on the somatosensory cortex could inhibit or facilitate the kinesthetic illusion introduced by tendon vibration, respectively.
Therefore, the hypothesized Bi-directional effects of rTMS on the kinesthetic perception could be observed. While these results are limited to the kinesthetic perception, the similar mechanisms could be observed in different types of perception, and the practical consequence of such mechanisms will be discussed. Comfortable Self-Established Pace (CSEP) as the Best Strategy in Producing Positive Affect in Exercise Kimio Hashimoto When prescribing exercise for promotion of individual health and physical fitness, %VO2 max and %HR max are generally used as indices for setting the appropriate exercise intensity.
However, altough this relative exercise intensity may achieve the desired physical and mental effects, it is not always possible for individuals to adhere to the exercise program, and therefore consideration also needs to be given to psychological aspects such as motivation. Recently, therefore, behavior modification techniques based on behavior change theory have been used for helping individuals to continue exercising. Also, it may be possible to introduce a psychological aspect to the exercise prescription itself.In studies of anxiety or depression in relation to exercise, the effectiveness of the exercise has been examined by manipulating its intensity.
However, no studies have yet focused on exercise adherence, and previous viewpoints have merely centered on whether exercise improves negative affect. Therefore, to promote adherence to exercise, it would seem important to focus on aspects of positive affect, such as pleasantness, satisfaction, relaxation, and so on, both during and after exercise. For this purpose, Hashimoto and Saito (1993) introduced a psychological perspective to exercise intensity with the intention of both acquiring the maximum positive affect after exercise and promoting exercise adherence,and have advocated the concept of Comfortable Self-Established Pace (CSEP) as a self- selected/self-determined index of subjective exercise intensity.
So far, we have clarified the objective exercise 82Symposia Tuesday July 11th intensity, the consistency of CSEP, the degree of increase in positive affect after exercise, and favorable changes in running image. Our results suggest that CSEP may be a useful basis for setting the optimal exercise intensity in order to maximize positive affect, thus encouraging exercise adherence. In this symposium, I would like to describe the utility and practicality of CSE Exercise Dependence Research in Taiwan: An Adaptation of Western Research Model Frank Lu Exercise dependence (ED) is a morbid exercise behavior which exhibitedby a constellation of pathological syndromes such as excessive exercise, psychological withdrawal when unable to exercise, exercising more planned, insatiable intention and time in exercise, and neglecting responsibilities because of exercise (Hausenblas& Symons Downs, 2002a, 2002b; Symons Downs, Hausenblas, &Nigg, 2004).
The current presentation shows research results of ED in Taiwan. Literature review with updated empirical studies carried out in Taiwan has been introduced. Initially, Taiwanese researchers use self-developed measure in examining ED and correlates (Chen, Lu, & Tsai, 2005).
Further, researchers adapted/validated Hausenblas and colleagues measure (i.e., EDS-R, Hausenblas et al., 2002a, 2002b; Symons Downs et al., 2004) and found dancers’ ED associates with self-presentation (Chang, 2010), association betweenself-presentation and ED was mediated by psychological needs (Chang, 2009), and exercise commitment mediated the relationship between exercise identity and ED (Lu et al., 2012). Recently, Chang and Lu (2017) also found male weight trainers’ exercise behavior links to anger response but was mediated by drive for muscularity and ED. Exercise dependence can be detrimental to exercisers’ psychological well-being and physical health in any population and culture, even in Taiwan.
By adapting Western model it is useful to understand ED is a serious psycho-pathological problem for a small group of exercisers. Implications and future research directions are discussed. Physical Activity and Weight Control in a Viewpoint of Exercise Psychology Youngho Kim Obesity is one of several major public health problems, and is quickly becoming an epidemic as evidenced by the rapidly increasing prevalence rates around the world.
In this regard, it is broadly accepted that an active lifestyle and regular physical activity are important contributors to the prevention and reduction of the health risks caused by obesity. In a viewpoint of exercise psychology, it is well known that physical inactivity may be associated with psychological attributes, such as self-efficacy, attitude, perception, and motivation. In order to increase the physical activity participation and reduce weight in obese people, concerted recent efforts have been a shift towards theoretically based studies that concentrate on physical activity adherence focusing on the broad range of interactions with psychological variables and that apply an intervention strategy incorporating physical activity and psychological modification.
The current presentation tries to share my research experiences regarding physical activity and obesity on the basis of psychological theories. Symposia Session 3. (17-18.30) Evidencing principles of Positive Sport through theoretical insights, practical applications, and empirical evaluations Chair: Artur Poczwardowski (University of Denver) 83Symposia Tuesday July 11th Theory-to-practice interventions aim at both advancing the field of applied sport psychology and benefiting the client.
In serving the public good, some theoretical frameworks and practical approaches gain additional focus if they are founded on a broader theoretical and philosophical platform (e.g., positive youth development [Larson, 2000; Watson, Conolle, & Kadushin, 2011]). Such an approach as an encompassing professional philosophy and a social movement has been recently developed in a Central European country under an umbrella term of positive sport. The purpose of this symposium is to constructively examine this novel theory-to-practice perspective.
Specifically, the presenters will report empirical investigations as well as offer theoretical insights into the developmental and systemic considerations in understanding high achievement in sport. The first presentation will examine retrospective data on issues involving early specialization and professionalization of youth sport. The second presenter will outline the types of conditions that need to be considered separately and collectively in supporting both high athletic achievement and holistic development during the specialization and expert stages.
The third presentation will report qualitative data on lives after successful sport careers, and more specifically, on how the lessons learned in sport translate to future fulfilling personal and professional pursuits. The forth presentation will outline the theoretical foundations of a practical model translating core principles of positive sport into coaching practices. Finally, the session will be concluded with a 10-minute discussion of the commonalities and unique pieces of information across all four presentations.
This summary discussion will form a bridge to the interaction with the audience and will aim at stimulating and reinforcing the diversity of perspectives on the theoretical and practical issues involved in athletic talent development. Keywords: positive sport, athletic career stages, coaching Positive sport perspective on high achievement of Polish expert athletes: On late talent identification and exploration stage Malgorzata Siekanska (University of Physical Education in Krakow), Artur Poczwardowski (University of Denver) Reaching a professional level in any performance domain is based on focused, conscious and systematic work (Bloom, 1985). In sports, the developmental curve from the first attempts in sport to the proficiency phase comprises several stages (e.g., Stambulova, 1994; Wylleman & Lavallee, 2004; 2013).
Every phase is typified by a variety of challenges, threats, and opportunities. Phases of relative stabilization and balance are interspersed by crises and circumstances, which have significant effects on the course of a career including both achieving elite status or premature dropouts. In this project, careers of 128 Polish athletes (54 females and 74 males) representing 23 sports were examined retrospectively (psychometric tests and structured interviews).
Three phases were identified (i.e., exploration, commitment, and proficiency) and four skill groups emerged (i.e., expert-champions, future experts, those awaiting success, and those discontinuing prematurely). Results showed that the level of competence in the proficiency phase is connected with the type and amount of early phase experiences. Experts-champions (e.g., multiple medallists of the Olympic Games and world championships) when compared with the three remaining groups were identified as “talented” later in their chronological age.
Second, they practiced sports in the form of deliberate play for the longest time and entered the stage of competition at a professional level later than the other three groups. Third, expert-champions and future experts had the largest number of positive experiences and the smallest number of difficult experiences. Finally, the expert-champions recalled that the decision to take up professional sports was made based on their own initiative.
These findings, further dispel the myth of necessity for early specialization in sports (Cote, Lidor, & Hackfort, 2009) and provide empirical argument against professionalization of children and youth sport. Keywords: positive sport, exploration stage, expert athletes 84Symposia Tuesday July 11th Conditions supporting high achievement during the specialization and expert stages: Positive Sport perspective Jan Blecharz (University of Physical Education in Krakow) The specialization and expert stage in sport is considered as challenge for athletes who are required to repeatedly demonstrate their skills at the highest level as well as to take responsibility for their own achievements. When sports career is considered from the viewpoint of a positive sport, the following question should be posed: what conditions must be fulfilled for the athletic career so they promote holistic development?
In this presentation, the notion of conditions is derived from the scientific methodology and distinguishes between sufficient, indispensable, and favorable conditions. Case illustrations will deepen the content of the session. A sufficient condition guarantees the achievement of a goal.
It usually comprises a broad set of indispensable conditions and, also, favorable conditions, which increase the likelihood of achieving or pursuing a goal. For a long-term realization of any major goal it is sufficient to: (a) meet all direct indispensable conditions, (b) eliminate all hindering conditions, (c) have possibility to effectively prevent any disruptions, and (d) meet the most important favorable conditions (Kocowski, 1978). In sports, direct indispensable conditions to win a competition include an appropriate level of fitness, technical, and tactical skills.
Hindering conditions might include severe injury or lack of any direct indispensable conditions. An athlete should also know how to cope with adversities such as conditions encountered on sports site, pressure, as well as unexpected course of events during the competitions. Favorable conditions vary from the aforementioned direct indispensable conditions to ones such as nutrition, recovery, and convenient accommodation.
Sport psychologists should recognize which conditions are indispensable, alternatively indispensable, or favorable for good preparation of athletes for competitions, individual approach to competitors and stimulation of athlete’s development through sports. Keywords: positive sport, specialization stage, expert athletes Positive sport as a system: Exploring the relationship between athletic and life excellence Aleksandra Pogorzelska (Warsaw School of Social Sciences and Humanities, Sopot), Aleksandra Krukowska (Loughborough University), Artur Poczwardowski (University of Denver), Tomasz Kurach (University of Warsaw), Aleksandra Zienowicz (Foundation of Positive Sport) According to Nowak and Vallacher (1998), a dynamical system is defined as a set of interacting elements which undergo changes in time. In this perspective, positive sport can be seen as a coherent system of human interactions, which are the source of happiness, holistic development, and effective relationships during an athletic career as well as after career termination (thus, transcending the sport itself across the whole lifespan).
In particular, engagement, which is perceived as one of the most important components of sport participation (Lonsdale, Hodge & Raedeke, 2007), is based on various systems affecting each other (e.g., internal motives, relationship with a coach, competitors). This presentation will report a study of 107 professional athletes whose engagement can be characterized in terms of two systems: negative and positive. The system of positive engagement is based on positive emotions, positive bodily responses, effective relationships, trust and cooperation towards one’s coach, support networks and social circles, and achievement goal orientation.
The system of negative engagement contains opposite characteristics including negative emotions, negative bodily responses, coach-athlete relationship based on mistrust, anger, and shame, and achievement avoidance orientation. Moreover, the results of this follow-up qualitative study with 4 former Olympic medalists investigating their whole athletic careers through semi-structured interviews showed that all of them demonstrated the system of positive engagement. We hypothesized that athletes who show a positive engagement style during their sporting careers are effective in transferring skills from sport to other domains of life.
Based on dynamical systems theory, we will present a detailed analysis of how elements of the positive 85Symposia Tuesday July 11th engagement of an Olympic gold medalist influenced his transfer to a non-athletic career and helped him become highly successful in the pursuit of non-sport goals. Keywords: positive sport, dynamical system approach, Olympians i7W Model as a tool for coaches: Theoretical and applied insights into the practice of Positive Sport Aleksandra Krukowska (Loughborough University), Artur Poczwardowski (University of Denver), Tomasz Kurach (University of Warsaw), Kamil Radomski, Aleksandra Zienowicz, Ewa Serwotka (Foundation of Positive Sport), Martyna Tadzik (Technika Zwycestwa, Poland), Aleksandra Pogorzelska (Warsaw School of Social Sciences and Humanities, Sopot), Wojciech Tadzik (Technika Zwyciestwa, Poland), Malgorzata Pajaczkowska (Foundation of Positive Sport) One of the fundamental challenges of sport and performance psychology is to effectively communicate its theoretical and practical accomplishments to athletes and coaches. The i7W Model was adapted into practice in an attempt to translate the principles of positive sport into concise and clear recommendations for coaching practice.
Forty-three coaches and 435 athletes representing a variety of sports were divided into experimental and control groups. Coaches from the experimental group took part in eight workshops aimed to increase their ability to use the behavioral dimensions of the i7W model: inspire, support, explain, expect, reward, and appreciate. Self-determination theory (Ryan & Deci, 2000), the coach-athlete relationship model (Jowett & Poczwardowski, 2006) and the transformational leadership framework (Callow et al., 2009) constitute the model’s theoretical underpinnings.
It was hypothesized that in the post-intervention condition, athletes of the coaches who took part in the workshops will perceive higher levels of self-confidence, motivation and team cohesion in comparison to the control group. The results of the 2 (Group) x 2 (Time) fully randomized ANOVA indicated that there was a significant Group by Time interaction for self-confidence F(11,184) = 1,85; p < 0,05, and group cohesion F(1,196) = 3,40; p < 0,001, whereas there was no change in regards to motivation. Athletes classified to the experimental group perceived an increase in their coaches’ usage of the behaviors from four categories: explain, reward, expect and appreciate.
In the presentation, the content of the workshops along with the results of data analysis will be outlined. Through creative applications of sport and performance psychology knowledge, and empirical validations of coach education programs, sport psychologists can aim to enhance athletes’ experience and coaching practice in youth sport (McGuire, 2012). Keywords: positive sport, coaching methods, intervention The field of sport and exercise psychology in Malaysia Chair: Philip Lew (National Sports Institute of Malaysia) The establishment of the Malaysian Sport Psychology Association (MASPA) provided a platform for academicians and practitioners in sharing their knowledge and promote the field of sport and exercise psychology in the multicultural Malaysia.
In paper 1 of this symposium, the author will be illustrating a case study in the implementation of telepsychology as an integrated part of the training routine and its benefit in remotely supporting an elite swimmer throughout his debut participation in 2016 Rio Olympics from Malaysia are being highlighted. Paper 2 focuses on examining the effectiveness of using Mindfulness-Acceptance- Commitment (MAC) as an alternative approach to athletic performance enhancement, as the practitioner is pioneering this approach in Malaysia elite sports setting that lends support to the emerging links between mindfulness, stress and performance. In Paper 3, the psychosocial determinants of physical activity in undergraduates according to gender and physical activity index category are being analysed.
The finding has been impacted by the launch of the National Sports Day and FIT Malaysia programmes in encouraging youths 86Symposia Tuesday July 11th to practice a healthier and active lifestyle. The focus of paper 4 is understanding the coach driven and performance focused support, which includes individual profiling on anxiety, enriching training activities with psychological elements, monitoring coach's mood state and the adaptation of religion and spirituality in establishing pre-match routine, during their qualification quest to the 2018 Hockey World Cup. All 4 papers provide a mixture of practical applications and theoretical concept of sport and exercise psychology in Malaysia.
With the nation hosting the upcoming 2017 SEA Games with the participation of 925 Malaysian athletes in 38 sports and 405 events, sport psychology will be among the most integral components in supporting the nation's bid to top the Games medal tally. Keywords: Malaysia, telepsychology, Rio , MAC, team, PA Olympic state of mood through telepsychology: Profile of an Olympic athlete Philip Lew (National Sports Institute of Malaysia) The Olympic Games are global sporting events that has an estimated viewership of 3.6 billion people worldwide. Most athletes and coaches structured their training & competition periodization in relationship to the Olympic 4-year cycle.
With a 15,631km distance between the Olympic venues in Rio and Malaysia, providing sport psychology support to the first Malaysian swimmer to qualify with Olympic 'A' time in two events, proved to be an intriguing challenge. To enable regular service provision to the athlete, the telepsychology programme, which included the use of video-calling and mobile messaging applications through smart phones, were introduced as an integrated part of the psychology training & competition programme. The online version of the BRUMS (Terry et al., 2013) were being administered daily to monitor his mood profile.
His post race feedbacks and performance ratings were also being obtained. The mood profile highlighted higher levels of negative moods (i.e. depression, fatigue) in the early stages of the stay in the Olympic village, which was revealed to be effects of travelling and the associated jet lag.
A slight increase in tension was observed as on competition day and higher level of confusion was being reported after the completion of the 1st event, which the athlete was satisfied with the performance despite experiencing some nervousness in his debut appearance on the Olympic stage. Individual discussion sessions became a critical element in ensuring and enhancing the athlete's well-being, especially in dealing with the intense media coverage and reporting. Starting from day 3, his vigour level was consistently high throughout the whole campaign and positively correlated with his performance as he equaled the National Record and his Personal Best record.
By identifying & determining the optimal mood state associated with the superior performance of the athlete, it would be beneficial to recreate a similar mood state prior to future competitions. Keywords: Olympic, swimming, telepsychology, BRUMS, mood Effects of mindfulness intervention on stress and performance in Malaysian youth squash players How Peck Ngor (National Sports Institute of Malaysia) Mindfulness-Acceptance- Commitment (MAC) is designed as an alternative approach to athletic performance enhancement. The theory suggests that you do not need to control, change, or eliminate negative internal states in order to perform optimally.
Objective: to examine the effectiveness of MAC on sport performance and stress level. Method: Single-case, multiple baseline AB design. Participants: 2 male and 1 female national sub-elite squash players (mean aged 15.33 years old) completed the program.
Method: Single- case, multiple baseline AB design was used. Participants gone through a 3 weeks baseline, 7 weeks intervention and 4 weeks retention before a social validation were conducted. Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (MAAS), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), Self-rating Athletic Performance (SAP) was collected throughout the program.
Data assessed by visual analysis. Results: Player A has gained MAAS scoring from 54.8 to 65.3 but experienced a 87Symposia Tuesday July 11th slight increase of stress level (22.0 to 22.8) while maintained performance rating (5). Player B had a significant gain in MAAS (+20.1) and relatively positive improvement in performance rating (+1.3) despite the increased level of stress (+3.9).
Player C experienced a slight gain in mindfulness score (+2.8) while reduced in stress (-1.1) although she rated herself a trivial drop in performance (-0.3). Conclusion: Overall the present study lends support to the emerging links between mindfulness, stress and performance. Mindfulness training improves awareness and paying attention to the present which facilitates sport performance.
Though individual differences appear for stress level follow an increase of MAAS score, short mindfulness intervention might still be effective. Keywords: MAC, squash, MAAS, stress, performance Gender and physical activity index category differences in psychosocial determinants of physical activity among undergraduates Hui Yin Ler (Tunku Abdul Rahman University College, Kuala Lumpur) Majority of Malaysians do not meet the recommendation of adequate and regular physical activity, with about 61.4 % (aged 15 and above) considered inactive. This study examined the differences of psychosocial determinants of physical activity in undergraduates according to gender and physical activity index category.
The psychosocial determinants of physical activity inventory included Self-efficacy Assessment Scale (5 items, α = 0.8), Social Support for Exercise Scale (13 items; family support, α = 0.9, friend support α = 0.9), Motivation Scale (16 items, α = 0.7) and, Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale (18 items, α = 0.6). The Physical Activity Index (PAI) was determined by multiplying exercise intensity, duration and frequency. The total PAI score was categorized as ‘Needs improvement’ [NI], ‘Fair’ [F], ‘Average’ [A], ‘Good’ [G] and ‘Excellent’ [E].
A total of 359 undergraduates were conveniently surveyed (male = 74.4%, female = 25.6%). Result in physical index category revealed that 25% of the undergraduates each was in the ‘fair’ and ‘average’ category. About 15% of the undergraduates needs improvement and 34.8% was in the ‘good’ and ‘excellent’ category.
Inferential statistics analyses showed psychosocial determinants of ‘self-efficacy’, ‘exercise enjoyment’, ‘motivation’ and ‘support from family’ were significant according to gender. Males involved in physical activity due to ‘self-efficacy’, ‘motivation’ and ‘enjoyment’ while females were more influenced by family support. Significant results on PAI category and psychosocial determinants were shown in self-efficacy, social support from friends, motivation, and exercise enjoyment.
For ‘self-efficacy’ and ‘social support from friend’ factors, the ‘Need improvement’ group had low self-efficacy and social support from friends. However, for the ‘motivation’ and ‘exercise enjoyment’ factors, the ‘Needs improvement’ was more motivated (mean: NI>A>G>E) and enjoyed exercise more than other groups (mean: NI>A>G>F>E). Keywords: psychosocial determinants, gender, physical activity Integrating sport psychology practices in the 2018 World Cup qualification quest of the national field hockey team Philip Lew (National Sports Institute of Malaysia) A sport psychology program was designed for the national women's field hockey players (n=18; mean age: 28.45) in the preparation for the 2017 World League R2.
Besides conducting basic psychological skills training, players were monitored regularly through self-report measures during training and competitions on their psychological states. The analysis provided solid framework in establishing individualized psychological profiling for every players. In comparison to past findings during the 2015 tournament, the current findings demonstrated that the players showed identical high levels of confidence in "low intensity" game (M=37.53, SD=3.21) and in the "high intensity" game (M=37.42, SD=2.49) during this campaign.
On specific skills routine (e.g. penalty corners), structured biofeedback assisted imagery training and implementation of the electronic 88Symposia Tuesday July 11th version of the Harris and Harris' (1984) concentration grid exercise interventions were conducted with the flickers and goalkeepers. There was an increment of 31.8% of penalty corner conversion and 35.3% of saves made by goalkeepers throughout the matches.
The importance of spirituality and religion in pre-match preparation was being highlighted (Coakley, 2009; Watson & Nesti, 2005). According to the qualitative analysis, 85% of the players reported a sense of calm and confidence by praying together as a group prior to entering the field ahead of the start of the match. Coach's mood states was also being closely monitored and through maintaining regular interaction with the psychology practitioner, the coach managed to maintain the ideal Everest mood profile in 90% of the matches involved (Terry et al., 2003).
The integration of sport psychology practices also directly occurred within the multi-disciplinary members and the importance of systematic monitoring of the team members, integration of applied sport psychology practices in a team and the commitment to this unifying orientation were acknowledged for future Games. Keywords: hockey, profiling, mood, anxiety, spirituality The Support of Sport Psychology in Preparation and at the Rio Olympics 2016 Rebecca Wong (National Sports institute of Malaysia) Every athletes dream to compete at the Olympics. Some are disappointed to qualify, while others will do whatever they could, to excel at the inaugural event.
Malaysian badminton mixed double pairs, the Rio Olympics silver medalists will be used as case study in this paper. Sport psychology support in preparation phase: building relationship; on-site observation; regular discussion with coaches helped in need analysis. Returning to high competitive level from injury was a challenge.
In order to climb the world ranking to quality at Rio Olympics, it motivated the pairs, at the same time it imposed a lot of pressure due to time constraint. Communication played an important role, to enhance their play to win matches for ranking points. Periodically individual and group (pair) consultations were carried out to ensure both were in good mindset to train and play well.
A combination of psychological skill training (PST) and cognitive behavioral therapy techniques (CBT) were implemented to enhance the duo’s commitment towards targeted goal. Sport psychology support in competition phase: effective communication; mindfulness and CBT techniques; functional support system and video analysis were the key element in final phase. The moment: Mindfulness CBT and ensuring an optimal level in arousal, anxiety and relaxation in the duo.
Keywords: Olympics, badminton, mindfulness, CBT, arousal, relaxation The transition from school to university being an athlete Chair: Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) This symposium provides an overview of demands and coping strategies that athletes need for the transition from secondary school to university. First, Cecic-Erpic presents her work on the concurrent transitions in sport and education that athletes face when becoming elite athletes and university students almost at the same time. Second, De Brandt and colleagues compare the prioritization of competences between secondary and university students following a dual career also as elite athletes.
Third, Defruyt and colleagues based on the perspective of dual career support providers, compare the competences needed by elite athletes following secondary education with the competences needed by elite athletes following university education. Fourth, Miró and colleagues analyse the different scenarios that student athletes cope with during the transition from secondary education to university. Finally, Díaz de Subijana and colleagues analyse the career path followed at different stages of the sporting career.
Keywords: dual career, transitions 89Symposia Tuesday July 11th University student-athletes’ acclimatization to the concurrent transitions in sport and education Saša Cecic Erpic (University of Ljublijana) The within-career transition between developmental and mastery stage is one of the important periods in sport career development (Stambulova et al., 2009), represented by process of athletes’ adaptation to different changes. This transition coincides with transition to the university, which is one of the major life transitions in developmental period of emerging adulthood. The aim of the study was to research different aspects of transitional process between developmental and mastery stage, explaining the process in according to Athletic career transition (ACT) model (Stambulova, 2003).
Using a cross-sectional qualitative design, 75 student-athletes (SA), students of 1st year university study were asked to complete Transitions in athletic career qualitative instrument (TACQI; Cecić Erpič, in press). Directed content analysis was used to analyze data gathered with open-ended questions, with the aim to code answer passages according to the pre-defined theoretical categories, extending the conceptualization of the used theoretical framework. According to Stambulova’s model (2003), the process of transition is described by transitional demands, coping barriers, coping resources, and the process of coping itself.
The results of the analysis showed that SA perceived all of the above described aspects of their transition from developmental to mastery stage in strong and reciprocal connection to other domains in lives (i.e., educational/vocational, psychological, psychosocial and financial level) as in Holistic athletic career model (Wylleman et al., 2013). Transitions occurring in the athletic career and those occurring in other domains of athlete’s life are concurrent and reciprocally interact. Keywords: athletic career development, transition, student-athletes, junior-senior transition university students Gold in Education and Elite Sport (GEES): Do elite athletes in secondary and higher education prioritize different dual career competences?
Koen De Brandt, Paul Wylleman, Simon Defruyt (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Kristel Taelman (Sport Vlaanderen) The aim of this study was to explore if elite athletes in secondary education (SE) prioritize different dual career (DC) competences in several challenging DC scenarios compared to elite athletes in higher education (HE). The GEES project identified i) a GEES list of 38 DC competence items and 4 DC competence factors (DC management competences, Self-regulation & Resilience competences, Social competences, and Career Planning competences), and ii) 6 challenging DC scenarios (e.g. exam coincides with competition (1), making study choices (2), missing significant days of study (3), relocating for sport and/or study (4), suffering from an injury (5), social life expectations (6)) (De Brandt et al., 2016).
471 15-to-25-year-old Flemish SE and HE athletes (mean age 17.6 ± 2.2 yrs; 39% female) selected from the GEES list the five DC competences they perceived as most important to successfully manage each scenario. Independent t-tests showed significant differences in the competences prioritized by SE and HE athletes in 5 out of 6 scenarios (p<.05; Cohen d range: .22 - .43). In scenario 1, HE athletes prioritized their DC management competences more than SE athletes.
In scenario 3, SE athletes prioritized their Self-regulation & Resilience competences more, whereas HE athletes prioritized their Social competences more. In scenario 4 and 6, SE athletes prioritized their Self-regulation & Resilience and Career Planning competences more than HE athletes. In scenario 5, SE athletes prioritized their DC management competences more than HE athletes.
Findings imply that a need exists for a developmental and situational approach in assisting athletes during their DC ‘elite sport and study’ pathway. Keywords: GEES, Erasmus+ Sport, dual career, transition, university, development 90Symposia Tuesday July 11th Dual career support providers’ perspective on elite athletes’ competences for secondary education (SE) versus higher education (HE) Simon Defruyt, Paul Wylleman, Koen De Brandt (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) A dual career (DC) can be quite demanding, providing DC athletes with challenges at different levels of development (Wylleman, Reints & De Knop, 2013). Especially the transition from SE to HE involves a set of challenges, requiring specific competences.
This study aimed at evaluating how important competences are for DC athletes in order to manage the dual career, comparing secondary education with higher education athletes. To avoid self-evaluation bias, a Dual Career Support Providers’ (DCSPs’) perspective was adopted. Within the GEES project, 268 DCSPs from 9 European countries evaluated a list of 38 DC athlete competences (De Brandt et al., 2016) on their extent to which they were important (1- not important at all, 5- very important) for the DC athletes they provided support to.
Results revealed that the DCSPs working with SE athletes generally evaluated the importance of the competences of SE athletes equally high as the DCSPs working with HE athletes. For example ‘Ability to cope with stress in sport and study’ and ‘Ability to resolve conflicts’ were rated as equally important for SE and HE athletes. Only for two competences, significant differences between SE and HE were found: ‘ability to prioritize what needs to be done’ and ‘ability to live independently with competent life skills (e.g.
cooking)’ were rated as significantly more important for HE athletes. The less-structured environment of HE might increase the importance of these competences. The general findings indicate that although the requirements and challenges of HE are different from those in SE, the level of importance of the main set of competences to manage these challenges is almost similar.
DCSPs might use these findings to prepare DC athletes for the SE to HE transition. Keywords: transitions, resources, athletic career, holistic, challenges, Gold in Education and Elite Sport (GEES) Comparing dual career during secondary education Vs university: experienced scenarios and competences Salvador Miró, Miquel Torregrossa, Yago Ramis (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Susana Regüela (Centre d’Alt Rendiment) According to the literature (e.g., Stambulova et al, 2014; Torregrosa, et al, 2015), carrying out a dual career (DC) during athletic career (i.e., combining sports with studies or work) involve multiple benefits (e.g., reduced life stress and developing multiple personal identities). However, student-athletes experience different scenarios that they must successfully manage to continue their sports and academic/vocational career.
Embedded in a European project, the primary objective of this work is to compare how do athletes combine studies in sport during secondary and university education. Second we explore which competences are more frequently used to optimally manage each scenario experienced. Student-Athletes (n=246) participated in the study.
Questionnaire focused on exploring possible demanding scenarios that student- athletes might have experienced during their DC and 38 useful competences to manage each scenario. Results show that during secondary education and university, student-athletes similarly experienced some of the proposed scenarios (e.g., leave from home or manage exams with competitive phase). On the other hand, more secondary student-athletes experienced the scenarios related to miss significant days of study and how balance DC and social life.
The competences most used by both groups to successfully manage the scenarios are related to the management of the DC (dedication to succeed in both sport and study) and self-regulation (ability to cope with stress in sport and study). The competences used to a lesser extent are social competences (e.g., asking advice to the right people at the right moment) and career planning (e.g., being prepared for unexpected and having back up plans). Results of the present study can be useful as a guideline for student- athletes and DC Support Providers, to be prepared to manage the scenarios that will be experienced during their DC and provide appropriate competences in advance to manage scenarios successfully.
91Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: education, sport, dual career, young elite athletes, quantitative study Stages and sport career development: the career path makes a difference Cristina López de Subijana, Javier Ramos Gómez, Maribel Barriopedro (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid), Carlos Muniesa (Universidad Europea de Madrid) The aim of this presentation was to compare the sport career development of elite athletes depending on the career path they took (Pallarés, et. al, 2011). 447 retired elite athletes (62.5% male and 37.5% females) from 32 different sports answered a 52 items questionnaire.
The results showed how those athletes that chose combining their sport career with working (12.4±5.8) and those that were focused on sport (10.9±3.7), started later to practice their sport (F3,469=9.2; p<.001) than the athletes that followed a dual career with studies (9.7±3.5 and 10.2±3.8); they entered in the mastery stage later (18.2±2.9 sport and 20.4±4.4 working; F3,471=30.1; p<.001) than the athletes that combined sport with studies (16.9±2.7 and 16.9±2.7) and their best sport result was achieved later too (25.6±5 for sport; 27.3±4.8 for working; 22.9±4.3 for convergent and 22.4±4.9 for parallel models; F3,468=28.1; p<.001). The mastery stage was also longer for the sport (13.8±5.2) and working groups (13.6±5.1) than those athletes that combined sport with studies at both models (11.9±4.8 for convergent and 10.6±5.4 for parallel model; F3,472=10.6; p<.001). Finally, the athletes focused on sport (32.0±3.7) and those who worked (33.8±5.3), had a significantly higher age at retirement than those who combine the sport with studies (28.7±5.4 for convergent and 27.4±5.8 for parallel model; F3,472=32.6; p<.001).
It seems that athletes that achieved studies they shortened their sport career in other to start their second career and enter into the labor market. Funding: This project was funded by the Research Advance Grant Program of the International Olympic ID471. Refining the delivery of imagery interventions Chair: Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) Imagery has long been a major component of psychological skills training (PST) in sport and is a valuable technique for promoting physical activity for health.
Research examining imagery interventions is extensive and diverse. However, reviewers have reported confusing and even contradictory conclusions about the effective delivery of imagery programs (Feltz & Landers, 1983; Morris et al., 2005). This situation points to the need for additional research in a range of contexts to further understand when, how, and why imagery can be used effectively to change psychological states, modify physiological variables, and enhance sport performance or physical activity participation.
In this symposium, we present four different contexts and content of imagery interventions to aid understanding of the application of imagery in sport and exercise. First, Garry Kuan and colleagues describe their study aiming to understand the effects of an individual self-guided breathing device with imagery training to ameliorate anxiety among novice and skilled netballers. Next, Sho Itoh and colleagues report on the first study in a series examining the relationship between imagery dose delivery and performance response.
Here, the researchers focused on the effect of number of imagery repetitions on basketball free- throw shooting, while holding session duration and number of sessions per week constant. Then, Meisam Savadelavar and colleagues describe a new approach to the content of imagery, basing their imagery script on Neuro-Linguistic Programming as they examined archers’ shooting performance. Finally, in a physical activity context, Anaurene Roy and colleagues present the results of an imagery intervention study in which imagery scripts based on imagery functions were applied to increase Harmonious Passion for a physical activity and amount of physical activity in type 2 diabetics.
Each of these studies throws a new light on the use of imagery. Tony Watt leads audience discussion. 92Symposia Tuesday July 11th Keywords: imagery interventions, physiological responses, dose-response, NLP-based imagery, passion Understanding the effects of using an individual self-guided breathing device with imagery training among novice and skilled netballers Garry Kuan, Siti Raihanah Binti Roslan (School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia), Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) Breathing patterns are often disrupted in stressful situations.
Trained breathing patterns can have a profound effect on individuals’ self-regulation for reducing anxiety level. This study examined the effect of using a self-guided breathing device with imagery training between Novice and Skilled netballers. The breathing device employed the concept whereby participants followed the rhythmic breathing using their smartphone to inhale for a count of four, hold for a count of four, exhale to a count of four, and pause for a count of four before repeating the sequence together with the imagery (Williams, 2010).
Participants were novice (n=13) and skilled (n=13) netballers. They completed the Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM), a self- efficacy for netball shooting scale, the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory-2 Revised (CSAI-2R), and a breathing rate counter. We measured netball shooting performance, self-efficacy, and competitive state anxiety before the intervention and at post-test.
All participants had moderate to high imagery ability. Skilled netballers showed a significant increase in self-efficacy (p=0.015) from M=370.00 during pre-test to M=503.85 during post-test, using paired t-test, but we observed no significant difference in self-efficacy of novice netballers from pre-test to post-test (p=0.249). Similarly, skilled netballers showed a significant reduction in somatic state anxiety (p=0.026) and cognitive state anxiety (p=0.021) using paired t-test.
However, no significant difference was observed for novice netballers. In terms of performance, paired t-test showed significant improvement in skilled netball scoring (p=0.046) but not for the novice group (p=0.222). For breathing rate, skilled and novice netballers showed more negative values than positive values, showing that breathing rate across the 12 sessions decreased in both research conditions as intended by the intervention.
Implications of using imagery techniques to enhance breathing are discussed Keywords: breathing patterns, imagery, anxiety, self-efficacy, performance Effect of imagery dose repetitions on performance in sport Sho Itoh, Tony Morris, Michael Spittle (Victoria University Melbourne) Imagery is an effective psychological skill that can be applied to sports performance. Research has shown benefits of utilizing imagery in sport for improving performance and controlling mental states. However, many studies neglect important imagery variables, particularly repetition, duration, and frequency, that are related to determining the most effective dose of imagery for the response of improved sports performance.
Identifying the most effective amount of imagery can provide guidance to help athletes, coaches, and psychologists to better use imagery training to improve athletic performance. Moreover, all levels of athletes will be able to use imagery more effectively for their desired goals. In this project, we systematically investigated the dose-response relationships of imagery prescription used to promote sports skill by manipulating the number of repetitions, duration, and frequency of imagery.
Specifically, repetitions acted as the independent variable, while duration and frequency remained constant. We randomly allocated 60 participants from local basketball teams to three imagery intervention conditions (n=15 each), who performed 10, 20, or 30 imagery repetitions per session, and a control condition (n=15), who maintained their usual basketball training. Imagery participants undertook 4 weeks of imagery training to promote free-throw shooting, continuing their usual basketball training.
Duration and frequency of sessions were held constant at 10 minutes and 3 sessions per week respectively. Accuracy of free-throw shooting was measured at pre- intervention, Weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, and follow-up in Week 5. We analyzed accuracy of basketball free-throw 93Symposia Tuesday July 11th shooting by using 2-way mixed design ANOVA, that is, 4 conditions (3 independent repetition conditions and control condition) x 6 occasions (repeated measures at pre-test, Weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, and follow-up test in Week 5).
Results will be described and discussed and implications addressed. Keywords: imagery training, dose-response, imagery repetitions, session duration, session frequency The effects of neuro-linguistic programming imagery on archers’ shooting performance Meisam Savadelavar, Garry Kuan (School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia), Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) is a multidisciplinary approach to changing thoughts, feelings, and behaviour based on the use of language and non-conscious cognitive processes. Because mental training is a fundamental property of learning motor skills and enhancing performance of athletes, it should be helpful to examine the efficacy of NLP imagery-based techniques in sport settings.
The purpose of this study was to examine the influence of using an imagery script based on NLP principles for enhancing novice archers’ performance. Participants were novice archers (n=15) with moderate imagery ability evaluated by the Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM). Participants were involved in two introductory sessions.
First, they learnt about NLP principles and the “anchoring” technique. In the second session, participants learnt about the 10 basic steps in archery performance, which are stance, finger placement, hand placement, bow arm, drawing, anchoring, holding, aiming, release, and follow through. In the same session, participants also performed a 20- shot shooting trial to apply what they had learnt in action, with feedback on their performance from an experienced coach.
We employed a pre-test-intervention-post-test design with a 20-trial 18m archery shooting performance test before and after 10 sessions of listening to the NLP imagery audio script over five weeks before the post-test was conducted. Participants listened to the script twice per week, with the first session in the sport psychology laboratory and the second session at their home with an mp3 player provided. Results from a paired samples t-test showed that there was a significant increase in the gain score for archery performance, t(14) = -3.84, p Keywords: neuro-linguistic programming, imagery, anchoring, imagery script Using imagery to increase harmonious passion for physical activity in people with diabetes Anaurene Roy (Sports Centre, University of Malaya), Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne), Selina Khoo (Sports Centre, University of Malaya) In a previous study we found significant positive relationships between cognitive imagery use and harmonious passion and between motivational imagery use and harmonious passion (HP) (Roy et al., 2014).
Regression also indicated that both types of imagery use significantly predicted harmonious passion. In the present study, we examined the effect of an imagery intervention on passion for PA in 20 voluntary male and female participants with T2DM, aged between 32 and 65 years. Participants practised imagery for two sessions per week for six weeks.
Ten participants, assigned at random, practised the harmonious passion imagery (HPI) intervention, including cognitive and motivational imagery related to harmonious passion. Cognitive imagery included images of the place where each individual normally exercised. It also included images of the individual warming up, exerting more effort and cooling down.
Motivational imagery included images of enjoying the activity, goal accomplishment, and positive experience associated with completion of the task. The other 10 participants practised a general physical activity imagery (GPAI) intervention with no passion-related content. The script included images of the individual performing and completing their respective activity.
Using a two- way repeated measures ANOVA, we found a significant difference, p < .05, between increase in HP and PA and no significant difference in OP in HPI and GPAI conditions from pre-test to post-test to follow-up. We observed a significant increase in HP and PA, but no significant difference in OP for these periods. No interaction effect 94Symposia Tuesday July 11th was found between HP, OP, and PA from pre- to post-test or follow-up, Results supported the proposition that an imagery intervention focused on harmonious passion was an effective cognitive-behavioural technique that led to an increase in HP for a preferred physical activity, as well as increased PA for managing diabetes.
Keywords: imagery, harmonious passion, obsessive passion, physical activity, diabetes Emerging approaches to the psychological aspects of physical activity and sports in Puerto Rico Chair: Mercedes Rivera Morales (University of Puerto Rico- Rio Piedras Campus) This symposium presents the diversity of psychological approaches applied to athletes in Puerto Rico—in different settings as, highly competitive settings, at the college level, and in elementary schools. Puerto Rico has a long history of intervention in psychology of the sport different levels where professionals work under the cognitive social perspective and psychophysiology. The discussions will include brain wave management technology and its application during last Olympic Cycle (2014-2016) and the development of instruments to gauge biopsychological factors associated to athlete performance and emotional styles.
Additionally, the findings of a study on the relationship between self-efficacy and physical activity level measured with accelerometers in boys and girls in elementary school and test differences by gender and grade level. Keywords: brain waves, biopsychosocial profile, Rasch model, self-efficacy Biopsychosocial profile of a group of student athletes in the southern region of the country Carlos R. Carrasquillo-Rios (Universidad Puerto Rico -Humacao Campus) The objective of this research was to identify the resources and needs of a group of university student athletes in southern Puerto Rico.
Social aspects could be barriers to training days and performance at university level in order to prevent sport dropout. The study used a psychosocial questionnaire, administered to 145 athletes from different disciplines. Of these, 57 % were male, 43 % female.
Family conflicts are usually dealt with respectfully. In their couple relationships, women expressed less satisfaction than males. Half of the participants of both sexes felt discomfort in the lower back after the event.
The support provided by trainers seems to be a strengthening element, especially in women. The percentage of pre-competition anxiety was higher among women. More comprehensive attention is recommended for women athletes, as well as giving greater importance to physical/mental preparation and creating support groups.
Keywords: family conflicts, pre-competition anxiety, university athletes Brain waves management as a sports psychology tool during the las Olympic Cycle Rosa Hechavarria-Gomez (Universidad Puerto Rico- Medical Science Campus) A discussion on the technique of brain wave management and its application during the last Olympic Cycle (2014-2016) in Puerto Rico. Statistics related to participants, athletes treated at the health clinic, and athletes in psychological intervention during each game will be presented, highlighting brain wave management and other interventions that were carried out before, during, and after the event at the Olympic Village. Stress and anxiety are widely acknowledged as symptoms that occurs in sports competitions.
Some of the stress symptoms is confusion, attention problems and sleep difficult; this may influence in the athlete’s performance and coherence in the National Team. Keywords: brain waves, psychological interventions, olympic cycle 95Symposia Tuesday July 11th Development and validation of the Colón and Andújar Emotional Style Scale with a sample of athletes from a university in Puerto Rico’s northern region Amilcar Colon-Cortés (Universidad Puerto Rico- Arecibo Campus) The objective of this research is to present development and validation results on a scale that measures emotional styles, used with 200 athletes from a university in northern Puerto Rico. According to Davidson and Begley (2012), there are six emotional styles: 1.
Resilience, 2. Outlook, 3. Social intuition, 4.
Self-awareness, 5. Sensitivity to context, and 6. Attention.
The results and inferences of the instrument, which were validated using the Rasch model, will be presented. The study’s applications and limitations will be included in the discussion. Keywords: emotional styles, Rasch model Self-efficacy, physical activity, and physical fitness in elementary school girls and boys in Puerto Rico Mercedes Rivera Morales (Universidad Puerto Rico- Río Piedras Campus) Physical activity levels change trough life stages, is important to identify psychological aspects that will intervene early in life.
Children should maintain a level of physical activity of at least one hour per day. Whether they are active or sedentary will depend on social, environmental, and psychological factors, as proposed by Buckworth, et al. (2013).
The present study explored the relationship between the level of physical activity and self-efficacy regarding exercise in a sample of 312 (157 boys and 155 girls) students from two elementary schools in San Juan. The study used direct physical activity measures with accelerometers ActiGraph GT3X + for 7 days. Self –efficacy was evaluated using a questionnaire administered by interview, measures repeated during a 5-year period.
T –test analyses will be presented. Keywords: self-efficacy, physical activity, elementary school Physical activity and quality of life across ages and cultures Chair: Bonnie Berger, Ed.D (Bowling Green State University, USA) This symposium examines specific contributions that participation in diverse types of physical activity can make to participants’ quality of life throughout their lives. Quality of life has been defined by the World Health Organization as “individuals’ perceptions of their position in life in the context of the culture and value systems in which they live” (WHO, 1994).
Each presenter will address contributions of physical activity to quality of life in various age groups and cultures. The first presenter reports on the effects of a year-long exercise and wellness lifestyle intervention program for children (N = 167) ages 3 to 14 years from African-American (80%), Asian (10%), and Hispanic (10%) backgrounds. Results indicated that using pedometers helped children significantly increase number of steps by 300% (p < .05).
The second presenter will report on an exploratory study (N = 10) on quality of life in senior women golfers, age 50 years. The senior golfers reported high levels of Satisfaction with Life, exercise enjoyment, physical fitness, as well as mood alteration after exercising that was correlated with Satisfaction with Life. The next presenter will examine the benefits of a village women’s volleyball program delivered in Fiji and Vanuatu.
The program was designed to increase physical activity and improve diet, but also resulted in improving confidence, happiness, perceived village unity, and men’s attitudes toward women. The fourth presenter, a clinical psychologist, will examine the impact of exercise on clients’ quality of life as reported in three case studies incorporating both quantitative and qualitative analyses conducted before and after therapeutic interventions. The symposium will conclude with a discussant 96Symposia Tuesday July 11th examining the presentations that highlight the diverse influences of physical activity on quality of life for participants of various ages and cultures.
Keywords: physical activity, quality of life, culture, psychological correlates Motivating physical activity by pedometer use: Results of a program focused on quality of life in at-risk youth Mary J. MacCracken (University of Akron, USA), Robert Stadulis (Kent State University, USA), Alexis Holt (University of Akron, USA) Sedentary behavior is a health hazard that has contributed to obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D) in children and adolescents (Manger et al., 2012). The Keeping PACE (Physical Activity/ Tennis & Character- Health-Nutrition Education) Program has guided at-risk African-American, Asian, and Hispanic youth to understand ways to make healthier choices.
Researchers (MacCracken et al.,2001) studied whether activities/ environment might motivate youngsters to combat T2D and low levels of exercise. “Having fun” seemed to be a primary consideration especially when lessons involved culturally-appropriate physical activity. The present study asks, “Would using pedometers motivate children and adolescents to increase levels of physical activity thereby addressing potential T2D and resulting in a higher quality of life?” Program participants (N=167) were asked to use pedometers when they exercised.
Enrollees were boys (n=76) and girls (n=91) aged 3-5 years (n=55), 6-10 years (n=101), and 11-14 years (n=11); 80% were African American, 10% Asian, and 10% Hispanic. Culturally-infused, free, year-long, face-to-face lessons focused on lifestyle intervention; participants wore pedometers during physical activity lessons. At the program’s conclusion, results showed participants took 300% more steps from quarter 1 to quarter 4 (p = <.05).
Children ages 3-4 years increased their steps by 494%. In addition, the older youth seemed to enjoy the pedometers, but not to the same extent as the youngest group. However, these older children were able to explain that daily exercise helps combat T2D, and also able to share that exercise/physical activity impacts self-esteem/competence and improves social interaction.
The lifelong influence of these lifestyle changes in physical activity is yet to be determined, but enrolled youth have shown an increase in quality of life. Keywords: quality of life, pedometers, youth, exercise, fun, motivation Quality of life in senior golfers: Psychological and physiological correlates Bonnie Berger, Lynn A. Darby (Bowling Green State University, USA), David R.
Owen (Brooklyn College of the City University of New York, USA) Golf is a popular recreational activity, yet little is known about the relationship of golf participation with quality of life (QoL). This exploratory study based on the hedonic model of exercise participation (Keyes, Fredrickson & Park, 2012) explored psychological and physiological correlates of QoL in senior golfers. Females (N = 10, mean age: 63.6 ± 7.2 years with 25.9 ± 20.3 years of golf participation) completed an 8-week golf- fitness program (Golf-Fit; Titleist® Performance Institute).
At the beginning and end of Golf-Fit, the women completed the Satisfaction with Life Scale and the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale. They also completed the Profile of Mood States (POMS) before and after 6-min walk tests (6MWT). Results indicated that at both the beginning and end of Golf-Fit, senior golfers scored high (66th and 69th percentiles) in aerobic fitness and reported consistently high scores on Satisfaction with Life (Ms = 27.9, 27.8, r = .96).
After each 6MWT, Satisfaction with Life scores were significantly inversely correlated with Total Mood Disturbance (rs: Post- 6MWT Beg and End, range -.42 to -.64), and with the Tension and Depression subscales of the POMS (rs: -.55 to -.83). Their mean exercise enjoyment scores of 93.1 ± 18.4 and 97.1 ± 15.5 were high but did not change due to Golf-Fit. Although the 6MWT tests were performed at high intensities (RPEs: 13.0, 13.5, “somewhat hard;” %HR max = 81.6%, 76.7%), the golfers reported desirable changes in mood.
Initially, they reported significant 97Symposia Tuesday July 11th increases in Vigor and decreases in Confusion, and at the end of Golf-Fit, they decreased significantly in Fatigue. Senior women golfers reported a high QoL as indicated by Satisfaction with Life, aerobic fitness, exercise enjoyment, and desirable changes in mood. These results support a need to further examine the relationships between golf participation and senior women’s quality of life.
Keywords: qualitiy of life, satisfaction with life, mood alteration, exercise enjoyment, senior golfers The effects of a Pacific Island volleyball program on the well-being and quality of life of village women Stephanie J. Hanrahan (The University of Queensland, Australia) Volleyball programs were delivered in villages in Fiji and Vanuatu with the goal of increasing physical activity and improving nutrition in women. Questionnaires investigated the attitudes of participants, and qualitative data focused on opinions about the program and its perceived effects.
In Vanuatu 94 individuals (83 females - 63 participants and 20 non-participants; 11 males – all nonparticipants) from three villages completed questionnaires. Ages ranged from 13 to 70 years, with a mean of 32.31 years. Two focus groups, (6 and 8 participants each), took place in one village.
In Fiji, questionnaires were received from 33 women from two villages with ages ranging from 19 to 64 (M = 38.88 years). Qualitative responses were obtained from 42 women (four villages; ages 21 to 75, M = 45.97 years), and 11 men (two villages; ages 22 to 60, M = 38.22 years). Overall the attitudes and intentions of the villagers towards the volleyball program, physical activity in general, and healthy diets were positive, although slightly more positive for women and program participants than for men and non-participants.
Although the attitudes towards the volleyball program remained positive over time, there was a slight decline over time in the attitudes of the participants towards participating in the volleyball program or physical activity in general over the next 12 months. In Vanuatu, many participants felt they had lost weight, learned new volleyball skills, and changed the way they ate as a result of the program. In Fiji, both the men and women noted that the women were healthier, fitter, or lighter.
The women reported feeling more confident and happier as a result of the program. The men observed increased village unity and their own improved attitudes towards women as a result of the volleyball program. Both participants and nonparticipants wanted the program to continue.
Keywords: well-being, quality of life, gender, attitudes Exercise and health-related quality of life with complex clinical clients Frances L. Price (Independent Practice, USA) Although a set point for life satisfaction may be stable over time, it might be affected by life events (Fujita & Diener, 2005). Health-related quality of life refers to how an individual’s health impacts his/her ability to function as well as perceived well-being with respect to physical, mental, and social domains (Hays & Morales, 2001).
Clients of different ages and ethnicities were physically active before unforeseen circumstances negatively affected their quality of life, including their ability to exercise. Each client had a unique challenge. Therapeutic modalities included cognitive-behavioral therapy, insight-oriented therapy, solution-focused therapy, play therapy, and relaxation training.
This presentation will include three case studies. Assessment, interventions, and the role of exercise with respect to quality of life were examined via quantitative and qualitative analyses. Multi-dimensional, age- and cognitively-appropriate quantitative measures were administered to track clients’ progress, determine the effectiveness of the interventions, and generate goals and plans designed to enhance the clients’ treatments, outcomes, and overall quality of life.
Because qualitative research is not guided by a priori hypotheses, a structured, in-depth, phenomenological, dialogic interview technique using open-ended questions was also employed. Approaching interviews from this perspective allowed the participants to guide the interview and express what they considered to be the most 98Symposia Tuesday July 11th salient aspects of their experiences. This approach provided insight into a complex interaction of variables and life circumstances.
The case studies will examine the roles, the desire, and how the ability to exercise played in the clients’ lives prior to, and in the context of life-altering events. This presentation also will raise questions regarding how individuals’ needs might better be served and their quality of life and subjective well-being enhanced through exercise. Keywords: qualitiy of life, case studies, satisfaction with life, clinical clients Doing qualitative research with injured populations: our confessions… Chair: Ross Wadey (St Mary's University) Since the 1960s, a significant body of research has focused on the psychosocial experiences of injured populations.
In the field of sport and exercise psychology, the literature can be divided into two broad themes: athletes’ experiences of injury (e.g., Brewer, 2010; Wadey & Evans, 2011) and the role of physical activity in the lives of non-athletic, injured populations (e.g., Day & Wadey, 2015; Douglas & Carless, 2015). To address these lines of inquiry, researchers have predominately used qualitative inquiry, and chosen to represent their findings through the conventions of a realist tale (i.e., experiential author[ity], the participant’s point of view, interpretive omnipotence; Van Maanen, 1988). Yet, while this form of representation has been beneficial in foregrounding the research findings, the voice of the researcher about what happened during the fieldwork is left absent.
To generate a more reflexive and critical stance towards both the process and product of qualitative research, Sparkes and Smith (2014) recommended that researchers use confessional tales. That is, researchers should reflect on the methodological and ethical perils and pitfalls of their research experience (Van Maanen, 1988), which has significant pedagogical value for neophyte qualitative researchers. Drawing from a wealth of qualitative experience (i.e., >300 interviews, >50 focus groups, & >500 hours of observation) of working with various injured populations (e.g., elite athletes, adolescents, & military personnel) in various contexts (e.g., hospitals, competitive venues, & airports), the aim of this symposium is to share confessional tales of our fieldwork experiences with injured populations.
Specifically, we reflect on gaining entry, using qualitative methods, and ethical tensions (e.g., procedural and relational). Recommendations are provided for neophyte researchers (e.g., what to do, what not to do, and how best to foster a researcher-participant relationship) Keywords: injury, psychology, qualitative, confessions Doing qualitative research with injured adolescents: my confessions… Francesca Cavallerio (Anglia Ruskin University) Despite the benefits that arise from participating in competitive sport, a few researchers have started to suggest the existence of a darker side to sport, which may pose a risk to damaging athletes’ health (e.g., Douglas & Carless, 2015; Theberge, 2008). The environment and culture of gymnastics have often been pointed at as an example of this darker facet (Krane, Greenleaf, & Snow, 1997), for encouraging the development of unhealthy beliefs and behaviours among young gymnasts (e.g., Barker-Ruchti & Schubring, 2016; Warriner & Lavallee, 2008).
Pain and overuse injuries are common negative experiences in gymnasts’ life, often overlooked by both coaches and gymnasts (Barker-Ruchti, 2008), but with possible serious consequences in life after sport (DiFiori, et al., 2014). In 2013 I started conducting a 12-month ethnographic study in a high performance Italian rhythmic gymnastics club (Cavallerio, Wadey, & Wagstaff, 2016). The study was underpinned by ontological relativism and epistemological constructivism, and aimed to gain a better understanding of the psychosocial aspects that facilitated the development of overuse injuries among gymnasts.
I observed trainings and competitions, conducted formal and informal interviews, as well as focus groups with gymnasts, coaches, and 99Symposia Tuesday July 11th parents, and kept a reflexive journal throughout the duration of the ethnography. The confessional tales selected from my journal reflect on the difficulties of doing research with young athletes (“How To Do Research With Children?”), while focusing on a sensitive topic like disclosing about pain and injury in the environment I was immersed in (“What Will They Think of Me?”). Lessons learned from these tales include taking time to know and understand one’s participants, keeping in mind the aspect of power and its balance in the relationship, the importance of building a trustworthy relationship overtime, and of tailoring our methods of data collection so that they resonate with our participants.
Keywords: adolescents, pain, overuse, injury, qualitative Doing qualitative research with in-patients: my confessions… Phoebe Sanders (St Mary's University, Twickenham) Immersive fieldwork can facilitate an understanding of the richness, complexity, and multifaceted relationships within medical environments, and is increasingly being used to explore sensitive topics within healthcare (Long, Hunter, & van der Gest, 2008). However, few published studies have made use of immersive methods within hospitals or clinics; highly structured, protected, and exclusive institutional spaces (Foucault, 1975) which may prove inaccessible to researchers. There is also a lack of guidance for those seeking to conduct immersive research within medical spaces (Wind, 2008), despite calls to reduce the shock to neophyte qualitative researchers by discussing upfront the range of emotions, role conflicts, physical and mental effort, discomfort and stress at play during fieldwork (e.g., Kleinman & Copp, 1993; Owton & Allen-Collinson, 2014).
This study utilised immersive fieldwork methods, including participant observation, informal conversation, and interviews, to explore the experiences of amputee patients attending a specialist rehabilitation centre at a hospital in the U.K. In this confessional tale, the author draws on reflective diary entries and fieldnotes to explore her experiences of integrating into this environment as a neophyte researcher with no medical training. Overall, four main challenges are discussed: finding a role, navigating waiting spaces, encountering the unfamiliar, and ethics in the boardroom and in the field.
Specific recommendations for novice researchers entering medical environments include: preparing to encounter those who do not share their beliefs, identifying a safe environment in which they can share their emotions, and exploring the impact their (in)experience and willingness to embrace opportunities for learning may have within their own research context. The importance of reflective practice is also highlighted as a means of improving researchers’ capacity to recognize and negotiate ethical complexities. Keywords: fieldwork, healthcare, hospital, amputee, qualitative Doing qualitative research with out-patients: my confessions… Ross Wadey (St Mary's University, Twickenham) What participation in physical activity means in the lives of injured military personnel has attracted increased research attention (e.g., Brittain & Green, 2012; Carless, Sparkes, Douglas, & Cooke, 2014).
Findings have demonstrated how physical activity can affect participants’ psychological, subjective and social wellbeing. Yet, while we are gaining a more in-depth understanding from the perspective of military personnel, the researchers’ experiences of doing qualitative research with this injured population has been absent in the literature. In this study, I draw upon my confessional tales from conducting a longitudinal, qualitative study with injured military personnel.
Underpinned by ontological relativism and epistemological constructivism, the aim of the study was to examine the impact of different types of physical activity on the lives of injured, military personnel. The sample pool consistent of 54 participants (51 males, 3 females; Mean age = 55 years, SD = 13 years). Specifically, 14 activities (e.g., ski-diving, sailing, golf, fishing) were explored that took place in various countries (e.g., Austria, California, England, Greece).
Data collection involved formal interviews (N=84), 100Symposia Tuesday July 11th focus-groups (N=2), observation (> 150 hours), fieldnotes, and a reflexive journal. Drawing upon my fieldnotes and reflexive journal, the confessional tales reflect on the challenges of doing research with this injured population. The tales selected cohere around gaining entry (i.e., “Letting Go and Moving On”) and data collection (i.e., “Interviews, Observation, and the Masculine Self”, “Cigarettes, Alcohol, and the Focus Group”).
Recommendations for neophyte qualitative researchers and those seeking to work with injured populations include examining one’s prior beliefs, reviewing early transcripts, appreciating the role of informal interviews, using elicitation devices, understanding what questions to (not) ask, having an exit strategy, and mobilising a critical friend. Keywords: military, injury, physical activity, qualitative Doing qualitative research with victims and witnesses of athletic injury: my confessions… Melissa Day (University of Chichester) The importance of researching and understanding experiences of athletic injury has been recognised by researchers for several decades (Evans & Hardy, 1995; Maddison & Prapavessis, 2005; Podlog et al., 2015). More recently, attention has not only focused on the injured athlete but on the wider sports network, highlighting the negative impacts of injury on coaches (Day, Bond, & Smith, 2013; Martinelli & Day, 2016) and teammates (O’Neill, 2008; Day & Schubert, 2012).
Conclusions from all these lines of research have demonstrated the detrimental impact of injury, both for the injury victim and the witness of injury events. Yet what has been noticeably absent from this literature is how the vulnerability of both participant and researcher can be managed when narrating athletic injury. This confessional tale draws on a reflective diary kept during a series of narrative interviews that asked injury victims and witnesses to story their experiences of injury.
Participants included injured athletes, coaches, and teammates, all of whom had been involved in an injury event that resulted in a severe or life-changing injury. This confessional tales focuses on the challenges of asking participants to narrate athletic injuries. Two tales (Ready to return in body and mind?) and (Beginning at the end) illustrate the difficulties that may be experienced by participants narrating injury.
The final tale (Imagining the world of others and struggling to leave) focuses on the researcher and considers how connected or detached a researcher should be when listening to stories of injury. Recommendations for neophyte qualitative researchers include considering the order in which stories are narrated, becoming aware that physical recovery and return to sport may not equate to psychological recovery, and strategies for listening to sensitive or vivid descriptions of injury. Keywords: victim, witness, injury, qualitative The role of structured and unstructured sport activities in skill acquisition and talent development Chair: Patrícia Coutinho (Centre for Research, Education, Innovation and Intervention in Sport, CIFI2D) The benefits and costs associated with various types of sport activities performed during different stages of an athlete’s development have been a topic of discussion in the last two decades (Coutinho, Fonseca & Mesquita, 2016).
Specifically, the role of structured and unstructured sport activities has been examined in order to understand how these activities may aid the acquisition of skill and talent development. Whilst structured activities have been considered a key factor in distinguishing performers at different skill levels (Ericsson et al, 1993; Coutinho, Fonseca & Mesquita, 2016), unstructured activities have been recognized as a type of activity equally relevant in the development of an athlete (Coutinho et al, 2016). The main purpose of this symposium is to explore the characteristics of both structured and unstructured sport activities and discuss how they could aid the development of expertise in sport.
More specifically, we will present the main 101Symposia Tuesday July 11th advantages of unstructured activities and discuss how they could promote the athlete’s motor, physical, cognitive, psychological and social development. This symposium will include four communications. The first two communications will provide a theoretical perspective of the core concepts, emphasizing the benefits and potential negative consequences of both structured and unstructured sport activities.
Here, we will particularly highlight the relevance of unstructured sport activities for skill acquisition and talent development. Then, the third and fourth communications will present empirical findings on the perceptions that adult (retrospective perspective) and youth (prospective perspective) volleyball players have about the importance of unstructured activities for their development. It is therefore expected to shed light into the existing knowledge in this research field, clarify potential misunderstandings and to discuss important avenues to explore in future research.
Keywords: sport activities, practice, play, athlete development, talent development How unstructured sport activities aid the development of expertise in volleyball players Patrícia Coutinho, António M. Fonseca, Isabel Mesquita (Centre for Research, Education, Innovation and Intervention in Sport <CIFI2D>, Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal) Within the panoply of early developmental sport activities that constitute the athlete’s sport participation, unstructured activities has been considered an important contributor to the acquisition of skill and expertise. The purpose of this study was to analyse the involvement in unstructured sport activities by volleyball players and understand their contribution to talent development.
Thirty highly skilled (HS) and thirty less skilled (LS) players participated in retrospective interviews. The data were subjected to thematic analysis. Results indicated that both HS and LS participated in unstructured activities during their early development.
However, only HS players recognized the importance of these activities as a key formative experience in their expertise achievement. Moreover, HS players particularly indicated the participation in specific unstructured activities (street volleyball) as relevant for their development. On the contrary, LS players reported being involved in general play activities (other activities rather than volleyball).
When the characteristics of the context were considered, only HS players mentioned having played specific unstructured activities (street volleyball) with older peers, recognizing this opportunity as a key element for their development at different levels (motor, physical, social and cognitive). These findings highlight the importance of considering not only the role of unstructured sport activities in the development of expertise in volleyball, but also the overall environment in which practice activities are experienced (the degree of formality and specificity of activities, peers age). Coaches and sport systems are therefore encouraged to consider the role of unstructured activities in the early years of athlete development as this type of learning context may provide additional stimuli in developing important attributes (technical, tactical, physical, cognitive) for expertise development and achievement.
Keywords: play, skill acquisition, talent development Perceptions of youth volleyball players about the importance of unstructured sport activities for their skill acquisition and talent development Cristiana Bessa, Patrícia Coutinho, António M. Fonseca, Isabel Mesquita (Centre for Research, Education, Innovation and Intervention in Sport <CIFI2D>, Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal) In the last decades, much attention has been given to the role that unstructured sport activities play in athlete and talent development (Coutinho et al, 2016). These informal child-led activities foster innovation, creativity, adaptability, and flexibility (Memmert et al, 2010), which are important contributors to expertise in sport.
While studies have retrospectively examined the perceptions of adult athletes about the importance of these activities in their development, the perceptions of youth athletes have not been considered. The purpose 102Symposia Tuesday July 11th of this study was to examine the perceptions of youth volleyball players about the importance of unstructured sport activities for their skill acquisition and talent development. Twenty players from 6 to 12 years of age participated in semi-structured interviews.
The data were subjected to Braun and Clarke’s (2006) approach to thematic analysis. After reading the transcripts, it was generated the initial codes (units of information with similar ideas). Then, units with similar meaning were grouped into more comprehensive themes, which allowed organization and interpretation of the unstructured data.
Finally, themes were reviewed and checked for accuracy. Players highlighted that the involvement in unstructured sport activities were important in developing their technical and tactical skills as well as the “smartness” of the game. However, apart from these motor skills, youth players reported that these activities were important in developing their autonomy, responsibility and engagement in sport.
Youth players also mentioned that unstructured activities were an important contributor to their self-confidence, social acceptance and equity within the sport context. These findings highlight the importance of unstructured sport activities during the early years of development not only for skill acquisition, but also for personal and social development, which are core factors in the development of expert performance in sport. Keywords: play, expertise, athlete development The psychological benefits of unstructured learning environments for young players Sara da Silva (School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK), Patrícia Coutinho, António M.
Fonseca, Isabel Mesquita (Centre for Research, Education, Innovation and Intervention in Sport (CIFI2D), Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal) Across their life span, individuals encounter optimal age-periods for achieving certain goals (Heckhausen et al., 2010), such as to achieve expertise in a given career domain. Once those optimal age-periods have passed and investment in a given goal is no longer possible, developmental regulation theories claim that disengagement from the goal and reengagement in alternative goals will contribute to an adaptive development (Haase et al., 2013). The present study explored the regulatory strategies used by retired elite football-athletes.
We applied an interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) to semi-structured interviews conducted separately with four football ex-athletes. Our findings show that participants found it difficult to disengage from their career goal as football athletes and this had a negative impact on their wellbeing. The main reasons stated for finding it difficult to disengage from their careers as athletes were the reduction of sense of identity and high intensity emotions, the lower level of responsibility when compared to being a coach, and loss of social recognition.
Additionally, while participants did invest in alternative life-goals linked to the football field (e.g, becoming a coach), they did not consider these goals to be as fulfilling as their career as athletes. These findings suggest athletes approaching retirement might benefit from support interventions since this process seems to have a negative impact on their wellbeing. These interventions should aim at helping ex-athletes to reframe the meaning of retirement, and to identify new life-goals that could be equally fulfilling.
Keywords: sport activities, play, self-esteem, self-confidence, motivation What constitutes an optimal talent development environment? The role of structured and unstructured sport activities Patrícia Coutinho, António M. Fonseca, Isabel Mesquita (Centre for Research, Education, Innovation and Intervention in Sport <CIFI2D>, Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal) Research addressing the acquisition and development of sport expertise comprises the study of how athletes reach and stay at the pinnacle of their sport as well as what particular attributes or components of performance are key contributors to the expert’s performance advantage in sport (Coutinho, Fonseca & 103Symposia Tuesday July 11th Mesquita, 2016).
Sport scientists have examined the development of expertise in sport through different lenses, focusing their attention on either environmental (nurture) or genetic (nature) contributions (Davids & Baker, 2007). Regarding the environmental factors, researchers have examined the athletes’ sport participation to understand what type of sport activities constitutes an optimal environment for athletic development. Here, both structured and unstructured sport activities are considered important contributors to the acquisition of skill and expertise (Coutinho, Fonseca & Mesquita, 2016).
Whilst the amount of highly structured sport activities has been considered a key factor in distinguishing performers at different skill levels, several negative consequences is associated with this type of activity, including burnout, dropout, overuse injuries and lower levels of attainment (Coutinho, Fonseca & Mesquita, 2016). Alternatively, unstructured activities have been pointed out as a type of activity equally relevant for skill acquisition and talent development (Coutinho et al, 2016). Apart from emphasising fun, enjoyment, being intrinsically motivating, and providing immediate gratification, these activities may foster innovation, creativity, adaptability, and flexibility (Memmert et al, 2010), which are core factors for expert performance in sport.
The benefits and potential negative consequences of both structured and unstructured sport activities will be discussed in this session. More specifically, we will explore the main advantages of unstructured sport activities, how these may help the acquisition of skill and the development of expertise in sport. Keywords: practice, play, skill acquisition, athlete development, talent development Research on Morality in Sport in Chinese Athletes Chair: Zuosong Chen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University) Sport has traditionally been considered an important platform for the learning of life skills and the fostering of positive youth development.
However, increasing media attention on aggression and different forms of cheating in sport have led to questions of whether or not (elite) sport athletes provide good role models for youth. Athletes’ moral issues have also recently gained an increasing amount of attention from sports psychology researchers. It is of importance to understand the potential antecedents and mechanisms of moral behaviors in sport, such as prosocial and antisocial behavior and doping behavior.
To our knowledge, previous studies on the moral behaviors in sport have been primarily conducted in Western countries. It is unclear whether these findings are applicable to other countries with different sport system and large cultural distances such as China. Therefore, the purpose of this symposium was to investigate the morality in sport, its potential antecedents, and potential neural mechanisms in Chinese Athletes.
The symposium consists of four presentations. Study one sought to cross-culturally adapt and validate the performance enhancement attitude scale (PEAS) and to examine the relationship between sport moral disengagement and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes. The second study was to examine the influence of coaching style on attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes.
The third study sought to examine the relationship between moral disengagement and prosocial and antisocial behavior towards teammates and opponents in Chinese athletes. The fourth study was to investigate the cognitive neural mechanisms of sport moral judgment in Chinese athletes. Keywords: morality, sport, athletes, China Coaching style and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes: The mediating role of moral disengagement Zuosong Chen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University), Dong Wang (Fujian Normal University), Kun Wang, Tao Huang (Shanghai Jiao Tong University) Previous studies in Western countries indicated that coaching style had significant influence on athletes’ attitudes toward doping.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the association between coaching style 104Symposia Tuesday July 11th and attitudes toward doping among Chinese athletes. The potential mediating role of moral disengagement was examined. Participants were 203 athletes (Mean age = 19.0 years, 36.9% females) from the Fujian Provincial Sports Team, China.
Athletes’ perception of autonomy-supportive and controlling coaching style was assessed using the adapted Health Care Climate Questionnaire and the Coach Controlling Behaviors Scale, respectively. Moral disengagement in sport was assessed using a scale developed by the authors. The Performance Enhancement Attitude Scale was adapted to measure athletes’ attitudes toward doping.
Structural equation model (SEM) was established to assess the mediation effects. The results from SEM testing showed that autonomy-supportive coaching style had no direct effect on attitudes toward doping, and the indirect path through sport moral disengagement was also not significant. Controlling coaching style had an indirect and positive effect on attitudes toward doping through moral disengagement.
Results indicated that controlling coaching style was positively associated with attitudes toward doping among Chinese athletes. The relationship was mediated by moral disengagement. Autonomy-supportive coaching style was not associated with attitudes toward doping.
The findings provided evidence supporting the important role of moral disengagement in mediating the positive relationship between controlling coaching style and attitudes toward doping among Chinese athletes. The findings indicated that avoiding construction of controlling coaching climate and reducing moral disengagement in sport may be relevant for reducing athletes’ pro-doping attitudes. Keywords: doping, attitudes, coaching style, moral disengagement Cognitive neural mechanisms of moral judgment in Chinese athletes: evidence from ERPs Dong Wang (Fujian Normal University) Previous studies of sports moral judgment mainly focused on the antecedents of sports moral judgment and the relationship between sports moral judgment and moral behavior.
The underlying neural mechanisms remains to be elucidated. The purpose of the study was to investigate the cognitive neural mechanisms underlying sport moral judgment in Chinese athletes, mainly loaded on four parts. Study 1 sought to investigate the types and characteristics of moral misconduct behavior for Chinese athletes with Nvivo8.0 through the analysis of gathered 537 news on the Internet and 22 athletes in-depth interviews.
Based on the study 1, study 2 developed four types of 160 materials of moral judgment in sports. Study 3 tested the validity of four types of materials of moral judgment in sports from percentages of affirmative responses, decision times, moral conflicts, moral acceptability, emotional valence and arousal valence. Study 4 investigated the cognitive neural mechanisms of different type's moral judgment in Chinese athletes used ERPs.
Results showed that: (a) Types of moral misconduct behavior for Chinese athletes can be mainly divided into violence, doping, negative ball or game and self-knowing lose honesty. (b) The validity of developed four type's materials of moral judgment in sports were acceptable, violence, doping, negative ball or game and self-knowing lose honesty have 40 cases each, can be used as effective experimental materials to conduct moral decision-making research in the sports. (c) No significant difference were found between the four types of moral judgment in stimulating lock and reaction lock in which induced every ERP components, and anterior cingulate cortex (i.e.
BA10 and BA25) were activated by four types of moral judgment. The findings indicated that the four types of moral judgment with the same cognitive neural mechanisms and validated the dual-process theory of moral judgment. Keywords: athlete; moral misconduct behavior; moral judgment; cognitive neuroscience Relationship between moral disengagement in sport and prosocial and antisocial behaviors in Chinese athletes Kun Wang (Shanghai Jiao Tong University), Kaihong Sun (Yangzhou Polytechnic University), Dong Wang (Fujian Normal University) 105Symposia Tuesday July 11th Moral disengagement is a psychological process in which people use different cognitive strategies to justify their potentially problematic actions and to reduce feelings of shame and guilt.
Athletes with high level of moral disengagement in sport may show more antisocial behavior and less prosocial behavior than other athletes. Since the majority of past studies have been conducted in western countries, we know little about moral disengagement of Chinese athletes. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to examine the relationship between sport moral disengagement and prosocial and antisocial behavior among Chinese athletes.
Three hundred and six Chinese athletes (mean age=19.9±1.5 years) were recruited and responded to the 20-items moral disengagement questionnaire and the Chinese version of prosocial and antisocial behavior in sports scale (PABSS). Results showed that gender, type of sport and competition level predict antisocial behavior towards teammates and opponent better than prosocial behavior towards teammates and opponents. Type of sport was the strongest predictor which negatively predicted antisocial behavior towards teammates and opponents.
After controlling for gender, type of sport and competition level, non-responsibility was the strongest predictor which significantly and negatively predicts prosocial behavior towards teammates and opponents; euphemistic labeling was the strongest predictor to positively predict antisocial behavior towards teammates; conduct reconstrual was the strongest predictor which could significantly and positively predict antisocial behavior towards opponents. The present study contributes to research into moral disengagement in sport by by analyzing the relationship between moral disengagement and prosocial and antisocial behavior in Chinese athletes. Keywords: athlete, moral disengagement, prosocial behavior, antisocial behavior The relationship between moral disengagement and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes Tao Huang, Kun Wang, Zuosong Chen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University) Doping has been a widespread issue in various sports.
Before immoral behaviors happen, individuals may change cognition and attitude toward immoral behaviors through moral disengagement. Previous studies examining the relationship between moral disengagement and attitudes toward doping have been conducted in Western countries. It is unclear whether the relationship are applicable to other countries with different sport system and large cultural distances such as China.
The purpose of the study was to cross-culturally adapt and validate the performance enhancement attitude scale (PEAS) and to examine the relationship between sport moral disengagement and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes. Firstly, eighty-three athletes (mean age=21.1±1.3 years) were recruited for the adaptation of PEAS in order to investigate the measuring characteristics of PEAS. PEAS items were revised and adapted based on the adaptation results.
Another two hundred and three athletes (mean age=20.0 ± 2.0 years) were recruited and answered the revised PEAS in order to establish the evidence for the reliability and validity of the revised PEAS. Results showed that: (1) the construct validity of original PEAS was poor in Chinese athletes; (2) the revised PEAS consisting of 10 items had good reliability and construct validity; (3) significant and positive association was observed between sport moral disengagement and attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes. In conclusion, the Chinese version of the performance enhancement attitude scale showed satisfactory psychometric properties.
Sport moral disengagement positively predicted attitudes toward doping in Chinese athletes. Keywords: athlete, doping, attitude, moral disengagement Motivation and psychological intervention in dance: State of the issue and analysis of the educative and professional context Chair: Diana Amado (University of Extremadura) 106Symposia Tuesday July 11th With the aim to understand the psychological processes that explain the commitment with dance as an emerging physical activity (Gao, Hannan, Xiang, Stodden, & Valdez, 2013), currently there is a great interest to study motivation in dance by the professionals involved in the psychology context (Gillet, Vallerand, & Lafrenière, 2012; Jang, Reeve, & Deci, 2010) and their consequences about the well-being or ill-being of their participants. According to this issue, the current symposium gives findings about this topic in different contexts.
At educative level, results from a research based on a teacher-focused intervention which supports the needs for autonomy, competence and relatedness, to help experienced teachers develop a motivating style that could increase students’ psychological need satisfaction and self-determined motivation at dance teaching sessions at school is shown. At professional level, firstly the outcomes from a work developed in dance schools that aimed to test the mediating role of stress appraisals in the associations between need satisfaction and well-being, and need thwarting and ill-being among dancers are shown. Secondly, a study carried out in the Basic Teaching of Dance with the aim to know the state of students´ motivation, as well as the prediction that has on different factors such as sex, age, physical self-concept and teaching competences was conducted.
Thirdly, a work that explored the role of motivation as a mediator in the relationship between perfectionism and indicators of well-being (i.e., life satisfaction and subjective vitality), and an indicator of ill-being (i.e., burnout) is shown. Finally, a study about a psychological intervention in dance sport, aiming to investigate the psychological needs perceived by athletes in dance and to describe the applied work designed to meet those needs is shown. Keywords: dance, motivation, professional context, educative context, psychological intervention Daily experiences of basic need satisfaction and frustration experienced in dance schools Eleanor Quested, Veronica Formentin Formentin, Nikos Ntoumanis (Curtin University, Perth, Australia), Peta Blevins, Luke Hopper (Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia) Autonomy, competence and relatedness are considered by basic needs theory (Deci & Ryan, 2000) as fundamental human needs for optimal functioning and health.
The current study tested the mediating role of stress appraisals in the associations between need satisfaction and well-being, and need thwarting and ill-being among dancers. 87 full-time dance students aged 14 to 25 years (Mage = 17.57+2.55) completed daily diary measures to assess need satisfaction and need thwarting experienced in dance school for eight days. The dancers’ perceptions of challenge and threat in relation to their classes the following day were also measured, as well as state vitality and anxiety.
Findings from multilevel modelling analysis indicated competence need satisfaction to be most salient in predicting daily vitality and anxiety. Relatedness satisfaction positively predicted vitality and autonomy need thwarting predicted anxiety. Challenge appraisals mediated the relations between autonomy/competence need satisfaction and vitality.
Threat appraisals mediated the relations between autonomy/competence need thwarting and anxiety. Findings indicate that daily experiences of need satisfaction and thwarting in dance classes predict dancers’ cognitive appraisals of up-coming classes, and in turn their feelings of vitality and anxiety. Dance learning environments that are need supportive are more likely to facilitate performance states that are more conducive to healthful and optimal functioning.
Keywords: need satisfaction/frustration, well/ill-being, perception of challenge and threat vitality, anxiety, dancers In the mind of the dancer. Psychological intervention in dancesport Irene Checa (Departamento de Metodología y Ciencias del Comportamiento. Universidad de Valencia) In recent years, dancesport has expanded as an important discipline itself and has received increasing attention from all continents.
There are few experiences published in scientific literature (Tremanye & Ballinger, 2008; Cantón & Checa, 2011), while some authors have published their applied projects with dancers 107Symposia Tuesday July 11th (Winkelhuis, 2011, 2015). In our present paper, the psychological characteristics of the dancesport are described and the results of the focus group are discussed with the previous literature. By using a qualitative methodology, a focus group formed by 7 dancers between 20 and 42 years old (M=27.28; DT=7.34) with 12.43 average years of experience (DT=3.99) was undertaken.
The group interview was designed from the specific characteristics of duo sports (Bohórquez & Checa, 2016) with queries concerning six aspects: communication, rules, cohesion, leadership, roles and collective effectiveness. Qualitative results have shown the following conclusions: 1) communication is verbal during the trainings and nonverbal in the competitions, being this exclusive of each pair; 2) the trainer is not present in the trainings, and experience provides more autonomy; 3) rules are not written and they are established by the trainers at the beginning of the career and modified by the dancers themselves; 4) leadership is generally shared and tasks related to competition are distributed; 5) roles are remarkably set by the mixed training formation of this discipline and they are not habitually interchangeable; 6) there are difficulties related to the romantic relationships which come up inside the pair; 7) difficulties to confront subjective results of the judges arise and its influence in the perception of the efficiency. These qualitative results are related to the applied work and the psychological intervention in this discipline, offering applied tools for dancers and trainers.
Keywords: dancesport, focus group, qualitative methodology, psychology intervention Motivational intervention in educative dance context Diana Amado, Pedro Antonio Sánchez-Miguel, Inmaculada González-Ponce, Pablo Molero (Department of Didactic of Musical, Plastic and Corporal Expression. Faculty of Sport Sciences. University of Extremadura) Based on self-determination theory framework (Deci & Ryan, 2000), we designed and implemented a teacher-focused intervention which supports the needs for autonomy, structure and interpersonal involvement, to help experienced teachers develop a motivating style that could increase students’ psychological need satisfaction and self-determined motivation at dance teaching sessions at school.
A quasi- experimental design was used in Spain, with 2 natural groups (one class of 27 pupils as control group and one class of 20 pupils as experimental group) and Mexico, with 40 natural groups (16 classes of 474 pupils as control groups and 24 classes of 447 pupils as experimental groups) already established by the schools, so it was not possible to ensure randomisation. Participants belonged to different schools, ranging in age from 11 to 17 years old. Both groups undertook the same dance teaching programme (12 sessions), but for the experimental groups, a motivational intervention programme was also developed.
A prior training programme was carried out with the teachers in the experimental group to support the basic psychological needs. An initial and final measurement was taken in both groups, using different questionnaires to measure the basic psychological needs satisfaction and the level of self-determination. Results from both studies showed that students from experimental group revealed significantly greater levels of autonomy, interpersonal involvement and self-determined motivation after the application of the program.
Nevertheless, to significantly increase perception of structure in these types of new contents, maybe it is needed more time of intervention for students. As conclusion, the results emphasize the importance of the teacher’s role in the teaching of dance at school, and therefore they should include in their teaching style strategies to support pupils’ autonomy, structure and interpersonal involvement. Keywords: motivation, methodology, gender, dance, education, pupils.
Predictors of motivation within the Basic Dance Studies Dellia Ibáñez-Granados (Facultad de Ciencias de la Educación. Universidad de Granada, España.), Diana Amado (Department of Didactic of Musical, Plastic and Corporal Expression. Faculty of Teacher Training.
University of Extremadura), Néstor Sánchez-Rivera (Facultad de Traducción e Interpretación.Universidad de Granada, España.) 108Symposia Tuesday July 11th When it comes to dance, motivation is essential, for dancers will either continue carrying out this activity or, on the contrary, end up abandoning it (García–Dantas y Caracuel, 2011; Carlin et al., 2009; Montero, 2010). We shall take into account that there are not only physical, but also psychological challenges throughout each dancer’s career (Fuentes, 2007; Sanahuja, 2009). Research has shown that motivation can be directly determined by teaching competencies (Amado et al., 2014, Baena-Extremera et al., 2015).
Motivation is also related to factors as important as physical self-concept (Requena-Pérez et al., 2015; Ezquerra, 2013; Amado et al., 2010). Thus, research was carried out within the Spanish Basic Dance Studies (Enseñanzas Básicas de Danza) with the aim of finding out how the students’ motivation actually was, in terms of self-determination (Deci & Ryan, 1985, 2000). The influence of different factors upon motivation was also considered, such us gender, age, physical self-concept and teaching competencies.
174 students participated in the research (165 female and 9 male students) whose age varied from 10 to 17 years. They were all studying their last year of the Basic Dance Studies at five different Andalusian Professional Dance Conservatories (located at Almería, Cádiz, Córdoba, Granada and Seville). The design was descriptive, with a cross-sectional study.
The instrument used was the questionnaire, to assess the level of self-determination, physical self-concept and teaching competencies. The results show that the motivation of those students who have successfully completed their Basic Dance Studies tends to be self-determined and related to physical attractiveness, self-confidence and the teaching competencies. Keywords: motivation, dance, self-concept, teaching competencies The role of perfectionism and motivation in the prediction of well- and ill-being in vocational dancers Lorena González (Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Europea de Valencia), Miguel Goltermann, Francisco Luis Atienza (Facultad de Psicología, Universitat de València) Perfectionism is considered to be an important personality factor to take into account within the dance context given the high number of dancers who are influenced by its negative consequences (Hamilton, 1998; van Staden, Myburgh, & Poggenpoel, 2009).
Therefore it is necessary to consider the relationship between perfectionism and dancers’ well- and ill-being and the existence of possible mediational variables. To this end the present study explores the role of motivation as a mediator in the relationship between perfectionism and indicators of well-being (i.e., life satisfaction and subjective vitality), and an indicator of ill-being (i.e., burnout). Participants of the study were 146 male and female Spanish vocational dancers aged between 12 and 26 years old (Mage = 15.40 ± 2.96) who completed a package of questionnaires measuring the variables of interest.
Results of MANOVA revealed that there were no significant gender differences (Wilks’ Lambda = .95, F = .82, p > .05), and therefore subsequent analysis were conducted considering the whole sample. Hierarchical regressions analysis showed that self-oriented perfectionism (SOP) positively predicted well-being indicators and negatively predicted ill-being. Whereas, social prescribed perfectionism (SPP) positively predicted ill-being and negatively predicted well-being.
Autonomous motivation positively predicted well-being, and amotivation negatively predicted well-being and positively predicted ill-being. Results also indicated that autonomous motivation partially mediated the relationship between perfectionism and well-being. On the other hand, amotivation partially mediated the relationship between perfectionism and well-being; and totally mediated the relationship between perfectionism and ill-being.
The findings of the present study support the role of social prescribed perfectionism as the negative dimension of perfectionism, while self-oriented perfectionism was associated with positive outcomes. Keywords: perfectionism, motivation, well-being, ill-being, dancers 109Symposia Tuesday July 11th Identification and development of performance competences in young talented athletes Chair: Jolan Kegelaers (Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium) It is generally recognized that certain psychological qualities and mental skills are essential to reach high levels of performance in sports. This symposium will present recent scientific work trying to identify and/or develop these essential psychological characteristics for sport success, also labeled performance competences.
Each study is coined around the idea that performance competences should be (a) appropriate for the stage of athletic development an athlete is in, and (b) the development of these competences should incorporated within the everyday work of elite coaches. The first presentation will present a rational for incorporating the development of performance competences during daily training activities. The second presentation will introduce a theoretical framework for cognitive readiness: the cognitive competences needed to establish and sustain high-level performance in a complex and unpredictable environment.
The third presentation offers a developmental perspective of career challenges and performance competences in Dutch female gymnasts. The fourth presentation will look at the potential of deliberate practice in order to develop performance competences. Finally, during the fifth presentation, biofeedback as a method to train adaptability and resilience will be discussed.
Keywords: mental skills, cognitive readiness, deliberate practice, biofeedback Cognitive readiness in elite youth sport Jasperina Coenen, Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Caroline Jannes (Gent University Hospital), Jolan Kegelaers (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) O’Neil, Perez & Baker (2014) describe Cognitive Readiness (CR) as relevant for those who must adapt quickly to rapidly emerging, unforeseen challenges such as athletes in elite sports. Fletcher (2004) defined CR as the mental preparation (skills, knowledge, abilities, motivations, and personal dispositions) someone needs to establish and sustain competent performance in complex and unpredictable environments. CR has been investigated within military contexts, such as warfare situations.
Elite athletes, like military personnel, must have the ability to deal with complex and unpredictable situations. However, little research has been done in athletic contexts. First, a literature study investigated the theoretical frameworks of cognitive readiness.
Research considered Adaptive expertise, Working memory, Mental models, Decision making, Communication, Interpersonal skills, Pattern recognition, Situational awareness, Critical thinking, Problem solving, Adaptability, Resilience, Self-regulation, Metacognition and Creativity to be competences of CR. Secondly, we discussed which competences apply to the context of elite sports in 12 focusgroups. Subjects included in this study are athletes (2), high-level coaches (36) and sport psychologists (8) from the Flemish Gymnastics, Judo, Tennis, Athletics and Swimming federations.
In order to define the competences that were discussed, a thematic analysis approach was chosen. The most mentioned competences were Self-regulation (62.5%), Knowledge (25%), Adaptability (17.5%) and Resilience (7.5%). It can be concluded that both literature and practitioners in elite sports made a contribution to the understanding of the concept of CR in elite sports.
After reviewing both sources of information, a theoretical framework applied to elite sports was conceptualized. This study was supported by Sport Vlaanderen. Keywords: adaptability, self-regulation, decision-making; resilience, creativity 110Symposia Tuesday July 11th Does deliberate practice promote the use of performance competences in talented athletes?
Jolan Kegelaers, Paul Wylleman, Jasperina Coenen (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Caroline Jannes (Gent University Hospital) The theory of deliberate practice has been extensively used to predict expertise in elite sports. However, there remains a lack of attention for the possible relationship between the quality of deliberate practice and the development of performance competences. Our study aimed to test this relationship using a mixed method quasi-experimental design.
We measured the impact of an instructional design, based on the principles of deliberate practice, on both short-term performance and on the use of four performance competences (i.e., motivation, focus, self-regulated learning, communication). A total of 10 young talented athletes, divided in an experimental and a control condition, were compared over the course of 10 consecutive training sessions. Performance was assessed by coaches using a standardized performance tool, competences were assessed using an observation instrument, specifically designed for this study.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with the coaches and athletes of the experimental condition immediately after completing the study and again three months after completion. Results indicated that even though there was no difference between conditions on short-term performance, athletes in the experimental condition demonstrated more behaviour related to focus, self-regulated learning, and communication. No difference was found for motivation.
Qualitative evaluation confirmed this finding and seemed to suggest that the experimental condition might demonstrate better long-term performance. Our study seemed to confirm our hypotheses that deliberate practice can lead to an increase in the development and/or use of performance competences in talented athletes. Even though no difference in short-term performance was found, we expect that the development of performance competences might lead to an increase in long-term performance.
Further longitudinal research is needed to confirm this hypothesis. This study was supported by Sport Vlaanderen. Keywords: competence development, self-regulated learning, focus, communication skills Identification of within-career challenges and performance behavior competences for Dutch gymnasts Suzan Blijlevens (Rijksuniversiteit Groningen), Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Marije T.
Elferink- Gemser, Chris Visscher (Rijksuniversiteit Groningen) The purpose of the present study is to identify within-career challenges gymnasts are confronted with during initiation, development and mastery stages of athletic development in training sessions, competition, and in daily life. Furthermore, we also identified the stage-appropriate competences necessary for gymnasts to cope with these challenges. In-depth interviews were used to explore the views of 16 talented and elite gymnasts.
Participants were divided into three groups, corresponding to the stage of athletic development they were in. The results show differences in the challenges for the three different stages of athletic development. The number of quotations as well as the number of challenges increases as the gymnasts enter the mastery stage.
However, some challenges were identified in each stage of athletic development. Furthermore, we found 14 different competences gymnasts should posses in order to deal with these challenges during different stages of the athletic career. The results offer new insights in common challenges gymnasts are confronted with in specific stages of their athletic development and the competences needed to deal with these challenges.
This study was supported by the Netherlands Olympic Committee*Netherlands Sports Confederations (NOC*NSF). Keywords: talent development, challenges, transition, gymnastics, elite sports, performance behavior 111Symposia Tuesday July 11th The development of competences related to performance behavior in talented and elite athletes Paul Wylleman, Jolan Kegelaers (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) It is generally recognized that mental skills are essential for reaching and maintaining the highest level of performance. The development of these mental skills is not only influenced by personal characteristics of the athlete, but also by his/her environment.
However, there exist a lack of knowledge on the way coaches (supported by sport psychologists) can develop these mental skills in their athletes on an everyday basis. Based on scientific literature and applied experience in counseling talented and elite athletes, five specific topics (i.e., cognitive readiness, deliberate practice, resilience, biofeedback, performance behavior competences) were selected for study, which will be highlighted during the following presentations. This presentation will provide a rationale for the incorporation of these topics in the everyday functioning of elite coaches.
Furthermore, it will provide insights into the ways coaches, supported by psychologists, can develop these competences in their athletes. Keywords: mental skills, elite sports, talent development, coaching Biofeedback to improve cognitive readiness: Case studies in elite youth sport Caroline Jannes (Gent University Hospital), Paul Wylleman, Jasperina Coenen, Jolan Kegelaers (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) Fletcher and Wind (2014) propose a framework for cognitive readiness including skills such as metacognition, communication, adaptability, and resilience preparing people to learn or perform in unpredictable and new situations. Biofeedback (BF) is a tool to train optimal arousal regulation which ultimately enhances self-regulation and other cognitive skills.
The purpose of current evaluative case study is (1) to enhance arousal regulation and (2) to train adaptability and resilience. Three elite youth athletes in track and field, gymnastics and tennis (ages 17, 14 and 14) participated in an intervention based on the Wingate 5- Step Protocol with on average 12 sessions (1 hour per session). They filled out pre- and post-test questionnaires such as IZOF and CSAI-2, and trained heart rate variability (HRV) with EmWave Pro.
Overall, analysis over time of the SDNN showed no significant increase of HRV coherence. However, power spectrum analysis showed an improvement of HRV when using cue words or imagery scripts for relaxation, adaptability and resilience. Two athletes performing at a competition reported less negative and more positive emotions on the post-IZOF.
In general, athletes quickly adopted the protocol and showed improvement in arousal regulation, adaptability and resilience both in sport and in non-sport related situations. Limitations and future research on biofeedback for cognitive readiness in sports will be discussed. This study was supported by Sport Vlaanderen.
Keywords: Cognitive readiness, adaptability, resilience, biofeedback, heart rate variability Human performance and long distance and marathon runners Chair: José Carlos Jaenes Sánchez (University Pablo de Olavide) The World records in the marathon was ratified by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), the international governing body for the sport of athletics. The IAAF world record for men is 2:02:57, set by Dennis Kimetto of Kenya on September 28, 2014 at the Berlin Marathon. After IAAF acepted this record, scientifics, marathon coaches and athletes began to arguing about if men could 42, 195 meters under 2.00.
Spanish athletes consulted said no but scientific and coaches basically said yes. In the symposium we have the opportunity to share opinions with an Olympic Champion in the distance, an European Champion in 15000 112Symposia Tuesday July 11th meters and at the same time researcher, and present different research about training and competing in the distances. Physiological, biological, psychological and other explanations will take part in the Simposium.
We also present studies about motivation, running addition, mental preparation (PST training) in order to learn more about and try to answer some questions about the chance to run under 2.00 hours. Keywords: marathon, long distance, anxiety, self-confidence, concentration, Olympic champion Differences in performance in elite Kenian and Caucasian long distance runners Arturo Casado (University Isabel I) Differences in performance in elite long distance Kenyan runners and elite long distance Caucasian origin runners are explained by multiple factors. These are physiological, biomechanical, feeding, training, genetics, altitude, psychological and socioeconomic factors.
For instance, it´s been reported that physiological aspects such differences between maximal oxygen consumption, haematological profile, muscle fibres composition couldn´t explain these performances differences. Nevertheless, sports biomechanics prove a better race economy in Kenyan distance runners than in Caucasian origin distance runners due to Kenyan’s longer and thinner legs. Altitude has also been proposed as a potential factor because most of Kenyan runners have been born, lived and trained in high altitude, in the Rift Valley area in Kenya.
Furthermore, genetics has also been proposed as a differential factor between these two populations, arguing that Kenyans genetic is better adapted to long distance running. Previous mitochondrial DNA,Y-Chromosome and candidate gen research has shown that genetics doesn´t play an important role in these different performances. Nonetheless, future genetic research could explain these differences.
Besides, Kenyan natural feeding based on carbohydrates and vegetables has also been proposed as a differential factor. Finally, psychological and socioeconomic factors have been shown as important differential factors which explained these different performances. Kenyan twentieth century History show the way British taught Kenyans how to train in athletics.
Even more, economics has been shown as a crucial factor in Kenyan runner’s motivation to achieve greatest performances. Casado (2016) reported in his PhD study that most of elite long distance Kenyan runners had to go running barefoot to school for ten kilometres (go and back home) during school days. This author also evidenced greater amount of training in elite long distance Kenyan runners compared to Spanish o Keywords: kenyan, spanish, performance, long distance, marathon Intervention with recreational marathon runners David Peris-Del Campo (University of Valencia), Eneko Larumbe-Zabala (Clinical Research Institute.
Texas Tech University HSC. Lubbock, Texas, USA.) Brief psychological intervention with recreational marathon runners increased popularity during the 2000s decade both in US-Canada and Europe, and especially in Spain. The so-called “Psyching teams” are usually composed of sport psychologists and graduate sport psychology students that voluntarily serve during the marathon expo, one to three days prior to the race day.
The intervention model developed at UNED university by Dr. Buceta, tailored for Madrid marathon and later used in other endurance races (e.g., Oporto, Mexico City, Vitoria, Castellon, Valencia), typically involves different steps: 1) using posters to present useful information; 2) proactively approaching the recreational marathon runners at the expo; 3) inviting the runners to fill out a specific questionnaire, usually the “Podium”; 4) briefly interviewing with the runners to discuss their perceptions, goals, and mental strategies; 5) providing them with a brochure that will help them remember the discussed ideas and do some homework; 6) and approaching the runners during the race day and help them share their experience. The whole process at the expo typically takes no more than 10 to 15 minutes.
Consequently, in order to make the intervention significant for the runner, the interview needs to be very focused and straight to the point. The questionnaire helps the psychologist get a profile on the runner’s 113Symposia Tuesday July 11th perceived states of motivation, self-confidence, fitness, social support, and anxiety. With these results in mind, the psychologist can conduct the interview exploring the hypotheses that emerged from the assessment, and complete the quick evaluation.
More importantly, the psychologist can help the runner think about the goals and their transcendence, develop plans and coping strategies, dissipate concerns, reduce anxiety, and enhance self-confidence. Despite the brevity of the assessment/intervention process, “psyching teams” also disseminate the usefulness of sport psychology consulting among this Keywords: psychological intervention, psyching teams, marathon, recreational runners, running Psychological skill training for long distance and marathon runners José Carlos Jaenes Sanchez (University Pablo de Olavide), Jose Carlos Caracuel Tubio, Patricia Jaenes-Amarillo (Universidad de Sevilla) Based on the Psychological Skill Training Model (PST), an individually designed combination of methods selected to attain psychological skill needs (Gill, 2000), tested in different Sports such tennis, golf, track and field, swimming, rowing (Jaenes, 2002) and others. The authors present a PST program for long distance and marathon runners that has been tested in the field with a group of male marathon runners (Jaenes & Caracuel, 2005, 2016) who run marathon between 2.25.12 and 3.10.
This PST program is included in the physical training log, so runners will practice those mental skills while they are running at different paces. The program include evaluation of precompetitive Anxiety (Trait, State, cognitive and somatic) and Self-confidence according to the Martens, Vealey and Burton model (1990), and Mood State evaluation; attention and concentration skills training, coordination, making decisions, sensations self –evaluation, coping with anxiety, and present different correlations between Anxiety, self-confidence and performance in the distance of 42,195 kilometers. An useful and practical approach to PST.
Keywords: marathon, long distance, anxiety, self-confidence, concentration Rosa Mota, the psychological experiences of an Olympic Champion Rosa Mota Rosa Mota, a women born in Porto, in a country without large experience in women long distance runners was European marathon Champion in the first European Champion in the distance in Athens, 1982; she was awarded the bronze medal in the first Women's Olympic Marathon in Los Angeles Olympic Games, 1984; European Champion in 1986, and World Champion in Rome, 1987; and Olympic gold medal in Seoul, 1988. She also won the Chicago Marathon twice and Boston three times and London, 1992. Her best time in the distance was 2:23:29 in the 1985 Chicago Marathon.
She has been considered as the best marathon runner in the history. In our Symposium she will talk about psychological aspects of the marathon, mental practice and training, how to cope with problems and how to solve it; how she prepared her races and her experiences as a top runner. Her personal experiences, memories and anecdotes will enrich this Symposium as nobody can do it.
Keywords: marathon, Olympic champion, experiences, training,coping Running, “the new fashionable addiction”, in the society Abel Nogueira Lopez (University of Leon) The phenomenon of "running" is one of the sports which more people practice in last years, there are many people that regularly take to the streets day after day to run (Siphway, 2009). Running has become a regular behavior in our society, being considered as one of the best activities to improve the physical, mental 114Symposia Tuesday July 11th and psychosocial health of those who practice it (Warburton, Nicol & Bredin, 2006; Siphway & Holloway, 2010; De Mello et al., 2013; Márquez & de la Vega, 2015; Antunes et al., 2016; Ruiz-Juan & Zarauz, 2016). In this boom, the phenomenon of “runner's high”, (Glasser, 1976; Kostrubala, 1976; Carmack & Martens, 1979; Sachs & Pargman, 1979) - neurobiological reward, which appears both During, as after running long distances and affecting at central level (regulator mood, welfare effect) and at peripheral level, decreasing the sensation of pain - (Glasser, 1976; Kostrubala, 1976; Carmack and Martens, 1979; Sachs and Pargman, 1979), plays a very important role.
The problem arises when running becomes a harmful need causing negative health consequences, produce as a result the Exercise Addiction - "positive addiction" (Galsser, 1976) and "negative addiction" (Morgan, 1979). This "running addiction" is characterized by the appearance of six common symptoms such as abstinence, mood modification, salience, tolerance, relapse and conflict (Terry et al., 2004; Griffiths, 2005; Egorov & Szabo, 2013, Berczik et al., 2014, Jaenes & Caracuel, 2005, 2016; Márquez & de la Vega, 2015). In light of the relevance of this issue, the research group Exercise, Health and Quality of Life from the University of León, has decided to study this phenomenon in order to identify, analyze and describe the levels and the type of addiction among the popular Spanish runners.
Keywords: addiction, marathon, long distance, negative addiction, positive addiction “runner’s high” Sport and exercise psychology practitioners: Competences and challengers strategies of psychological intervention in Mexican sport Chair: Claudia Rivas (ISSP/Solcpad/AMPDAF) In Mexico, sport psychology emerged and developed mainly in the applied field, followed by academic programs, research and publication of work. The present symposium shows the different techniques of intervention, varied football contexts of the young semiprofessional soccer players to the 2nd and 3rd division until the individual intervention with elite soccer players, professional soccer teams of the first division and national team. In addition, this symposium shows the psychological strategies in face to the demand for a major division.
As well as the work in a "minor" equip of third division. The similarities and difference in the context of intervention with the lower categories of a Professional Club like Santos de Torreón and university clubs. It shares the intervention in youth tennis and the difference of context with the youthful and professional soccer of Mexico.
The differences between individual intervention in a sport such as tennis and in an overall sport such as football are raised. Situations and recommendations for collective and individual psychological intervention are suggested. Keywords: sport, psychology, practices, soccer, tennis, México Creation and application of a sport psychology intervention model for national youth tennis teams on tour Ricardo Ponzanelli (AMPDAF), Claudia Rivas (ISSP/SOLCPAD/AMPDAF), Alexandre Garcia-Mas (ISSP) The Mexican Tennis Federation (FMT) has incorporated the area of sports psychology into the National Tennis Program (PNT) aiming to create a platform for athletes, coaches and family members to be aware about the importance of psychology in the process of sports development.
As part of the PNT, a series of international tours had been defined to achieve formative and performance goals. To begin to incorporate the application model, it was necessary to identify the main behavioral tendencies on national tennis in the different youth categories in both branches. Observation and registration of competitive and training habits during the 7 main national tournaments that are hosted during the year was carried out.
Finally, the psychological work model for tours was designed and applied, including individual and collective sessions, body awareness and social conscience, emotional education, self-registration on matches and orientation in 115Symposia Tuesday July 11th decision-making processes to promote Self-confidence for independence. During the tour, it was possible to notice behavioral adaptations associated with higher confidence in decision-making within matches and more adaptive behaviors, as well as competence coping skills. Over 75% of players reported more pleasure playing tournament matches and training.
Keywords: integral training, paradigm shift, and psych educational work Mental training in the professional third-division soccer team in mexico colts uaemex Ada Sarai Albarran (ISSP/Solcpad/AMPDAF), Juan Carlos Perez (ISSP/SOLCPAD/AMPDAF), Alexandre Garcia- Mas (ISSP) The professional football tournament of the third division is between the most demanding in the Mexican Football Federation. In the competition 220 teams at national level, 207 with right ascension, 13 branches, (teams representative of each first division club) divided into 14 groups. The duration of the tournament is 1 year, where 26 games are played.
If you qualify for the league, you play 12 games to reach the final. Altogether they would be playing 38 games of a high level to be able to be champion and to obtain the promotion to second professional division. The age of the players is of 15 to 20 years and they have by rule the teams have to play with a minor and two medians.
The characteristics of this tournament generate the need for an arduous and specialized work by the technical and multidisciplinary team. In this symposium I will share the mental training carried out during 5 five years with managers, coaching staff, multidisciplinary bodies and players. The intervention is focused on training psychological skills (Identity, cooperation, self-confidence, self-efficacy, self- regulation, concentration) that complement and increase their athletic and personal performance.
At the sports level, goals will be set and restated, performing performance evaluation in the short, medium and long term. At a personal level, they will monitor their integral education, taking care of family, school, social and professional aspects. The methodology carried out per week is a collective session with the players, 5 to 10 individual sessions, daily feedback with the technical body and multidisciplinary body.
The results achieved, Consolidate and maintain the figure of the sport psychologist and mental training in technical-tactical planning and applied sciences. To be a team protagonist to be fighting finals, to be quarry of the teams of second division and promotion of the institution, to cement the autonomy of the player. Keywords: soccer, young, applied, psychological,development Psychological intervention in high performance young soccer players Jonatan Yañez (Solcpad/AMPDAF), Luz Antonia Vazquez, Claudia Rivas (ISSP/SOLCPAD/AMPDAF), Alexandre Garcia-Mas (ISSP) This symposium aims to describe the psychological intervention with a group of young soccer players (U13, U14, U15, U17, U20) belonging to the Club Santos Laguna, the different needs that are present in this specific population, as well as the influence of the Institutional Philosophy In sports training.
Fundamental variables such as self-knowledge, cohesion, values, belonging and the motivational climate have generated a basis for sports development. The conviction towards coaches and managers has generated a high level of cooperation and interdisciplinary work that re-dimension the psychological intervention and helps the technical bodies to draw the clearest and most adequate objectives for teams and individuals. A long-term intervention program has been drawn up for athletes and coaches that establish profiles of psychological training for admission and discharge of each category, work schedules and intervention techniques that seek formation established in the institutional philosophy.
A positive response has been observed and evaluated by athletes, physical and general coaches of the institution who confirm the usefulness of the proposals of the department of sports psychology. Keywords: psychological training, young footballers, intervention methodology 116Symposia Tuesday July 11th Psychological intervention with professional football players Claudia Rivas (ISSP/Solcpad/AMPDAF), Ada Sarai Albarran (ISSP/SOLCPAD/AMPDAF), Alexandre Garcia-Mas (ISSP) Beginning in 2013, a personal interest (outside of their home clubs) began to be generated by professional soccer players, through a "mental training", seeking the psychological intervention of a sports psychologist. In the present paper, 6 case studies are shared: 3 goalkeepers, a containment, and 2 lateral defenses, all playing in clubs of the first division, all belonging at a time to the National Major Selection, and all active.
The objectives that each player sought of the psychological work, the obstacles presented, the solutions and the different strategies for the different objectives, the obtained results and the techniques of intervention used will be presented. The special situations of work are shared: preseason intervention, endings, and crisis situations. Keywords: soccer, professional, mental training, goals, stress, performance Psychological training program in obtaining the ascention of the football team colts UAEM F.C.
Juan Carlos Perez (SOLCPAD/AMPDAF), Ada Sarai Albarran (SOLCPAD/AMPDAF) This document describes the application of a psychological training program with a professional second division team from Mexico that managed to get promoted to the next division. Once observed the last 4 tournaments of the professional team Colts UAEM F.C. and analyzing the previous situation of having lost an ascension, it was considered determinant to strengthen the emotional intelligence of the players through psychological training and to repeat key moments where they have already experienced performing their functions at an optimal level of performance.
In addition to developing the management of psychological variables, which individual and collective performance influenced to achieve the goal of ascending to 1st Division A. That is why a program of psychological training was developed which was integrated as a whole to the integral preparation Physical, technical and tactical. The methodological structure consisted of observing the psychological aspect of the team in training, matches and evaluation, a diagnosis (current psychological needs) of the team; Psychological planning according to the stage of the season in which the team was; Effective intervention in the short and medium term; Follow-up and feedback of the intervention program in training and matches.
The program consisted of 26 sessions and aimed to increase the psychological abilities of the players of the 2nd Professional Division of the UAEM to meet the goals set and to get the team up in the circuit 1st Ascension MX. This is through the development and strengthening of the aforementioned psychological variables and provides strategies to become effective people and players with quality of life, as well as to raise their personal and collective potential within Keywords: observation, diagnosis, psychological planning, intervention, monitoring and feedback Use of quantitative methods to evaluate psychological factors as predictors of sports behavior Chair: Sara Márquez (University of León, Spain) To date, a great deal of effort has been put into learning more about the psychological characteristics separating the most successful athletes from those not so successful. Research in sport psychology has predominantly used quantitative methods to understand in depth the effects of psychological factors and how they relate to human performance.The need for questionnaires being valid, reliable and as specific as possible for the field of sport has led to the development of psychological assessment tools with potential for predicting 117Symposia Tuesday July 11th athletic performance.
In this symposium, we present four papers that involve the use of quantitative methods, such as questionnaires or psychophysiological responses, as tools aimed to predict sports performance, along with other related variables. In the first place, we find a study by Salguero, Nogueira and Márquez, entitled The Grit Scale, a predictive tool for performance in long distance runners where the authors present the Spanish adaptation of the short version of the Grit scale and its psychometric properties. Next, an approach is presented that allows to identify adverse effects of training loads on young swimmers performance; the title of the work is Monitoring of the load during the period tapering and influence of the indexes of monotony and fatigue in the levels of stress-recovery and their authors are Molinero, Aranzana and Salguero.
The following contribution, signed by Barquín and Robles and entitled The evaluation and prediction of sports performance in the 51st military judo championship of the land army, employs an experimental battery of questionnaires to predict performance in a military championship. Finally, the presentation Light conditions affect the psychophysiological warfighters stress response in close quarter combat, coauthored by de la Vega-Marcos and Clemente-Suárez, continues the line of previous work, and analyzes how different light conditions could alter participant response in contexts of stress. Keywords: psychological assessment, performance, stress, grit, light The grit scale, a predictive tool for performance in long distance runner Alfonso Salguero, Abel Nogueira, Sara Márquez (University of León, Spain) The personality trait of GRIT, defined as the tendency to pursue long-term goals with sustained zeal and hard work, has been shown to predict achievement in academic, vocational, and avocational domains (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews y Kelly, 2007; Duckworth y Quinn, 2009; Duckworth, Quinn y Seligman, 2009; Von Culin, Tsukayama, y Duckworth, 2014).
GRIT is a measure that can predict success beyond individual skills. GRITTIER individuals, according to the literature, are people who share many personality trait with runners, above all with marathon runners. The purpose of the present study was to analyze in Spanish long distance runners the relationship between GRIT, sport and performance, through the validation and adaptation of “The Short Grit Scale (Grit-S)”, developed by Duckworth y Quinn (2009).
Participants were 204 amateur runners (Mage= 37.1±11.1 years) who were applied the Spanish version of The Sport Short Grit Scale. The scale is composed by 7 ítems and 2 factors (persistence of effort and consistence of interest).Validity was demonstrated by exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis, with adequate reliability for the scale (α = .75) and each factor (αpersistence = 0.69; αinterest = 0.77). Results obtained reflect that men (Mpersistence = 3.51±0.88; Minterest = 3.77±0.80) obtained higher scores than women (Mpersistence= 3.38±0.91; Minterest= 3.58±0.78) for both factors scores.
Regarding age, runners between 56-65 years showed a GRITTIER profile for persistence of effort (M= 3.6±0.6) and those between 36-45 years for consistence of interest (M= 3.81±0.72). We consider that GRIT, can be a good quantitative tool useful to predict sports performance, together with the monitoring of other variables, such as number of training days or of hours per day, related to personal involvement. Keywords: grit, validation, persistence, interest, runners Monitoring load during tapering stage and monotony and strain index influence on stress- recovery levels Olga Molinero, Miguel Aranzana, Alfonso Salguero (University of León, Spain) Training periodization is important to improve athletic performance and to reduce possible adverse effects for the athlete (Armstrong & VanHeest, 2002).
Specifically, tapering stage seeks a reduction of physiological and psychological stress, generating the necessity to monitor the internal training load, and to observe the relationship with variations in stress-recovery levels (Black et al., 2016). High loading levels coupled 118Symposia Tuesday July 11th with high levels of monotony and fatigue, are factors related to negative training adaptations, and they are indicators of the early stages of overtraining syndrome (Foster, 1998, 2001) with the consequent effect on performance in this sensitive phase of athlete development (Oca, 2007).The aim of the present study was to analyze the variation and relationship of stress-recovery, monotony and fatigue indexes during tapering stage of Spanish young swimmers. 36 subjects, aged between 13 and 16 years old (Mage=14.0, σage=0.9) were evaluated for stress-recovery levels (RESTQ-Sport, Spanish version González-Boto et al.,2008), considering specifically the sport-specific stress and recovery scales(EED, RED); internal training load using the Session- Effort Subjective Perception method (session-RPE) (Foster et al., 2001), and the monotony index (MI) and fatigue index (FI) proposed by McGuigan et al.
(2004) and calculated from the load. Despite the significant decrease in the load (pP1-P3=.002) and FI (IFpP1-P3 = .032) during tappering, stress-recovery levels (EEDpP1- P3=.55; REDpP1-P3=.82) and IM (IMpP1-P3=.085) did not change significantly. These findings could indicate that training load reductions and changes in its distribution (%Load T1-T2= -25.13) might not be enough to modifiy the stress-recovery levels of our athletes, taking into account the specialized literature.
Keywords: athletic performance, overtraining, swimmers, load The assessment and prediction of sports performance in the 51th judo military championship of the army Roberto Ruiz-Barquín (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain), José Juan Robles (Armed Forces Headquarters, Spain) Many researchers emphasize the need to design specific psychological assessment tests for certain sports because theoretically there is a greater potential for predicting athletic performance. The aim of the present research study was to determine the relationships between a battery of psychological tests specifically used in competitive judo and the performance obtained in the modality of male category teams in the 51th Military Judo Championship of the Army (School Central of Physical Education of the Army, Toledo). 39 judoka men (Mage = 26.9, σage = 4.6) were evaluated, 30 of them participating in the team competition.
The test battery called "Sports and Multidimensional Performance Inventory in Judo" was applied experimentally (IRDYMEJ, Ruiz-Barquín, 2006). This battery was designed with two objectives: To design a test with special implications from a practical point of view; to enhance the processes of psychological evaluation and prediction of performance in judo, trying to provide additional information to the use of general psychological assessment tests (Ruiz, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2009). The test battery for athletes is composed of six scales: Technical Rating Scale, Tactical Rating Scale and Regulation, Physical Rating Scale, Psychological Rating Scale, Training Rating Scale, and Performance- Sport Result Rating Scale.
The administration of the tests was carried out prior to the competition. The tests were completed on a voluntary basis. General reliability levels are adequate for the six scales (α> .70).
There were significant correlations between performance and four of the scales (p Keywords: judo, performance, psychological assessment, army Light conditions affect the psychophysiological warfighters stress response in close quarter combat Ricardo de la Vega (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain), Vicente Javier Clemente (Research Center in Applied Combat <CESCA>, Toledo, and European University of Madrid, Spain) We aimed to investigate the effect of different light conditions (no light, rotatory light and light) on the psychophysiological response and specific fine motor skills of warfighters during a close quarter combat (CQC) simulation. The initial hypothesis was that in no light conditions the psycho-physiological response would be higher than in light conditions. We analyzed 20 male soldiers of the Spanish Army and Spanish Forces and Security Corps (33.8±3.4 years; 177.1±7.9 cm; 72.9±5.9kg).
Soldier served in the Army, Air Force, Navy, Civil 119Symposia Tuesday July 11th Guard, and National Police. Soldiers were equipped with standard uniform and boots, tactical fighting load carrier of the Army, simulated pistols, simulated rifle, simulated knives, shackles or flanges and a backpack with 12 kg to simulate the equivalent weight of a task force. We measured the rated of perceived exertion, blood lactate concentration, cortical arousal, isometric lumbar strength, legs strength and pistol magazine reload time before and after a CQC.
Normality and homoscedasticity assumptions were checked with a Kolmogorov- Smirnov test. Then a MANOVA test was performed to analyse differences. The Effect Size (ES) was tested by Cohen’s D.
Finally, a bivariate correlation analysis between all the study variables was performed using a Pearson correlation analysis. The results showed a different psychophysiological response, measuring the highest psychophysiological response in rotatory light and no light conditions: showed a significant decrease in the magazine reload time in no light conditions as well as significant increase in cortical arousal in rotary light conditions (p Keywords: stress, cortical arousal, strength, fine motor skill, lactate, perceived exertion 120Symposia Wednesday July 12th Wednesday July 12th Symposia Session 4. (10.30-12) Evaluating sport programs promoting social inclusion: Which challenges using participative approaches?
Chair: Caterina Gozzoli (Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore) Can sport enhance social inclusion among disadvantaged youngsters? Affirmative answers are provided by the international literature (Schulenkorf et al., 2016; European Commission, 2015; Gozzoli et al., 2013;): sport produces several benefits, such as social capital, self-esteem, self-regulation, skills development, reduction of deviant behaviors and scholar abandon rates (Williams et al.,2015). Although the positive impact of sport is generally recognized, different authors express criticism concerning the evaluation of sport projects (Coalter, 2015).
To provide a contribute to the current debate, we propose the use of participative evaluation as a tool to monitor the activities in sport projects aimed at social inclusion. This kind of strategy assumes a strong collaboration between evaluators and evaluated subjects in collecting assessment data. The innovative aspect of this method concerns the higher commitment of ‘assessed subjects’ in the evaluation and the higher attention to the context.
Literature points out that the dialogic sharing of information between evaluators and evaluated subjects allows to collect better data than traditional methods (Cousins & Earl, 1992). The symposium includes four contributions. The first is an explorative research where the main strengths and weaknesses of sport projects for social inclusion are investigated, with a particular focus on their participative evaluation designs.
The second presents the evaluation of a sport project for social inclusion in Denmark. The third shows a complex participatory evaluation framework where aims, objectives, expected results and indicators of efficacy are continuously re-defined with the program’s actors. The last concerns the evaluative research of a sport project for the development of skills in NEETs.
Keywords: sport programs, social inclusion, evaluation research, participative evaluation Strenghts and weacknesses of sport projects for social inclusion: a meta-evaluation Gaspar Maza (University of Blanquerna (Barcelona), Department of Exercise and Sport), Chiara Corvino (Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Department of Psychology), Ricardo Sanchez, Xavier Camino (University of Blanquerna (Barcelona), Department of Exercise and Sport) In recent years, the number of inclusive sport activities have increased, mainly thanks to the recognition by governments and private institutions of sport benefits for disadvantage people, which has resulted in an increase of funding allocation in this area (Cortês Neto, Cruz Dantas & Chaves Maia, 2015). In Spain and Italy, the rise in sport projects for social inclusion is a consequence of the growing interest of the European Commission and the local entities in this area. These projects are usually carried out in collaboration with youth organizations, social entities and sport clubs (Hermens, Super, Verkooijen & Koelen, 2015).
For this reason, now more than ever, the use of a meta-evaluation for inclusive sport projects is needed. The present work provides a critical reflection regarding sport projects for social inclusion, with a focus on their evaluation designs. Taking into consideration the different perceptions of different kinds of actors involved in sport programs, we interviewed 15 people aged between 30-60 (7 italian, 8 spanish): 4 sport workers; 6 project managers (3 F and 3 M); 5 social workers (3 F and 2 M) .
Strengths and weaknesses of inclusive sport projects were explored using semi-structured interviews. All the collected material was transcribed and analyzed using a phenomenological approach, with the support of ATLAS software. The interviews analysis confirms that the active participation of 121Symposia Wednesday July 12th various stakeholders (local entities, workers and project managers) is essential for a good choice of the project actions and for an efficient redefinition of the project itself (Cockerill, Myers & Allman, 2000; Rossi & Freeman, 1993).
On the other hand, the data analysis points out that the different actors involved have diverse representations of sport which can badly impact on their co-working in the participative process if not adequately captured and faced by evaluators. Keywords: sports programs, social inclusion, strengths and weaknesses, evaluation Using team sport (football) to enhance social inclusion, what pitfalls exist and what about the slurred perspective of measurements? Knud Ryom, Reinhard Stelter (University of Copenhagen, Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Denmark) Social inclusion is highly valued in the public school system in Denmark (Dolin & Krogh, 2010) and sport is suggested to have a positive impact (Bailey, 2005; Kelly, 2010).
Due to reported difficulties to participate in school and society, boys with migrant background are often seen as excluded by teachers, head masters and governmental agencies (OECD, 2010). The study aimed to investigate the effects of team sport as an tool to develop social inclusion, active citizenship and social capital in a school context. Team sport (football) was chosen because of documented positive results in regard to social integration of individuals with a diverse cultural background (Hatzigeorgiadis et al, 2013).
A multidisciplinary approach was applied based on theories on community psychology (Kloos et al., 2011), social capital (Putnam, 2000), and active citizenship (Biesta, 2011). The activities were organized by a local sports club (6th to 9th graders, N=44, age: 12-16) in a two years intervention in a lower secondary school of Copenhagen with a high percentage of pupils with migrant background.3 weekly training sessions (1-1½ hours), matches and referee/coach education were part of the study.Initial results from the overall study, has showed improved social resilience(Ryom, et al., 2017)..In regard to team sport, social inclusion and connectedness had increased. Moreover, if participation was perceived as meaningful, football could be an occasion for active citizenship.
Such important developments were registered trough a participative evaluation approach. On the other hand several pitfalls were noticed, and an important factor were participants’ understanding of football. Thus football as tool for development gave certain possibilities but at the same time inhibited others.A multimethod(Brewer, 2006) approach (questionnaires, interviews and observations) was applied, but qualitative measurements proved difficult as other studies also suggest(Baumgartner & Burns, 2013).
Keywords: sport for social inclusion, participative evaluation, team sport, social capital “Play for change”. Some outputs of the participative evaluation research Chiara D'Angelo, Caterina Gozzoli (Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Department of Psychology) Recent studies show that sport is one of the leisure activities through which it is easier to engage the so called “hard-to-reach youth” (Haudenhuysea et al., 2014).This presentation aims to showcase the evaluation research on a sport program involving at risk children in an Italian metropolitan area from 2014 to 2016. The program involved 113 youths (95% male; average age: 14.2; 25 % foreigners) attending multi-sport activities.
They were monitored by a multi-professional team (coach, educator and a sport psychologist) in two weekly training sessions and twice/month laboratory activities (cooking, mosaic, video making). Through these activities the program aimed at: developing participants’ motivation to sport, growing their sense of self- efficacy; developing the occasion for young boys and girls to create positive relationships with peers and significant adults; creating and implementing a social network starting form the soccer clubs. This work presents how the participative evaluation research contributed to continuously redefine the program itself and understand its real impact.
Using a longitudinal multi-method approach we collected 113 questionnaires 122Symposia Wednesday July 12th exploring athletes’ representation of and motivation to sport and their sense of self-efficacy; 32 semi- structured interviews to social and sport workers; 16 observation sections of sport activities (creating an ad- hoc observation grid). The interviews analysis shows that the participative approach helped in the redefinition of the project actions starting from the stakeholders’ point of view. The interviews analysis also highlights a positive evaluation of team cohesion and the creation of new social relations starting from the soccer club and involving territorial associations, municipality services, youth centers.
The questionnaires results show a rise of young’s motivation to sport practice; finally, the observations point out an increase of adults’ integration in their work with youngsters. Keywords: participative evaluation research, sport for social inclusion, play for change, longitudinal multi- method approach "Between words and numbers": the combination of qualitative and quantitative instruments for a good efficacy evaluation Sara Alfieri, Elena Marta, Lucia Calloni, Eleonora Reverberi (Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Department of Psychology) Around 14 million young people aged between 15 and 19 aren’t engaged in education, employment or training (NEET). After Greece, Italy is the second European country with the largest number of NEET (Istat, 2015).
The huge consistency of this phenomenon brought many Governments and non-profit associations to enhance and promote several project against social exclusion, in order to try to reduce this youthful pervasive condition. Among these ones, a famous Italian association proposed a project with the aim of providing soft skills to the young NEET, exploitable within the labour market. This project lasted three months and was based on sport and job training (e.g.
mok job interviews, CVs editing, etc.). The aim of the present study is the assessment of project’s efficacy. The evaluation was carried out with two different instruments: a) semi- structured interviews developed at the end of the project in order to understand the young people perception about the exploitability of acquired soft skills and the project strengths and weaknesses.
Furthermore, it was assessed the actual engagement of participants in educational or employment training. b) a self-report questionnaire given at both the beginning and the end of the project, in order to outline the differences between the participants’ level of Quality of Life, Self-efficacy and Locus of Control. The sample consisted in 11 male NEET, aged between 16 and 24.
The interviews analysis showed a general satisfaction of the participants, who identified sport as a good way to obtain several soft skills. However the participants have reached different level of social engagement. On the other hand, the questionnaire analysis showed a participants awareness about the lack of auto-efficacy in problem solving.
Both questionnaire and interview show strengths and weaknesses, for this reason the combination of qualitative and quantitative instruments seems to be an indispensable requirement for a good efficacy evaluation. Keywords: NEETs, efficacy evaluation, mixed-methods, sport for skills aquirement Investigating facilitating conditions of careers in sport Chair: Dorothee Alfermann (Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany) Pursuing a sport career may be an exhausting and time-consuming task, but at the same time also an exciting and enjoyable one. In youth sport, the main challenge for athletes is to pursue a dual career as a student and an athlete.
This means that young athletes have to combine training and competitions with school or other types of education. This quite a demanding task, and requires a variety of facilitating conditions, not only on the part of the athlete, but also on the part of the environment, particularly from the nearer and wider social environment (parents, clubs, school). In two contributions from Sweden and Spain there will be a closer 123Symposia Wednesday July 12th look on young athletes and how to foster their motivation and career development and in consequence, help them in making career transitions, e.g.
from junior to senior phase. The third contribution will focus particularly on social influences on career development, mainly on the contribution of parents and other social agents. In a fourth contribution from Germany the main focus lies on the question if and how sport psychology service is able to help young athletes in performance development and thus to make a successful career on the long run.
In a similar vein, the fifth contribution will give practical advice how to build a successful talent environment that would facilitate the career development of athletes. All in all the symposium covers a range of facilitating conditions that proved to be successful and are exemplified through research and practice results gained from a variety of target groups from different cultures, sports and both males and females. Keywords: career transitions, dual career, social support, sport psychology services, talent development environment Social influences on the junior-to-senior transition in Swedish athletes: Narrative case studies Alina Franck, Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden) The junior-to-senior transition (JST) is decisive for athletes who want to reach the elite/professional sport level.
The JST: (a) is initiated by a set of demands relevant to athletic and non-athletic development, (b) lasts between one and four years, and (c) is characterized by athletes’ high dropout rate (Bruner, Munroe-Chandler, & Spink, 2008; Franck, Stambulova, & Weibull, 2016; Stambulova, 2009). This study is a follow up of the quantitative longitudinal study of the JST in Swedish club-based athletes (Franck et al., 2016; Franck, Stambulova, & Ivarsson, in press) and aimed at further qualitative exploration of the JST process emphasizing social influences involved. Four athletes (age M = 24.2, SD = 1.5) representing tennis, swimming, football, and basketball were interviewed.
They were encouraged to reflect retrospectively on their JST process using five measurement points of the longitudinal study as an aid to structure their narratives. The interviews lasted for about 90 minutes. Thematic narrative analysis (Smith, 2016) was used to identify themes related to social influences during the JST and their perceived facilitative or debilitative effects.
All four JST narratives were unique, however, to structure the results the narratives were pared to represent individual vs. team sport contexts. The results revealed that the social factors facilitating the JST were shared by both sport contexts and included family support, and good relationships with coaches and peers.
The debilitating social factors that worked as the JST barriers were more diverse across the sport contexts. These factors covered a lack of sponsors/financial support and the ambiguity of requirements from the sport federations in individual sports, and changes in the structure of the team and selection to a higher level team not being ready for, in team sports. All participants went through the JST, continued a few years after, and then terminated their athletic careers.
Keywords: career transition, social factors, individual sports, team sports Female elite athletes’ transition to university: a longitudinal approach Andrea Perez-Rivases (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Susana Regüela (Centre d’Alt Rendiment), Carme Viladrich, Susana Pallarès, Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) The promotion of Dual Careers (DC) among athletes to combine elite sport and studies is concern shared by most European Countries (EU guidelines on dual careers of athletes, 2012). Research has shown that following a DC benefits athletes in the long term and makes it easier for the transition to an alternative professional career (Torregrosa, Ramis, Pallarés, Azocar & Selva, 2015). Although, other studies have shown that the combination can be stressful (Cosh & Tully, 2015).
Moreover, there are only few longitudinal studies exploring the transition from high school to university (Guidotti, Cortis & Capranica, 2015). This work explains 124Symposia Wednesday July 12th the advantages of using Qualitative Longitudinal Studies (QLS) to explore female elite athletes’ dual career and their transition from high school to university. Seven female athletes participated in this QLS lasting one year and a half.
Four semi-structured interviews were conducted with each athlete at different moments of the transition (i.e., mid last year of high school, beginning first year university, middle first year university, beginning second year at university). The interviews included reflections on their ideal and real time management to combine sport and education as well as the elicitation of words defining each phase of the transition. Results show that studying female elite athletes’ transition from high school to university using a QLS allows: (a) to describe and understand the development of the athletes and their paths followed in the different life domains, (b) to explore the match between what they expected (prospective view) and what they experienced (retrospective view), (c) to know facilitators and barriers of this transition, and (d) to increase athletes’ awareness on the process they are going through.
Keywords: career transition, dual career, longitudinal study Social influences on athlete career development Daniel Gould (Michigan State University, Institute for the Study of Youth Sports, East Lansing, MI, USA) It is often said that “it takes a village to raise a child“. The same can be said for developing an athlete. Family, friends, coaches and peers are just some of the significant others influencing athlete career development.
Social influences affecting athlete career development likely start before the child is even born as research shows that more physically active pregant mothers are more likely to have more physically active children who engage more in competitive sport (Pivarnik et al., 2006). Historically, socio-cultural research has shown that boys and girls are socialized differently (e.g., boys engage in more rough and tumble play) and these socialization practices have been related to sport involvement (Vilhjalmsson & Kristjansdottir, 2003). Coaches have also been shown to influence athlete development across their careers (Gould et al., 2002).
Research on peer influences in sport also show that one’s peers influence a child’s motivation for involvement (Smith & d’Arripe-Longueville, 2014). Lastly, research on Olympic athletes have shown that families and friends are perceived as playing an important role in athlete performance, both having the potential to provide much needed soical support or to become a distraction that hinders performance (Gould et al, 1999). Sport parents, in particular, have been the focus of many studies (Knight & Holt, 2014).
These studies support the notion that parents have important influences on athletes initial participation in sport (e.g., sign young children up for programs), how they interpret their sport experiences (e.g., do they view anxiety as a positive or negative experience), and how athletes react to their sport experiences (e.g., interpret success and failure). While these studies provide important ground work for understanding how and in what ways social influences operate to influence athlete career development, more studies that specifically link social processes to stages of career development are needed. Keywords: career development, social influence, parents, coaches Talent Development Environment – Psychological Intervention Studies and Their Implications for Athletes’ Career Development Nadja Walter, Marc-Oliver Löw, Franziska Preis, Marie Hengst (Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany) Since the discussion about young athletes and their dual career (DC) started, much has been reported about challenges and demands for youth elites.
To support athletes in their DC we implemented psychological skills training in the daily routine of young athletes in two Elite Sport Schools in Germany. These schools provide an optimal environment for athlete students, aged 10 to 18, where school education and competitive sports are combined and jointly supported. We conducted three intervention studies with an experimental/control group design.
Our first study (Preis) tested the effects of basic and systematic 125Symposia Wednesday July 12th psychological skills training. Almost 320 participants underwent the SAT program containing psychological stress prevention training, methods for systematic relaxation, goal setting and developing routines. Results show positive effects for the experimental group on motivation, recovery and perceived self-efficacy.
The second study focused on motivation. As dual career athletes need consistent motivation, Hengst designed an intervention study to develop athletes’ achievement motivation, particularly in winter sports. In this study (n = 83, aged 13 to 19) the participants of the experimental group improved their achievement motivation significantly.
The latest project in this line is our S4WIN-Project (Walter, Löw), an intervention study helping athletes to develop their individual self-talk skills. The aim of this project is to enhance athletes’ performance in competitions and to regulate the individual state of activity through self-talk. In this project about 160 athletes of various sports are involved.
With the results of these three studies and in line with the EU Guidelines on Dual Careers of Athletes (2012) we are able to frame some practical implications for young athletes and how to develop an optimal psychosocial environment (e.g. long-term sport psychological support; psychological education of coaches and teachers). Keywords: career development, intervention studies, psychological skills training Six fundamental principles that facilitate the transition from junior to professional in football: An example from the Danish premier league Carsten Hvid Larsen (Southern Denmark University, Odense, Denmark) The transition from talented youth level to professional level is considered to be the most difficult and complex transition in sports.
Literature in career transitions highlights that a match between an athlete’s resources and the demands of a transition will allow an athlete to enjoy a successful transition whereas a mismatch is likely to result in a crisis transition. Such resources are internal as well as external factors. The purpose of this presentation is to present practitioners and applied researchers with specific details and six principles of an ecological inspired program that facilitates transitions in a professional football (soccer) club in Denmark.
Insights are provided into delivery of workshops, the supervision of the coaches, on pitch training, evaluation of the program and integrating sport psychology as a part of the culture in the club. First, findings highlight that the practitioner should acknowledge that the athlete is embedded in an environment. Second, the intervention should be built on a thorough assessment of the environment from a holistic perspective.
Third, the practitioner should not only work with the individual athletes but also aim to optimize the entire environment around the athlete or team. Fourth, an intervention should take into consideration that an environment is always situated in a larger cultural setting of e.g. a national culture and a sport specific culture, and plan accordingly.
Fifth and sixth, the intervention should aim to create and maintain a strong and coherent organizational culture and treat the athletes as whole human beings by supporting their development of a holistic package of psychosocial skills that will be of use for the athletes not only in their sport but indeed in their other life-spheres as well. Keywords: career transition, football, psychological support, talent environment If you listen very hard, a tune will come to you: Applied sport psychologist professional training and development Chair: David Tod (Liverpool John Moores University) Over the past two decades, formal education and registration, accreditation, and licensure pathways have been established in several countries across the globe. Variation among these education pathways and registration schemes has resulted from factors such as the influence of different parent professional bodies (e.g., psychology or sport science organisations) and the presence or absence of country specific legislation.
126Symposia Wednesday July 12th Nevertheless, these efforts reflect the understanding that individuals need to be suitably trained to be effective, safe, and ethical practitioners. An associated development has been an increased research focused on practitioner training and supervision. Such research is needed to inform and optimise education and registration pathways.
Ideally, research and practice should inform each other as encapsulated by the scientist- practitioner model of education. The purpose of the current symposium is to bring together researchers and educators to share current investigations to stimulate debate about best practice and new avenues of empirical study. The specific investigations presented include (a) an examination of practitioners’ life histories and professional identity, (b) a comparison of developmental themes in sport, clinical, and counselling psychologists, (c) an exploration of the professional decision making process in trainee sport psychologists, (d) an assessment of trainees preferences regarding the content and process of learning, and (e) a discussion of practitioner development observations in sport psychologist professional training.
Together the presentations will signal the value of integrating research and practice in helping to ensure that future generations of practitioners are sufficient prepared to help clients and manage their careers. Keywords: training, supervision, professional development A whole lotta learn: What trainees want to learn and how they learn it Vana Hutter (VU University Amsterdam) Relatively little is known about learning for sport psychology practice. Training and education for the field should be informed by an understanding of learning and professional development of (future) practitioners.
We have investigated learning and professional development in two consecutive studies. In the first study, we developed a model of supervisory issues, based on 365 questions that were raised in supervision by 14 trainee sport psychologists (TSPs). The 19 themes in the model represent what TSPs want to learn in supervision and provide insight into the professional challenges that young practitioners encounter.
The 19 themes fall into two higher order categories, that is ‘know-how’ and ‘professional development’. In the second study, we studied the learning experiences of TSPs. Uniquely, we determined which learning experiences are useful for which learning outcomes.
A total of 530 learning experiences were mentioned by the 15 interviewed TSPs, falling into 22 different categories of learning experiences. We determined the associations between these categories of learning experiences and the themes from the model of supervisory issues by calculating odds ratios for the relative contribution of each learning experience to each theme. The results suggest that traditional learning experiences such as courses, teachers, and literature, are most useful for development on know-how themes.
In addition, practical experience and reflective activities appear useful for learning on both know-how and professional development themes. Learning from others was associated with development on professional development themes. Collectively the studies illustrate what TSPs want to learn and which learning experiences are useful to them.
This knowledge can inform education and training for sport psychology practice. Keywords: professional development, identity Dazed and confused: The stairway to reason Michelle Smith, Hayley McEwan (University of West Scotland) This study explored how UK trainee sport psychologists’ developed their professional judgment and decision-making (PJDM) skills during training. Participants (N = 7) were enrolled on the British Psychological Society Qualification in Sport and Exercise Psychology.
Participants were interviewed 4 times over 3 years during training regarding their professional development. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and a deductive thematic analysis was applied based on PJDM literature. Participants emphasised the role of storytelling in developing their PJDM skills.
For example, listening to the experiences of other practitioners 127Symposia Wednesday July 12th acted as a prompt for participants to consider the decision-making of the practitioner. Using analytical thinking, a key characteristic of applied practice, participants typically thought about alternative options that may have been available to the practitioner (e.g., why a particular skill was included in an intervention and not others). The development of analytical thinking encouraged participants to develop representations of how and why approaches might work in practice.
Observation of other practitioners also allowed participants to develop a range of routines that could be used during consultations. Participants identified that being exposed to skills, techniques, and approaches other practitioners used was an opportunity to integrate ideas for the participant’s own practice. The current results suggest opportunities exist in current training to accelerate the development of trainee’s PJDM skills by maximising the use of vicarious experience.
For example, training supervisors to embed critical cues (e.g., the moment that the situation is recognised as typical, triggering knowledge and causing shifts in the line of reasoning) within the stories they share, may be useful for expanding the experience base that trainees can draw from in their own future consultations. Keywords: professional development, decision making Good times bad times, you know I had my share: Applied sport psychologists’ professional identity narratives David Tod, Martin Eubank, Mark Nesti (Liverpool John Moores University) We aimed to explore applied sport psychologist’s perceptions regarding their professional identities, along with the people, events, and critical moments that shaped these beliefs. Interviewees (N = 10) included male and female applied sport psychologists with a minimum of 5 years’ service delivery experience and who had recognised qualifications enabling them to practice.
Unstructured interviews began with interviewees discussing their current professional identities. Interviews then moved to the construction of a life history timeline on which events, people, and critical moments were added to create a personal narrative regarding development and shaping of professional identities. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and subject to a thematic narrative analysis.
The personal narratives were amalgamated via an abductive analysis informed by relevant professional development literature. The personal and group narratives were feedback to participants for review and to other sport psychology practitioners, educators, and researchers for additional comment. Participants’ professional identities were constructed along three dimensions including their roles, personal characteristics, and group memberships.
Participants discussed an individuation process regarding their development, whereby the people (e.g., clients and supervisors), and the personal and professional critical moments they encountered (e.g., personal trauma) helped them to shape professional identities that reflected their attempts to be both authentic and successful within the environments they operated. These professional identities were dynamic and influenced by both personal beliefs and current circumstances. These results may inform trainee development (e.g., help trainees understand and prepare for changes they will likely experience during their careers) and future research (e.g., examine ways that professional identities may be optimally developed).
Keywords: professional development, identity Over the hill and far away: Sport psychologists learning to play Hayley McEwan (University of West Scotland), David Tod (Liverpool John Moores University) The aim of this study was to present an understanding of how UK trainee sport psychologists changed with practice, compared to clinical and counselling trainee psychologists. Following university ethics approval, 18 trainee psychologists (sport and exercise, n = 9, clinical, n = 7; and counselling, n = 2) were interviewed 3 times over 2 years during their training programmes regarding their professional development. Semi- structured interviews allowed participants to explore their development.
Interviews were transcribed verbatim 128Symposia Wednesday July 12th and subject to a thematic content analysis. All trainees demonstrated a process typified as becoming increasingly authentic (i.e., integrating more of who they were within their practice). For example, a trainee had a personal interest in anxiety and this interest was consistent with his theoretical allegiance to an existential approach.
Differences were found in the ways trainees in each sub-discipline tried to become authentic due to environmental influences such as placement structure and access to clients. Sport and counselling trainees could align their learning with their personal interests through the design of their own placements (e.g., working with endurance athlete-clients or volunteering in eating disorder clinics). Interactions with significant others (e.g., peers and elders) were the drivers of development and enhanced authenticity.
Access to significant others allowed trainees to reflect on, and develop their philosophies and service delivery practices. Differences among sub-disciplines may assist educators in the cross-fertilisation of ideas on how to develop training environments. For example, sport trainees may benefit from increased facilitation of peer-to- peer collaboration and alternative methods of competency assessment similar to the related clinical and counselling psychology fields, such as observation of skills practice.
Keywords: professional development, identity That’s the (stair) way: Practitioner development observations in sport psychologist professional training Martin Eubank (Liverpool John Moores University) This presentation discusses practitioner development observations in sport psychologist professional training. Scaling the training stairway and stepping into the applied practice arena of sport can be a daunting prospect, and represents a critical moment for trainees. Not knowing how big the step might be and not wanting to trip-up, early career advances are tentative and laden with anxiety.
Underpinned by naive expectations about applied practice and the professional helping process, an urgency to demonstrate competence through practitioner led problem-solving and advice-giving, and using traditional approaches transferred from educators and supervisors, appears to be a comfortable choice. Effective professional development involves an integration of the personal self into a coherent professional self. This process implicates the importance of fostering a congruent alignment of service delivery with personal beliefs regarding individual’s worth, capacity for change, experience of the world and the context that frames the meaning for behaviour.
Professional identity then forms, shaping the stable internal philosophical foundation on which to base service delivery. Many trainees build this self-awareness too late or too flimsily in the development process, risking instability and incongruence in their applied practice stairway. To resolve these shortcomings, trainees should, as a starting point, take time to reflect on professional values that underpin the type of practitioner they want to be, independent of any model or theory, then review which theory ‘fits into’ those professional values.
A training process that involves thorough and continuous self-reflection, a skilled supervisor who provides a space for meaningful dialogue in which to discuss ongoing practitioner identity, philosophy, congruence and normalisation of anxiety, and assessment and feedback that optimises learning represent key considerations for future professional training. Keywords: professional development, identity Mobile Technology for Ecological Momentary Assessment (mEMA) in Sport and Exercise Chair: Lluís Capdevila (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) Researchers and sport psychologists could consider combining Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) with other objective measurement to capture sport and exercise behaviours. We propose the term mEMA for 129Symposia Wednesday July 12th referring to the use of mobile devices for monitoring or sampling strategies to assess phenomena at the moment they occur in natural settings.
Smartphones and tablets can be useful for mEMA purposes using own sensors and capabilities for recording behaviours at real time. The aim of the symposium is to present some sport and exercise mEMA applications from an inter-disciplinary research: (1) How to promote and follow the adherence to healthy lifestyles by using mHealth and mEMA tools. Five lifestyle habits are considered: physical activity, nutrition balance, stress, sleep quality and social activity.
All are related with the people perception of wellness and the increase of life expectancy. (2) A smartphone application developed to continuously estimate physical activity through accelerometry and to measure mood state daily in elderly people. (3) An intervention to assess the Spanish national basketball team to improve recovery, team performance and coaching.
FitLab Team app offers the capability to follow up players in a non-invasive procedure during training camps. It allows the stress and recovery management as a key factor to get optimal peak performance. (4) Examples of different mEMA apps combining analysis of psycho-physiological and behavioural parameters to manage effort/recovery and stress in athletes and physical activity practitioners.
For example, the use of this system in Futbol Club Barcelona for monitoring the basketball and soccer teams. Or some applications for breathing control and stress reduction using biofeedback and gaming strategies. Keywords: EMA, mHealth, sport, mobile technology mHealth tools to promote healthy lifestyles in general population Juan Ramos-Castro, Miguel Ángel García-González, Federico Guede-Fernández, Victor Ferrer-Mileo, Mireya Fernández-Chimeno (Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya), Lluís Capdevila (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) We present different tools based on mHealth technologies to follow the adherence to healthy lifestyles in the general population.
For this work we have considered five lifestyle indicators: physical activity, nutrition balance, stress, sleep quality and social activity. All of them are related with the people perception of wellness and the increase of life expectancy. The goal is to build an almost "transparent" monitoring system that does not interfere very much on the daily life of people using platforms that are not unknown for the majority of population such as smartphones, or web based interfaces.
The data recorded by the system is: Physical activity: We have developed specific apps for recording the daily activity by using the embedded sensors in the smartphone. The app is running in background and is continuously analysing the sensors data. We can analyse distance travelled, speed, climbed stairs and estimate approximate energy expenditure.
Heart activity: Heart rate and HRV are estimated by the pulse waveform recorded by the integrated smartphone camera and flash. This can be done as request by the user or at certain instants during the day. Social interaction: A customized social network with users with the same profile allows them to interact and share experiences and create mini challenges.
Specific questionaries: An ecological momentary assessment can be done at the same time the physical activity and heart activity is recorded. This is carried out by a Weekly Physical Activity Log where the user can select from a predefined list the activity and intensity. The time resolution for this data is 15 minutes and can be filled out during the day, when requested (every 1-4 hours, programmable) or at the end of the day.
There are also specific questionnaires for evaluating the mood state (POMS), the dietary habits etc. We are currently evaluating these tools to analyse the effect on the adherence to healthy lifestyles by empowering the people thorough feedback Keywords: m-Health, lifestyles monitoring, physical activity, smartphone, accelerometry 130Symposia Wednesday July 12th Changes in physical activity in the elderly assessed by smartphone 3-axes accelerometry: A pilot study monitoring changes in mood state Federico Guede-Fernández, Victor Ferrer-Mileo, Mireya Fernández-Chimeno, Juan Ramos-Castro, Miguel Ángel García-González (Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya) More people are now living longer, so healthy ageing is a challenge to health-care system. Strong evidence demonstrates that physical activity (PA) has many health benefits.
A smartphone application (Seniorfit) has been developed to, among others, continuously estimate PA and to measure mood daily. Mood has been assessed by a reduced POMS questionnaire asking directly for 6 items (Tension, Depression, Anger, Vigour, Fatigue and Confusion). Each day, subjects under measurement quantified each item from 0 to 10 and a final score of mood has been estimated by averaging all items (except vigour that has been previously converted to weakness subtracting to ten the vigour quantifier).
PA has been assessed by estimating the magnitude of the acceleration after using bidirectional bandpass Butterworth filters and quantifying each minute of activity using a PA index (PAI) inspired by the time-above-threshold index. Seniorfit has been tested in 11 elderly subjects (mean age ± SD: 67.2 ± 3.6 years, 8 female/3 male) during periods ranging from 3 weeks to one month. Subjects were asked to fill her/his POMS questionnaire every morning and were informed that the device will monitor PA.
After the measurement period, one female subject was excluded for analysis after failing to complete the POMS questionnaire. The results for the remaining subjects show that mean PAI is very heterogeneous among subjects (the most active subject has a mean PAI 3.6 times higher than the most sedentary subject) and a linear regression over time shows that PAI decreases for every subject (p <0.001). Moreover, active subjects are less prone to show significant changes of mood over time and all subjects with significant changes in mood had improvements of mood over time.
Nevertheless, no direct correlation of changes in PA with mood was observed. Although the number of subjects and the observational time are low, we think that Seniorfit can be a useful tool to assess relationships between PA and mood. Keywords: physical activity, mood, smartphone, mhealth, accelerometry Stress index in sport throughout HRV analysis: Assessment of a basketball national team during its training camp for the Euro’2015 Toni Caparrós, Jordi Martín, Lluís Capdevila (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) Introduction.
With the aim to assess team staff professionals to improve recovery, team performance and coaching, concurrent HRV testing offers the capability to follow up players in a non-invasive procedure. During training camps, the load and recovery management is a key factor to get optimal peak performance on a short time championship. National basketball teams call for training camps more players than the last 12 that will be the roster for the championship, so the use of internal load parameters, as Stress Index, allows to design programs according each player profile, adapting load, specific recovery and psychological protocols to individual needs on these contexts.
Methods. A basketball national team (n=14, age 27,85 +/- 4,5 years and height 200,5 +/- 7,9 cm) was monitored during its training camp for the Eurobasquet 2015 (from 1st to 23rd august). HRV 5min-tests (Fitlab® system; healthsportlab.com) were performed during that period (every Sunday, during video session, before morning practice).
Results. 4 tests were done during the period (n=10,75 +/- 1,78), with a team stress index as follows: 42,4 for test 1; 48,6 for test 2; 55,2 for test 3 and 47 for test 4. The mean stress index for the period was 48,3+/- 4,6.
The 2 players that were finally cut at the end of the training camp (august 24th) had a mean Stress Index of 73,1 +/- 4,9 Conclusions. Stress factors as internal load parameter offers relevant information in professional sport. Sport training is multifactorial, and high competitive context all insides has to be target to get a full picture of every player needs.
Sports Science and specific technology offers the capability to design specific and optimal programs in all sport training fields, to get better performance and player health. 131Symposia Wednesday July 12th Keywords: stress index, HRV, professional basketball, training camp, internal load, recovery EMA applications and interventions using biofeedback and gaming for psychological training Lluís Capdevila (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Juan Ramos-Castro (Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya), Jairo Vázquez, Gil Rodas (Futbol Club Barcelona) mEMA refers to the use of mobile devices for monitoring or sampling strategies to assess phenomena at the moment they occur in natural settings. We will show different mEMA applications from our inter- disciplinary research.
We are using non-invasive systems combining analysis of psycho-physiological and behavioral parameters to manage effort/recovery and stress in athletes, physical activity practitioners and general population: (1) We will explain the use of this system in Futbol Club Barcelona for monitoring 14 basketball players of the first basketball team during several seasons. HRV 5min-tests at rest with FitLab® Team system were performed in group to assess and monitoring an individual stress index. HRV analysis was also applied continuously during training sessions and permitted to obtain conclusions about the recovery state of players in intermittent loads like basketball.
(2) We will present results about the application of this system in other sports like the Spanish national team of field hockey, combining the analysis of stress indexes with effort/recovery cognitive scales. (3) We will present a mEMA application for collective recordings of optimal breathing frequency with the aim to provide resonant frequency biofeedback training to increase cardiac variability. It could be used for stress and anxiety management in sport situations.
(4) Finally, we will show gaming strategies for mobile devices to achieve stress reduction using HRV biofeedback and for breathing control. Keywords: biofeedback, psychological training, gamification, EMA, breathing control, resonance frequency, stress management Psychological training in professional football. Applications in Spain and Latin America clubs Chair: Tomás García-Calvo (University of Extremadura) The aim of this symposium is to present different proposals for psychological intervention in professional football context, from an applied perspective.
Specifically, participants will expose different possibilities to improve fundamental psychological variables in training and competition, as well as personal and social life variables, with players and teams in Spain and Latin America. Thus, these proposals range from interventions with national federations from Mexico and Peru and their selections teams, practical applications with clubs of the first division Spanish League and Costa Rica League, as C.F. Villarreal and Saprissa Club, or approaches carried out with Argentine training teams.
Finally, in this simposium we have managed to bring together great professionals from different countries who are working in the professional context, and who will expose the strategies and resources they use to intervene with players and teams Keywords: cohesion, efficacy, coach behavior Psychological training in Spain and Latin American clubs Parma Aragon (Federacion Mexicana de Futbol Asociacion, A.C.) Quality Management applied to Sports Psychology Cantú-Berrueto, A. Aragón, P. México A lot is known about the work of the sport psychologist within sports clubs and federations, successful interventions have been clearly documented, however, there is very little information on how to implement an area in an 132Symposia Wednesday July 12th institution.
The systematization does not only belong to the world of research, within the applied psychology it is necessary to document and publish a working method that complies with the norms and processes of international quality management. This work aims to present the model that we have developed for the quality of the service provided by the Personal Growth area of the Mexican Football Federation. Sample: The work was carried out with 10 National Teams, male and female, age limit (N = 7), Female Senior Team (N = 1), Beach Soccer Team (N = 1) and Futsal Team (N = 1), the teams have an age range from 14 to 31 years.
The model has been developed based on the needs of each national team, taking into account the demands and the psychosportive requirements of international competitions, the implications of being a national team player and the particular characteristics of each branch and category. As a main result the Personal Growth area of the Mexican Football Federation has managed to generate a model from which it seeks to make the most of human and material resources, providing quality care to the National Soccer Teams. We believe that the standardization of processes leads to offer a professional quality service for the players and national teams.
Keywords: Quality; Sport Psychology; Soccer; National Teams. Keywords: cohesion, effica 5cy,coach behavior Development of psychological skills in professional football María de los Ángeles Corró Molas (Club Atlético La Barranca, La Pampa, Argentina) The aim of this work is to describe how the role of the sport psychologist was included in a professional football club. All the intervention was carried out with the team and technical staff of the “Club Atlético All Boys” (La Pampa, Argentina) during its participation in three tournaments: Federal Tournament, Provincial Tournament and Cultural League Official Tournament.
Period of work was from August 2015 to May 2016. To that end, a tailor-made project was designed and objectives were defined in different areas. At the individual level: focus was in the acknowledgement of sport psychologist’s role and the acquirement of psychological skills to optimize their performance.
At group level: the aim was to consolidate a cohesive team and with the technical staff we worked with an interdisciplinary model facilitating psychological resources to each of the actors. Based on Carron and Hausenblas’ (1998) model of cohesion the strategy of work began with interviews, observations, semi-structured questionnaires and group dynamics. As a conclusion of the process, an evaluation of the objectives was carried out and improvements were identified regarding the psychological abilities of the players (anxiety management, confidence and mental toughness), group cohesion, coach's leadership and communication skills.
As a challenge, it is proposed to design specific intervention strategies for each sport discipline and to deepen into design of attractive, effective and scientifically validated techniques that allow the improvement of key aspects in football such as decision making, concentration and the ability to cope with and control emotions. Keywords: football, mental training, psychological skills, cohesion, leadership Developing new learning environments for footballers. An applied experience at Villarreal C.F.
Eduardo Morelló Tomás (Villarreal C.F) Behaviour and character formation of boys and girls is determined in part by the interaction of personal and situational factors (Bandura, 1991). Given the importance of optimizing and enriching the process of personal development in Villarreal C.F.’s players, the ‘Endavant Igualtat’ programme has been developed as a part of the club’s personal training process. In this case, the purpose was to confront teams with learning contexts different to those they normally encounter in their sports environments.
The objective is to allow our players to carry out activities of coexistence and collaboration with other social groups and experience other ways of living that are different from their reality. In addition, it seeks to give media visibility to both users and 133Symposia Wednesday July 12th associations working with vulnerable people, groups at risk and/or with functional diversity. The Club has 600 players trained by 100 coaches.
The intervention has been carried out with 200 players and the coaching staff of each of the ten elite teams. The ages of the participants range from 12 to 30 years. Each team is assigned an association with whom they engage in different activities once every 3-4 weeks.
These meetings begin in October and last until June. In these activities the members of both entities spend time together, exchange experiences from their diverse lifestyles and share their different characteristics with the purpose of learning from one another. Our experience sampled during our first two years leads us to interpret satisfaction expressed from both sides, players and staff as well as the associated entities and their members, which encourages us to continue working in this direction and to share our experience with other professionals participating in professional training of junior athletes.
Keywords: football, values, learning environments Neuropsychology and sports performance: Case applied to soccer players of the first team of the saprissa sports club of Costa Rica Carlos Marín (Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica) The exhibition will try to explain and demonstrate the need to apply cognitive training techniques from a neuropsychological and biomechanical base in the soccer players of the Saprissa Sports Club of Costa Rica. In addition, to offer the practical bases of the scientific methodology in the evaluation and training of the necessary skills and abilities in the improvement of the sport performance in the soccer. Several theories on neuropsychology applied to sport in the area of attention will be explained, understanding that it is a process that from a neurophysiological approach involves the sensation and comprises elements like stimuli generated by internal or external energy to the organism.
It will also expose the importance of developing cognitive skills that facilitate different learning at an early age that parallels the development of motor skills. These two involved in psychomotor development including social skills. Finally, it will give an approach on the study of neuropsychomotor development which consists of the study of the neuroscientific nature of voluntary movement in its three main phases and theories of Laterality, cognitive training and Football.
All of the above will be reinforced with explanatory videos of the topics exposed, videos of the exercises and practices performed with the players of Deportivo Saprissa and players of other football teams in the leagues of Spain, England and Argentina. Keywords: neuropsychology, training, cognitive, concentration, attention, performance The Sports Psychologist in interdisciplinary work for the development of sports talents Mario Reyes-Bossio (UPC) The purpose of this presentation is to make known the importance of psychological approach in the selection and interdisciplinary development in the search of sports talents. Sports talent is the innate potential with which each player is born and the skill is what the player is forming through the training and experience formed during his career.
In this sense, maximizing the mental ability will allow the development of the different skills that every soccer player needs for his professional development. The Peruvian Football Federation has been working on a project that promotes the strengthening of psychological work in the training of athletes from different regions of Peru, including youth teams, regional teams (High Performance Centers) and professional clubs. A model has been created to promote the individual and collective development of football players for their strengthening as professionals and as individuals, promoting healthy lifestyles and quality of life.
It is fundamental this interdisciplinary work and with the family, the relevance of the sports pentagon is an important key for the work and strengthening of each athlete. All this work allows to promote group identity and teamwork, developing positive attitudes in each player. The goal is to promote this 134Symposia Wednesday July 12th systematic work to all regions of the country, to strengthen the national sub-15, sub-17 and sub-20 national teams.
Keywords: cohesion, efficacy, coach behavior Theory and practice: Condemned to understand each other Chair: Rosana Llames (University of Seville) In 1979 Martens presented some defects about research made in psychology applied to the field of sport. At this simposium we try to analyze the developments that have followed this tandem, academical research/professional activity, taking into account four relevant aspects: assesment, intervention, cost of professional sport psychologist’s intervention, and adaptation of deontologic norms to reality of professional sport psychologist’s activity. Our aim is to detect and present this development, to analyze the differences and actually distance that exist between and particularize needs and demmands from academical research to professional activity, and vice versa, from professional activity to academical research.
Keywords: sport psychology, research, professional activity, assessment, intervention, deontologic code “Smocks and jocks (from 1979 to 2017)”. A reflection about sport psychology assessment Juan Tomás Escudero (University of Balearic Islands), Rosana Llames (University of Seville), Pep Marí (Sport psychologist. Free-lance Barcelona), Jaume Martí (Sport psychologist.
Psicosport. Barcelona) The aim of this presentation is to share some observations and considerations related to Sport Psychology assessment. Specifically, I will compare research activity, carried out by academic researchers, and professional activity, carried out by professional sport psychologists.
Is there any relation between them? How close or how far are academic researchers and professional sport psychologists with regards to sport psychological assessment? What is the situation of current research, since Martens (1979) exposed some of its defects?
The field still needs a true communication between academic researchers—who know the basic principles of research (methodology and statistical analysis)—and professional sport psychologists—who know the ecological conditions and the demands of actual sports men and women and athletes Keywords: research, professional activity, sport psychology, assessment Sport psychological intervention, the most artistic part of our profession Pep Marí (Sport psychologist. Free-lance. Barcelona), Rosana Llames (University of Seville), Juan Tomás Escudero (University of Balearic Islands), Jaume Martí (Sport psychologist.
Psicosport. Barcelona) Sport Psychology handbooks present several methodological and intervention techniques. The scientific literature on psychological preparation programs combine them as a function of the athletes’ needs.
It is difficult to imagine a work program, oriented to the improvement of performance, that is not flexible. There is little research, however, on the criteria to manage this flexibility in practice. Too often they depend on professionals’ own experience and intuition.
Further research on this issue would reduce this artistic component and would improve the efficiency of interventions. Another issue that should be addressed is the maintenance of changes produced by the intervention. The best procedure is that which exhibits the optimal relation between the time invested to achieve the changes and the duration of those changes in time.
If we had more information about the duration of the effects of preparation, we could support the most efficient procedures Keywords: research, professional activity, sport psychology, intervention 135Symposia Wednesday July 12th Taking advantage of the portable technology: Use of smartphones as instrument of goal registration Joan Vives Ribó (Centro de Alto Rendimiento. Sant Cugat del Vallès. España), Rosana Llames (University of Seville), Juan Tomás Escudero (University of Balearic Islands), Pep Marí (Sport psychologist.
Freelance Barcelona), Jaume Martí (Sport psychologist. Psicosport. Barcelona) Goal setting is a well-known technique, very used and effective.
It mobilizes the effort and helps to persist in it, directs focus of concentration and facilitates the use of new learning strategies. The registration of goals achievement improves the consciousness about the work done on the objectives. The more consciousness about learnings, the more confidence in the resources acquired.
But traditional pen & paper registers (or by computer) have drawbacks in achieving the appropriate adherence to register consistently. Instead, registers though mobile (smartphone) provide instant access, an easy use, data saved instantly, and the possibility to share and edit this data from the cloud by athletes, coaches and psychologists. As an example of use of this type of registers, it will be presented a double intervention developed in the CAR of Sant Cugat del Vallès (High Performance Center), with the group of waterpolo junior female players.
On the one hand, an individual program of setting goals. Individual goals were established for players, with a customized form for each of them, built by Google Forms and directly accessible in their smartphones through a shortcut. The objectives were registered from March to June 2017 included.
It will be presented the results of the progress achieved in the objectives, the adherence levels in registration, and the relation between results and registration adherence. On the other hand, a communication training program for the coach, in order to change communication patterns to increase players’ consciousness about their work in practice, their achievements and the concentration or resources used. Coach communication follow-up was done through the same portable methodology.
It will be presented the changes perceived in the communication of coach, and the effects of these changes in the motivational orientation and confidence levels of the players. Keywords: goal setting, consciousness, portable technology, smartphone Price of sport psychologist’s work Jaume Martí (Sport psychologist. Psicosport.
Barcelona), Rosana Llames (University of Seville), Pep Marí (Sport psychologist. Free-lance Barcelona), Juan Tomás Escudero (University of Balearic Islands) Since 1990, when more of us began to work as sport psychologists, to 2017, we have confirmed that students of Sport Psychology masters and also “novice” sport psychologists, have a problems to establish psychologist’s fees or psychological intervention prices. In this presentation we try to discuss and make a reflection about a disturbing observation that happens for a long time: Sport psychologist still have problems to determine how much sport psychologist´s work cost?
or how much could sport psychological intervention cost? It’s clear that our education (psychology degree, sport psychology master, go to congress...) to become a sport psychologist has a prize for us and now, as a professionals, we are paying different taxes (social security as autonomous worker, professional association fee....); in other words, all of it isn’t free for us. It’s necessary to clarify these aspects in our professional activity that permit us to compute our work in order to avoid undervalue it and undervalue to ourselves and also our colleagues.
All of us would like to work as a sport psychologist and this activity enjoyed us but we also need to cost-price this passion Keywords: sport psychology, sport psychologist’s fees, prices, intervention Norms of deontological code vs reality of professional practice in sport Rosana Llames (University of Seville), Juan Tomás Escudero (University of Balearic Islands), Pep Marí (Sport psychologist. Free-lance Barcelona), Jaume Martí (Sport psychologist. Psicosport.
Barcelona) 136Symposia Wednesday July 12th Deontology is not attained through common sense. It requires training and learning to achieve this competence. Therefore, ethical education has to promote professional identity.
Although Sport Psychology is a young discipline, the last years have witnessed a substantial advance in consulting and counselling in this field. This, in turn, has led to problems related with professional ethics. The appearance of people without sufficient competences and, on occasions, with only market criteria, generated an increasing interest in establishing the norms that direct the discipline’s professional exercise.
That was the origin of the first agreements that dealt with deontological and normative issues, such as the Association for the Advancement of Applied Sport Psychology or the Canadian Society for Psychomotor Learning and Sport Psychology. In Spain, the General Council of Official Psychology Colleges also includes the profession’s general ethical norms in its Deontology Code. Nevertheless, it is not always easy to interpret the regulations in the context of applied sports.
Several issues create a split between the written norms and the actual implementation, including who is the client, the cooperation or exchange of information with other professionals, confidentiality (in an inherently public activity), the management of occasionally contradicting interests (technical staff, clubs, sports men and women), the temporal use of the collected information, and the limits of the psychologist’s involvement. In this presentation we will analyse these aspects, which we believe might lead to confusion, confronting specific articles included in regulations and codes, with real examples taken from professional practice. Keywords: research, professional activity, sport psychology, deontology, deontologic code Mental well-being in athletes from different perspectives Chair: Jeannine Ohlert (German Sport University Cologne; University Hospital Ulm) A general mental well-being is important for elite athletes, not only for their personality development and their daily life, but also in order to be able to perform on the best level in their sport.
However, well-being can be threatened by different obstacles, problems and challenges the athletes have to face in their sport and in their life. This symposium targets well-being of athletes from different perspectives. Three communications will concentrate on recent research results regarding well-being in athletes, and two communications will present best practice initiatives from two countries.
First, results from a study on the influence of coping with different developmental tasks on well-being in adolescent elite athletes will be presented. The second communication will focus on team flow in different settings with a particular focus on well-being. The third communication will deal with the experience of sexual violence in elite athletes and its influence on well-being and depressive tendencies.
Finally, two best practice initiatives to preserve and/or regain mental well-being in elite athletes, the Mental Health Clinic in Sweden and the network MentalEmpowerment in Germany will be presented. Keywords: well-being, developmental tasks, team flow, sexual violence, medical health clinic, mentallyprepared A mental health clinic to support elite sports: a multidisciplinary approach integrating performance psychology, clinical psychology and psychiatry Göran Kenttä (The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences & The Swedish Sport Confederation) Due to increasingly high demands in competitive sports, prevention of poor health and promotion of good health becomes more important. Unfortunately, in sport science, mental health research is limited.
Nevertheless, research indicates that elite athletes are at the same or greater risk of developing mental health problems as non-athletes (Schaal, Tafflet and Nassif, 2011). Moreover, concerns have been raised that athletes may receive inadequate and substandard versions of treatment as a consequence of how preconceptions regarding mental health problems in competitive sports influence the choice of treatment (Pipe, 2001). Consequently, in order to provide professional assessment and treatment of clinical issues a Mental Health Clinic started within public health care in 2015 – with the mission to better support elite sport.
The overall purpose of the Clinic is to provide a multidisciplinary support system not only to current elite athletes and high- 137Symposia Wednesday July 12th performance coaches, but also to those struggling with a career transition out for sports. All athletes and coaches who seek help for any mental health problem, defined as psychological distress that inhibited normal functioning in sport and life in general during two weeks or more, will perform a comprehensive psychiatric assessment with a licenced psychiatrist and a licenced psychologist before receiving the most appropriate evidence based treatment. However, it has been argued that there is a need for adapting psychiatric assessment and treatment to the population of elite athlete with specific concern of sport performance.
A recent review with elite athletes and mental health concluded that specific models of care are yet to be established for this group (Rice et al, 2016). This presentation will reflect upon lessons learned from 2 years at the mental health clinic. Experiences and data from psychiatric assessment and clinical treatment in elite sport as well as the relationship to performance will be discussed.
Keywords: mental health clinic, performance, elite sports Coping with developmental tasks and well-being in elite athletes Jeannine Ohlert, Jens Kleinert (German Sport University Cologne) The adolescent years are the most important years for personality development. Young elite athletes have to solve the same developmental tasks (DTs) as non-athletes even though they spend a lot of time with their sports and also have to solve certain sports related DTs in addition (Ohlert & Kleinert, 2014). Two studies were conducted to find out if this situation leads to a shortfall in certain DTs and furthermore to reduced wellbeing in adolescent and adult elite athletes.
The first study addressed adolescent elite athletes and non- athletes, the second one adult elite athletes. Participants answered questions regarding the personal relevance of different DTs, their actual progression, satisfaction with their actual progression, and their well-being. Results showed that compared to non-athletes, adolescent athletes reported a different relevance for some DTs, especially for the DTs circle of friends and independence from parents.
No significant differences between the two groups could be found in progression or satisfaction with progression. A stepwise multiple regression resulted in two significant predictors for well-being in adolescent athletes: satisfaction with progression in the DTs to find oneself and circle of friends. For adult athletes, only satisfaction with circle of friends was a significant predictor of well-being.
Furthermore, this satisfaction correlated negatively with the number of hours in sport per week. These findings suggest that in general, elite athletes do not suffer from problems with DTs. However, if satisfaction with the own progression in certain DTs is low, well-being will also be reduced.
Thus, sport organisations and coaches should think about a targeted planning of free times for their athletes in order to have time for their developmental tasks outside sport. Keywords: personality development; adolescent athlete; adult athlete MentalEmpowerment – Organisation and utilisation of mental health care in German elite sport Marion Sulprizio, Jens Kleinert (German Sport University Cologne) In addition to the physical demands of elite sport, athletes also encounter mentally and socially stressful conditions, which can potentially endanger their mental health. With this in mind, MentalEmpowerment (MentalGestärkt; MG), a network initiative founded in 2011, pursues three basic goals: Firstly, MG aims to preserve and support mental health (i.e.
health promotion) and strengthen athletes’ mental skills; secondly, MG aims to prevent mental health problems (e.g. stress, depression or burnout) in elite sport (i.e. prevention) through the early detection of symptoms; and, finally, MG aims to refer athletes to optimal treatment or therapy partners where necessary.
MG is a service-oriented initiative that operates in the areas of information, events, further education, screening and mediation. Through our coordination, a network of experts and institutions are brought together to ensure that elite athletes are optimally informed about health promotion, prevention of mental health problems and how to get the correct intervention or therapy for their problems. The network currently comprises 230 qualified partners from the fields of sport psychology, sport psychotherapy and sport psychiatry.
The two key branches of MG are (1) the steering group, consisting of psychologists, psychotherapists and psychiatrists and (2) the funding board, consisting of representatives from the financial partners. In 2011 – 2016 we were able to offer optimal support to 229 athletes: 45% of whom 138Symposia Wednesday July 12th reported signs of depressive mood, with some even thinking about suicide (2.2%); 7.6% suffered from a lack of wellbeing, either in general or as a result of injuries; 5.8% reported eating disorders, 2.7% reported sport addiction, and 9% suffered from stress in their sport. MG continues to work towards extending the support network, providing information, coaching trainers and parents, and combining services and research in the field of mental health in elite sports.
Keywords: depression, networking, prevention, therapy Sexual violence experiences and well-being in German elite athletes Jeannine Ohlert (University Hospital Ulm; German Sport University Cologne), Thea Rau (University Hospital Ulm), Bettina Rulofs (German Sport University Cologne), Marc Allroggen (University Hospital Ulm) The experience of sexual violence is known to have long term consequences on mental and physical well- being of the victims. In organised sport, however, research regarding the prevalence of sexual violence experiences and consequences on mental well-being is still rather scarce. Thus, the aim of the current study was to research prevalences of sexual violence experiences for German elite athletes, and to explore correlations with mental well-being.
Overall, 1,799 German national squad athletes over 16 years of age from 128 different sports took part in an online survey. Mean age was 21.5 years, 54% were female. Seventeen different situations of sexual violence (from sexist jokes to forced penetration) were presented to the participants, and they had to indicate how often they had experienced this particular situation in the sport setting.
Mental well-being was measured using the WHO-5 well-being index and the PHQ-2 measure for the risk of depression. Results revealed that 37.6% of the athletes had experienced at least one situation of sexual violence in organised sport; 11.2% even reported a severe form of sexual violence. Regarding mental well- being, significant lower values of well-being were found in those participants who had experienced at least one situation of sexual violence.
However, levels of well-being did not differ between the victims of so called “mild” forms of sexual violence (e.g., verbal sexual behaviours), “moderate” sexual violence (e.g., exhibitionism), and severe sexual violence (e.g., forced sexual penetration). The same pattern was found for the risk of depression. Our results show that the experience of sexual violence in sport is comparable to other studies and lead to reduced well-being in the victims no matter if it is a severe form or only a so called “mild” form of sexual violence.
Keywords: sexual harassment, squad athletes, depression, prevalence Team flow in different contexts: A systematic review with particular focus on well-being Fabian Pels, Jens Kleinert (German Sport University Cologne) A multitude of studies examined the concept of flow in individuals in the context of sports (see Swann et al. (2012) for an overview), finding that flow is associated with a variety of positive outcomes (e.g., well-being). However, few studies explicitly examined flow during group tasks in team sports (i.e., team flow) and potential beneficial outcomes (e.g., athletes’ well-being in teams, patients’ well-being in health sport groups).
Therefore, this work aims at providing a systematic overview of the existing research on team flow in different contexts, with particular interest on implications for future research on team flow in sports. The literature search was carried out with the use of several databases and additional sources (e.g., reference lists). Only peer-reviewed articles and publications in English language were included.
The included 21 publications varied widely in team flow definitions (e.g., team flow as an aggregation of individual flow vs. team flow as a collective state of mind) and, in turn, in related team flow measures. The majority of studies examined team flow in teams of musicians and employees in both low-interdependence tasks and high-interdependence tasks.
Studies identified different antecedents (e.g., collective efficacy, feedback from others) and different outcomes of team flow (mostly performance outcomes). This review shows that team flow can occur in different tasks and contexts and is characterized by specific team-related antecedents and outcomes. However, in contrast to research on individual flow, few studies explicitly examined well-being as an outcome of team flow.
The recent publications demonstrate the need for a consensual definition and theory, and related measurements of team flow in general. Moreover, there is a need to confirm and expand the results on antecedents and outcomes of team flow in the sport context. 139Symposia Wednesday July 12th Keywords: flow, group, overview Structure and development of sports psychology before the new challenges in Iberoamerica Chair: Antonio Hernández Mendo (Universidad de Málaga) The new century raises global questions that must be solved from the different areas of knowledge and from cultural diversity.
There is no doubt that the Sport Psychology does not remain unrelated to these issues and the very breakthrough in the solution of these discover new problems. The scientific and methodological progress of this area requires that from the new perspectives the old problems are analyzed, resulting in new strategies. This symposium reflects the focus of four research groups in Iberoamerica (Spain, Portugal and Mexico) before the new challenges posed in the Sport Psychology.
The challenges posed by these groups cover a wide range of issues ranging from methodological aspects, through substantive issues of areas of interest, to procedures in research through the use of networks or to a humanistic vision of intervention in Sports Psychology in the high performance derived from the current scientific and ethical maturity, to the gender stereotypes in sports practice and the psychological benefits of this participation once the barriers and brakes have been overcome. The contributions of this Symposium are established at three levels, quantitative, qualitative and reflection. There is no doubt that the data, necessary for the genesis of knowledge and theory, whether these are qualitative or quantitative, need a reflection on the scope of these, which will clarify the new strategies that must respond to the challenges.
Keywords: methodology, online platforms, networks, humanism, sport and women Challenges of Sports Psychology in the 21st Century Antonio Hernández Mendo, Verónica Morales Sánchez, Rafael Reigal, Sergio Luis González Ruiz (Universidad de Málaga) Informatics and the Internet have meant a technical, methodological and conceptual revolution that has impacted in all areas of knowledge. It is a technical and methodological revolution for having affected the design, implementation and analysis of tasks. Conceptual revolution because it has reduced the uncertainty of theories and conceptual models where it has been implanted.
This technical / conceptual revolution has affected, between others, fundamental and basic functions of science, data collection and sharing of results. In this sense the online platforms pose a conceptual change in the context of the Psychology of Sport. In the temporal plan a change occurs, it is not necessary for an encounter "face to face".
In the field of research the presence of the researcher is not necessary, there is no limit on the size of the sample (nor physical space, time availability or economic costs), people of different cultures, genres, races, nationalities, socioeconomic conditions or religions, can simultaneously access the study. Nor is it necessary to type the data obtained from the evaluation. Platforms provide quantitative and qualitative data (eg: order to perform the questionnaire in a direct, inverse or non-sequential way).
This situation makes it possible to connect the online platforms in the Mixed Methods approach and consequently to question the static estimation of the psychometric properties of the questionnaires in front of a dynamic estimation based on quantitative and qualitative data. The data of the online platform www.menpas.com is presented, currently has 19 work areas, a user area, an administrative area and 72 questionnaires / tests or tasks or programs implemented. Currently, the platform has 11,000 registered users and a registered annual activity of more than 135,000 events (events).
Some of his tasks already have more than 45,000 realizations. Keywords: computers, internet, online platform, mixed methods 140Symposia Wednesday July 12th Development of sports psychology in Mexico: Network work Jeanette López-Walle (Facultad de Organización Deportiva, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Nuevo León, México), Rossana de Fátima Cuevas Ferrera (Facultad de Psicología, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Yucatán, México), Claudia Rivas Garza (Asociación Mexiquense de Psicología del Deporte y la Actividad Física, Estado de México, México), María Pilar Rodríguez (Instituto Tecnológico de Estudios Superiores de Occidente, Jalisco, México) In Mexico, the psychology of sport begins when psychologists do not penetrate mental preparation with high-performance athletes, such as the doctor Octavio Rivas, who started with first division players. His premise was to promote multidisciplinary work to develop the psychological well-being of the athlete.
Later, different psychologists offer various continuing education courses, through the organization of national events such as congresses, symposium and conferences. These events led to the union of different members to local and national associations and / or groups that apply different methods of intervention to optimize the psychological skills of athletes, as well as the constant training of referees, coaches and parents. Along with continuing education, various institutions of higher education develop and consolidate projects to grant undergraduate and graduate degrees, which allows them to have formal training in various states of the Republic, and even in some of them recognized by Its quality in the National Register of Postgraduate Quality of the National Council of Science and Technology.
As a result of the different efforts made in various trenches in Mexico, the proposal for a Thematic Network, which, from the area of psychology, seeks to promote the psychological well-being of the individual through quality sport. For this reason, the psychology of sport in Mexico has been, is and will be a reflection of the work in networks, which guarantees the consolidation and internationalization of the contributions of all the members that participate in the Network, under the acronym. Keywords: networks, research, training Psychosocial benefits of women's sports participation Isabel Balaguer, Isabel Castillo, Mª Ángeles Atienzar, Paula Muiños (University of Valencia) Throughout history women have encountered many barriers, especially cultural and educational, to participate in sport, which has prevented them from enjoying the benefits of sport participation.
In this presentation, the psychological benefits of sports participation, from quantitative and qualitatively approach, are analysed in two team sports, basketball and soccer, the latter being the main brake on women's access to sport, mainly due to gender stereotypes. At the quantitative level, the differences between some indicators of psychological well-being (self-esteem and subjective vitality), youth development (personal and interpersonal), and competence in everyday life, between athletes and non-athletes are studied. Secondly, in the group of athletes, different theoretical models are tested in which the predictive power of coach perceived empowering climate on the athletes’ psychological benefits is explored.
At the qualitative level, the barriers that the players have perceived to sport participation and the benefits they receive from their participation in sport are investigated. 795 female athletes (soccer = 313; basketball = 240) and non-athletes (n = 242) with an average age of 15.21 years (SD = 2.88) completed a questionnaire package with the variables of interest and a selection of them participated in the qualitative study. MANOVA's analyses were carried out to analyse the differences between soccer, basketball and non-athletes, indicating that athletes obtained higher values (p <.001) in all variables, with the exception of interpersonal development.
The results of the structural equation models report that the empowering climate is positively associated with greater competence in daily life and that this leads to greater well-being and more positive development in the players. Keywords: psychological benefits, sport, woman, motivational climate Training Psychology: New challenges for a humanistic approach Sidónio Serpa (University of Lisbon) 141Symposia Wednesday July 12th Superior athletes challenge their own limits in order to achieve excellence and competitive success. Their sports careers tend to start at very early ages.
Therefore, their lives became dependent of performance development demands. Their perception of life meaning, self-concept, or their personality development are shaped by their sports experience, which is the major dimension of their lives in most cases. Despite the success on reaching outstanding patterns, there are many dramatic situations experienced by young and superior athletes.
Promising sports careers that fail or are interrupted by drop out, serious mental problems requiring clinical treatment, very young athletes included in fulltime coaching programs by their parents’ imposition, or post-career emptiness and misery, are examples contradicting the humanistic goals of sports. Applied sport psychology to the competitive context has been focused on improving athletes’ performance, which has inspired the new expression “performance psychology” that is currently extended to other activities. Grifith in USA as well as Puni and Roudick in Russia were the most important fathers of applied SP to sports competition.
In fact, Grifith was focused on perception and motor learning in order to increase the quality of coaching to improve the athletes’ performance. On the other hand, the Russian approach aimed at developing a scientific based system of mental training and psychological preparation of athletes leading to performance excellence. In both cases, the psychologist’s mission was to work for the performance improvement.
The World important development of sports as well as the current scientific and ethical maturity of Sport Psychology suggests that a reflection should be made regarding the professional role of sport psychologists working as top sports consultants. Keywords: performance enhancement, performance psychology, personal development Get Set to Go, a multi-site physical activity intervention for mental health service users: Measure developments and real-world practical considerations Chair: Florence Kinnafick (Loughborough University) Mental illness continues to pose a social and economic burden for health care systems worldwide. Sport, exercise and physical activity (PA) is gaining the attention of services, practitioners and researchers as a tool for prevention and treatment of various psychopathological abnormalities by improving physical health whilst reducing negative symptoms.
However, individuals with mental illness engage in significantly less PA than healthy controls. Tailoring measurement tools and improving our understanding of individual experiences within PA interventions can enhance health promotion initiatives and inform future interventions for mental health (MH) recovery. Get Set to Go (GStG) is a Sport England /National Lottery funded three year intervention delivered by Mind, a national mental health charity in England and Wales, which uses PA to aid MH recovery in Mind service users.
To date, 1274 participants have registered for GStG across eight local Mind services in four priority regions in England. Each local Mind provides tailored PA and sport groups using peer-volunteer support. The aim of the intervention is to increase motivation, participation, and decrease barriers to PA whilst improving MH recovery.
This symposium will outline the development of measurement tools suitable for populations with mental illness, and to enhance our understanding of the practical considerations of PA initiatives aimed at MH recovery. Presentation 1 will examine the psychometric properties of a short-form version of the Behavioural Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire-3 (BREQ-3; Wilson, et al., 2006) and presentation 2 will provide detail on the feasibility and acceptability of using objective measures of physical activity for GStG participants. Presentation 3 will detail the key socio-contextual determinants of adherence for participants of GStG while presentation 4 will focus on the experiences of peer navigators who volunteered as sport group leaders and provided one to one support.
Keywords: mental health, intervention, motivation, peer support, measurement, qualitative 142Symposia Wednesday July 12th Examining the factor structure of a short-form version of the Behavioural Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire in mental health service users Nathan Smith (University of Northampton), Paul Appleton (University of Birmingham), Timothy Osborne (Warwick Hospital), Florence Kinnafick (Loughborough University) The study’s aim was to examine the psychometric properties of a short-form version of the Behavioural Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire-3 (BREQ-3; Wilson, Rogers, Loitz, & Scime, 2006) in a mental health service user population. The most recent iteration of the BREQ-3 contains 24 items exploring key motivation regulations including: intrinsic motivation, identified regulation, introjected regulation, external regulation and amotivation. The BREQ-3 assesses the motivation regulations of individuals participating in physical activity and exercise.
A brief version of the BREQ-3 may be more practical for younger and/or hard-to-reach populations (e.g., mental health service users). We aimed to reduce the number of items required to target the motivational regulations, whilst retaining a valid and psychometrically sound measurement instrument. In total, 780 participants (379 males, 363 females, 38 non-disclosed) involved in the Get Set to Go intervention participated.
Mental health diagnosis included anxiety, schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. A 10-item version of the BREQ-3 was produced by identifying the 2 highest loading items for each motivation regulation based on findings from previous research. Items were scrutinised by the research team and presented to a mental health lived experience advisory panel for review.
All participants completed the short 10-item version of the measure. Confirmatory factor analyses (CFA) were used to test the proposed theoretical structure underpinning the BREQ-3. Results indicate a good model fit (X2 = 247.04; CFI = 0.98; TLI = 0.96) and support a 5 factor structure where the 2 retained items for each motivation regulation loaded onto their named factor (item-loading range 0.80-0.94).
Results provide evidence for the construct validity of the short-form version of the BREQ-3 within the current population group. Future applications of the short form BREQ-3 are discussed and suggestions for further validity testing identified. Keywords: Mental health, intervention, motivation, BREQ-3, measurement The feasibility and acceptability of the objective assessment of physical activity in mental health service users Richard Pulsford (University of Exeter), Lorna Tweed (University of Northampton), Nathan Smith (University of Northampton), Florence Kinnafick (Loughborough University) Information on the feasibility and acceptability of the objective measurement of physical activity (PA) in individuals with mental illness is limited.
To inform the evaluation of the Get Set to Go (GStG) intervention, the current objectives were to: a) examine recruitment, feasibility and acceptability of objectively assessing PA within the intervention, and b) examine the influence of accelerometer wear-time criteria on compliance and PA estimates. Attendees to GStG focus groups in four locations in England were invited to wear GENEActiv accelerometers on their non-dominant wrist for 24 hrs on seven consecutive days. Accelerometer data was analysed for compliance to wear-time instructions and habitual PA in R using GGIR software (https://cran.r- project.org).
On day seven participants completed an acceptability survey providing quantitative and qualitative feedback of wearing a GENEActiv. Fifty-seven % of attendees (22 of 38) volunteered to participate. This sample was similar in age (53.3±12.0yrs vs 49.8±12.49yrs), distribution of gender (50% vs 57% male), and mental health diagnoses to the group overall.
All participants recorded PA data for ≥12hrs/day on ≥3 days although compliance reduced if wear-time inclusion criteria (hrs/day or number of valid days) were increased. Estimates of daily MVPA were comparable to samples from the wider population and influenced by wear-time criteria. Approximately 75% responded positively to questions regarding acceptability of the measurement protocol.
Over 65% agreed that the PA assessment itself did not alter their behaviour or choice of activity. Qualitative comments were consistent with these positive responses. Findings support the feasibility and acceptability of assessing PA objectively in a population with poor/severe mental health as part of an 143Symposia Wednesday July 12th intervention like GStG.
Compliance to measurement instructions (and subsequent sample size), and estimates of PA are dependent on decisions about accelerometer wear-time criteria. Keywords: physical activity, accelerometer, mental health, feasibility, acceptability, compliance A physical activity intervention in a mental health setting: Social-contextual determinants of adoption and adherence Florence Kinnafick (Loughborough University), Lorna Tweed (University of Northampton), Timothy Osborne (Warwick Hospital), Anthony Papathomas (Loughborough University) Exercise can improve clinical outcomes in individuals with poor/severe mental health. However, this population group typically engage in low levels of physical activity (PA) and demonstrate poor adherence to PA interventions.
In this study, underpinned by self-determination theory (SDT: Deci & Ryan, 1985), we aimed to understand the key social-contextual determinants of adoption and adherence of a three year national PA intervention (Get Set to Go: GStG) for mental health service users. Thirty-five (19 male, 16 females, M age=49.03 SD=11.57 years) participants, with a range of mental health diagnoses, were interviewed as part of four separate focus groups in four regions across England; North West, North East, London and West Midlands. All focus group participants had been registered on the GStG programme for a minimum of 10 months.
Perceptions of programme satisfaction, and barriers and facilitators to adoption and adherence to the programme were explored. Data was subjected to a deductive thematic analysis approach as described by Braun and Clarke (2006). A need supportive environment was perceived via various sources including; the sports coordinator, peer-volunteers, and other participants registered on the programme.
Each source of support was considered central to enabling adoption and adherence to the exercise sessions by facilitating perceptions of enjoyment, competence, and minimising feelings of control. The shared lived experience of mental health between members was crucial in creating a sense of community, and initiated feelings of relatedness. Lapses in adherence to GStG occurred in conjunction with changes to individual physical and mental health.
However, perceived need support from within the programme enabled participants to feel able to return to the programme during their recovery. Practical considerations are offered in terms of facilitating a need supportive environment within the context of a real-world physical activity intervention. Keywords: mental health, intervention, motivation, qualitative, adherence Reciprocity and relatedness: Volunteer experiences of providing unpaid peer support for mental health recovery within a physical activity intervention Lorna Tweed (University of Northampton), Florence Kinnafick (Loughborough University), Nathan Smith (University of Northampton) Research suggests that motivation to volunteer as peer support is dependent on three basic psychological needs; autonomy, competence and relatedness (Haiva et al., 2012).
In particular, relatedness need satisfaction occurs when individuals form reciprocal social relationships and feelings of connectedness towards others, further motivating prosocial behaviour such as volunteering (Pavey et al., 2011). This study aimed to explore the psychological processes involved in the motivation to volunteer as peer support within Get Set to Go (GStG), a physical activity (PA) intervention for mental health service users. Using a purposeful criterion-based recruitment process, 30 peer support volunteers (14 male, 16 female, M age=48 years, SD=9.5 years) participated in a telephone interview or one of four focus groups conducted in four priority regions in England.
Experiences of, and motivation to providing peer support within GStG were explored. Theoretical thematic analysis was conducted to identify, analyse and generate themes from data collected. Criteria (validity, credibility, reflexivity and conformability) were used to ensure trustworthiness.
Reciprocity (dual opportunity to help others whilst receiving personal gains) emerged as a recurring theme. Positive experiences of 144Symposia Wednesday July 12th reciprocity through volunteering resulted in basic psychological need satisfaction (BPNS) and further improved mental health. Specifically, relatedness need satisfaction promoted feelings of connectedness to other mental health service users through peer support mutuality, and consequently influenced motives towards sustained volunteering.
Participants reported improvements to self-esteem, aspirations, competence and in their ability to deliver PA sessions, and a sense of autonomy described as an increased sense of control over their own mental health recovery. Those designing PA interventions for mental health should aim to facilitate BPNS of volunteers through positive experiences of reciprocity. Keywords: self-determination theory, peer support, volunteering, mental health, reciprocity, relatedness Thriving on pressure: Examining the stress experiences of performers in elite sport and military domains Chair: Rachel Arnold (University of Bath) This symposium aims to unite and showcase innovative research on stress and thriving in elite sport and military domains.
Specifically, the studies presented utilize various methods (e.g., autobiographies, interviews, questionnaires, physiological biomarkers) to explore elite performers’ stress experiences. Performers represented include athletes, captains, psychologists, support staff, and military veterans. Various components of the stress process are covered, including stressors, appraisals, responses, and coping.
Additionally, novel insights are offered into the impact of stress on performers’ health, well-being, performance, and ability to thrive. The symposium has five presentations. The first outlines a study which used autobiographies to explore the stressors encountered by sporting captains.
Turning to the demands originating from the organizational environment, the second presentation discusses an interview study with 40 support staff on the organizational stressors they encounter and the impact these can have. The third presentation highlights research examining the professional demands of psychologists, the appraisals of and responses to such demands, and the undesirable consequences they can have. Reflecting the intersection between sport and military domains, the fourth presentation summarizes an examination of the stress process experienced by military veterans pre, during, and post an international sports competition and the impact of this on their health, well-being, and performance.
The final presentation outlines an investigation on the most adaptive response to the stressors discussed – thriving. Specifically, predictive relationships of need satisfaction and challenge appraisal to in- game functioning are examined and an avenue through which practitioners can look to facilitate thriving is offered. The symposium concludes by the organizer summarizing and then facilitating an interactive discussion.
Keywords: elite, military, performance, sport, stress, thriving “The Team Behind The Team”: Exploring the organizational stressor experiences of support staff in elite sport Rachel Arnold, Samuel Collington, Hannah Manley, Samuel Rees, James Soanes, Matthew Williams (University of Bath) Research examining the organizational stressors encountered in sport has primarily focused on athletes’ experiences. As recognition of the impact that sports science and medicine related factors can have on elite performance has grown, the size and sophistication of teams of support staff in elite sport has also witnessed rapid expansion. Sport psychology practitioners, therefore, often find themselves working with other performers in addition to athletes.
The purpose of this study was to explore the organizational stressors encountered by this “team behind the team” in elite sport and the impact these can have. 40 support personnel currently working in elite sport (e.g., performance directors, strength and conditioning coaches, sports scientists, physiotherapists) participated in an interview. Thematic analyses unveiled 35 lower-order and eight higher-order themes, which were separated into the stressors encountered (e.g., relationship and 145Symposia Wednesday July 12th interpersonal, physical resource, contractual and performance development, organizational structure and logistical) and their impact (e.g., personal, job performance, broader life, positive).
Building on extant literature and theory, this study not only moves the focus beyond athletes’ stress experiences to that of the broader “team behind the team” in elite sport, but it also heralds a significant shift from primarily investigating the first stage of the stress process to additionally exploring the responses, feeling states, and outcomes that stressors can elicit. The presentation will also discuss the practical implications of the findings, which include a clearer understanding of the challenges that support staff face in elite sport and their subsequent educational needs. Additionally, the findings can raise employers’ awareness of their duty of care to employees and the factors that need to be managed given the proximal position the “team behind the team” hold in facilitating athletic and organizational success.
Keywords: athletic, Olympic, professional, response, strain, stress A mixed-methods examination of the stress process experienced by military veterans competing at the Invictus Games Gareth Roberts, Rachel Arnold, James L.J. Bilzon, James Turner (University of Bath), Martin Colclough (Help for Heroes Sports Recovery) This study explored patterns of change in a number of stress-related variables (i.e. organizational stressors, appraisals, emotions, coping) experienced by military veterans in the build up to, during, and post an international competition.
Furthermore, the study aimed to examine the associations between these patterns of change and veterans’ health, well-being, and performance. To achieve this, a longitudinal design was adopted, whereby 40 Invictus Games (IG) athletes completed questionnaires measuring study variables at seven time points (6-, 3-, and 1-week before, during, and 1-, 3-, and 6-weeks post-games). In addition to psychological variables, the participants also provided saliva samples at four time points (1-week before, 24 hours after landing, 24 hours prior to competition, and 1-week post-games) to measure cortisol and salivary secretory immunoglobulin A.
Informed by the quantitative data, interviews were conducted with a subset of IG participants (N = 15) to gain deeper insight into athletes’ experiences. The participants had a mean age of 37.43 years (SD = 8.56) and had lived with their wound, injury, and/or illness for an average of 6.58 years (SD = 5.22). Multilevel growth curve analyses revealed significant differences in growth trajectories over the 12-week period in experiences of stress-related variables.
The presentation will provide a novel insight for attendees into how veterans’ experiences of stress fluctuated in the 12-week period and how this can be crucial for performance, health, and well-being. Additionally, the presentation will discuss the results from a secondary data analysis which was completed to determine how comparable individuals who attended the Invictus Games were to individuals who did not participate in this event. Finally, the presentation will offer recommendations for practice regarding optimal support of military veterans using competitive sport as part of their recovery.
Keywords: growth models, Invictus Games, military, performance, stress, veterans On the front line: Reflections on a program of research examining the professional demands of practitioner psychologists in elite sport Christopher Wagstaff, Rebecca F. Hings, Richard C. Thelwell (University of Portsmouth), Sarah Gilmore (University of Exeter) This presentation will reflect on a program of work examining the working lives of practitioner psychologists in elite sport.
Drawing from both stress and emotion work theory, emerging findings will be used to illuminate the professional demands faced by a subgroup of practitioners. Specifically, this presentation will discuss how psychologists working in elite sport in the UK commonly face stressors aligned with a precarious and contingent employment status, nepotistic employment practices, the need to “sell” their professional services, and the re-setting of sport psychology practices in response to organizational change. The presentation will then reflect on practitioners’ appraisals of and responses to such demands, with a focus on the insecurity experienced by this precariat and the necessity for emotion management to navigate the professional landscape.
Indeed, such experiences appear to have potentially undesirable consequences for 146Symposia Wednesday July 12th practitioner development, well-being, performance, and retention. Hence, the presentation will conclude with a discussion of the key messages for the training, development and support of practitioner psychologists, suggestions for regulatory bodies and employers, and considerations for future research. Keywords: stress, emotional labor, professional development, precarious employment, job strain, organizational change The prediction of thriving in elite athletes: An exploration of potential process variables and salivary biomarkers Daniel Brown (University of Portsmouth), Rachel Arnold, Martyn Standage, James Turner (University of Bath), David Fletcher (Loughborough University) Thriving (i.e., high-level functioning) represents the most adaptive response to sporting encounters, and previous research with sport performers has identified possible relationships between thriving and two process variables (viz., basic psychological needs satisfaction (BPNS), challenge appraisal; Brown, Arnold, Standage, & Fletcher, 2017).
The purpose of this study was to examine these predictive relationships, and investigate whether salivary biomarkers of thriving can be established (cf. Epel, McEwen, & Ickovics, 1998). Fifty-one elite male hockey players (Mage = 24.94 years, SDage = 4.73; Mcompeting = 16.89 years, SDcompeting = 5.92) completed a diary survey over seven consecutive days prior to a match and a saliva collection protocol on the day of the match.
Functioning was assessed using indices for performance and well-being following the match, and saliva was assayed for the hormones cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone. No associations were identified between the salivary hormones and functioning. Latent growth curve modelling revealed pre-game levels of BPNS and challenge appraisal positively predicted in-game functioning.
In addition to providing the first piece of evidence to support these predictive relationships in sport, these findings offer an exciting avenue through which practitioners can look to facilitate thriving in sport performers. Keywords: functioning, latent growth curve modelling, performance, salivary hormones, thrive, well-being Using autobiographies to explore stressors encountered by elite sporting captains Matthew Smith (University of Chichester), Rachel Arnold (University of Bath), Richard C. Thelwell (University of Portsmouth) Captains of sports teams must balance their role to play and compete at an elite level, with leadership responsibilities both on and off the pitch.
However, while numerous studies have been conducted to examine the challenges and stressors faced in elite sport for coaches and athletes (e.g., Arnold & Fletcher, 2012; Olusoga, Butt, Maynard, & Hays, 2010; Thelwell, Weston, & Greenlees, 2007), limited research has examined the demands captains face in an elite sporting environment. Therefore, this presentation aims to provide further insight into the demands and challenges captains face in such an elite context. To achieve this aim, the autobiographies of 10 international cricket captains were read and analyzed.
Stressors were identified and categorized into seven general dimensions, which included multiple roles, team stressors, interactions with players, selection, interactions with other personnel, the media, and extreme situations. The findings that emerged extend our knowledge of stress in elite sport by illustrating the stressors faced by a specific population (captains in elite sport), who must balance the dual roles of playing role and their leadership responsibilities. Findings are considered, and practical applications are outlined, including how they might inform practitioners and coaches who work with captains.
Additionally, the use of autobiographies as a data source is critiqued. Keywords: autobiographies, captaincy, dual role, elite, leadership, stressors Examining correlates of the physical activity and leisure motivation scale (PALMS) Chair: Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) 147Symposia Wednesday July 12th Measuring motives for participation in sport and physical activity (PA) is an important component of research to understand why people become involved and sustain their participation in PA in the long term. This is crucial to the worldwide efforts to increase population participation in activities involving movement to promote physical health and psychological wellbeing.
The Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS; Morris & Rogers, 2004) is an instrument developed to measure motives for participation in PA. PALMS has been used in several languages and administered in diverse cultures showing considerable robustness to variations in characteristics of samples from countries as varied as Australia, Thailand, China, Israel, Finland, Japan, Turkey, and Iran. In this symposium, researchers present the results of their studies examining correlates of motives for participation in PA from samples in Malaysia, the Netherlands, Brazil, and Greece.
First, Abdullah Nurzulaikha and colleagues report results of their examination of whether PALMS motives for participating in PA distinguished between Health Science students in Malaysia, who were involved in three different co-curricular activities. Next, Niki Stolwijk and colleagues describe their study of the reliability of the Dutch language version of the PALMS among runners in the Netherlands. Then, Andréa Duarte Pesca and colleagues discuss the reasons for adherence to PA and Sport measured by PALMS in a number of cities in Brazil.
Finally, Maria Psychountaki and colleagues consider the role of individual characteristics and social physique anxiety on motives for participation in PA measured by PALMS among exercise participants in Greece. Each of these studies adds breadth and detail to the expanding mosaic of motives for participation in PA leading to the use of PALMS to strengthen motives and match individuals to activities that will satisfy their principal motives. Tony Morris will lead audience discussion.
Keywords: PALMS, participation motives, correlates, cultures, social physique anxiety Co-curricular activities: The motives for participating in physical activity among health science students in Malaysia Abdullah Nurzulaikha, Garry Kuan, Yee Cheng Kueh, Mohd Ismail (School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia), Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) The World Health Organization has suggested that physically active young people are more ready to adopt other healthy behaviour and demonstrate higher academic performance at school (WHO, 2015). Motivation to participate in physical activity (PA) could be a way to keep young people active in their daily life. The purpose of the study was to compare motives for participating in PA between different types of co-curricular activities of health sciences students in Malaysia.
Participants were 588 university students (female=79.1%, male=20.9%) aged 18-31 years with mean age of 19.77 (SD=1.39) from the Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan. We invited the students to volunteer to complete measures, comprising a demographic form, type of co-curricular activities (arts, uniform, and sports), and the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS; Morris & Rogers, 2004). PALMS consists of eight motive subscales, namely enjoyment, mastery, psychological condition, physical condition, appearance, affiliation, others’ expectations, and competition/ego.
We used one-way ANOVA to compare means of motives for participating in PA between three types of co- curricular activity (arts, uniform, and sports). Results showed that there were significant differences between motives of affiliation, F(2,584)=8.22, p<.001, appearance, F(2,582)=4.83, p=.008, and physical condition, F(2,575)=4.63, p=.010, by type of co-curricular activity. Students who enrolled in sports co-curricular activity had higher motives for PA than students in other types of co-curricular activity.
The information from the present study could provide further insight on motives for participating in physical activity among health sciences students, encouraging students to integrate PA involvement into their daily routine. Findings suggest a relationship between motives for participation in PA and PA behaviour in terms of student choice, which adds construct validity to PALMS. Keywords: physical activity, motives, student, co-curricular 148Symposia Wednesday July 12th Reliability of the Dutch version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS) in runners Niki Stolwijk, Koen Buseman, Rick Van Eupen, Jeffrey Thijssen, Simon Voorwinden (School of Physical Therapy, HAN University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands), Bart Staal (Research Group Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation, HAN University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands), Wim Van Lankveld (Radboud University Medical Centre, 3) Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen) Many people recognize the value of physical activity, leading to increasing popularity of low-threshold sports like running.
However, a significant proportion of new runners stop the activity within one year. To increase long-term sports participation, it is crucial to identify motives for participation in physical activity and promote effective motives. The aim of this pilot study was to translate the English version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS) into Dutch and investigate its reliability for use with recreational runners.
The PALMS was translated into Dutch according to internationally accepted guidelines. Measurement properties of the Dutch PALMS were tested in 106 runners (mean age=35.1, SD=13.2 years) of which 86 were recreational runners and 20 novice runners. Test-retest reliability was examined in 36 random runners, after an interval of seven days.
Participants accepted translation of the scale. In a principal-component analysis, the expected 8 factors accounted for 70.68% of the variance. Items had significant factor loading (>.5) on the desired factors, with the exception of items from the subscale “others’ expectations”.
The factor loadings of item 7 (To earn a living) and item 21(Because people tell me I need to) were poor (< 0.35). Despite the small sample size, we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis, resulting in moderate fit (CMIN/DF=1.68, TLI=0.80, CFI=0.82, RMSA=0.08). The PALMS Dutch version showed good overall internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha = 0.90).
Internal consistency for 7 subscales was good, ranging from α=0.83 to 0.92. Alpha of the “others’ expectations” subscale was poor (α=0.41). Test-retest reliability was good, ranging from r=0.79 to 0.97 for the separate subscales.
In this pilot study, the Dutch PALMS appeared to be a reliable instrument to measure motives for participation in physical activity of Dutch runners. A larger sample is required to confirm the factor structure. Keywords: PALMS, Dutch, running, motivations Reasons for adherence to physical activity and sport in Brazil Andréa Duarte Pesca, Juliana Frainer, Roberto Moraes Cruz (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brasil), Sidónio Serpa, António Fernando Rosado (University of Lisbon, Portugal), Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) Research investigating the reasons for adherence to sport and physical activity practice is traditionally elaborated by motivation theories.
Motivation is understood as an active process, which intensifies a behavior or intentional effort aimed to an objective or goal and depends on the interaction of personal and environmental factors. One approach to motivation is Self-determination theory. The measurement of motivation in sport and exercise can support the elaboration of public policies to promote health, prevent sedentarism and diminish the number of overweight people.
The goal of this research was to evaluate the motives for participation in sport and physical activity practice in the Brazilian context. We adapted the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS; Morris & Rogers, 2004) and tested its reliability and validity, also examining socio-demographic predictors of motives for participation in and adherence to physical activities and sports related to life satisfaction. Participants were 640 individuals (50.8% male, 49.8% female), aged 16 to 73 (M=27.9; SD=9.91) from various Brazilian cities who did regular physical activities and sports in the previous six months.
Besides PALMS, sociodemographic forms were administered, along with a life satisfaction survey. Analysis showed main components of factorial analysis of PALMS. A KMO=0.87, Bartlett sphericity test was significant [X2(780)=11465.317, p<0.001] showing proper factorial analysis.
Seven factors were extracted, explaining 55.9% of the total variance. To examine the 8-factor solution from the original scale, an analysis was performed to force the extraction of 8 factors, explaining 60.4% of total variance. Cronbach’s Alpha, in most of the factors, proved to be satisfactory (between α=0.77 and 0.86).
We concluded that the instrument showed 149Symposia Wednesday July 12th good indices of construct validity and internal consistency. Socio-demographic and life satisfaction correlates of PALMS motives will be reported. Keywords: motivation, adherence, physical activity, sport, psychometric parameters Exercise motivation: the role of individual characteristics and social physique anxiety Maria Psychountaki, Nektarios Stavrou, Forteini Zervou (National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece), Selina Khoo (Sports Centre, University of Malaya, Malaysia), Tony Morris (Victoria University Melbourne) Motivation is a crucial factor for exercise participation.
Research shows that exercise participation has a positive effect on physical and psychological health. We examined the link between exercise participation, participants’ gender, BMI, marital status, and social physique anxiety. We surveyed 412 (female=275 male=137) adult exercise volunteers, mean age=32.68, SD=11.28.
Exercise participants completed a demographic form, the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS), and the Social Physique Anxiety Scale. MANOVA results showed significant gender differences in PALMS factors (F(1,410)=17.079, p<.001, η2p=.26). Males’ indicated higher competition/ego motivation, whereas females were higher on appearance, others’ expectations, psychological condition, and enjoyment than men.
Regarding BMI, results did not show significant PALMS differences among underweight, normal, and overweight individuals (single, married, divorced). MANOVA analysis of marital status indicated significant differences in exercise motives (F(2,409)=3.715, p<.001, η2p=.071). Post hoc analysis of PALMS factors revealed significant differences for competition/ego, others’ expectations, and affiliation, indicating that divorced participants were more highly motivated to participate in physical activity.
Significant positive correlations arose between social physique anxiety and exercise motives, specifically for appearance, others’ expectations, mastery, and enjoyment motives. Findings suggest that motives for participation in physical activity differ based on adult participants’ gender and marital status, but not for BMI. Individuals’ subjective evaluation of physical appearance may be a key motivator for participating in exercise programs.
Social physique anxiety may be an important indicator of physical activity in relation to appearance, mastery, enjoyment, and others’ expectations. Results provide fruitful information to increase physical activity participation. Keywords: exercise motivation, social physique anxiety, BMI, individual characteristics The increasing motivation for physical activity (IMPAct) project: Theory development and intervention strategies Chair: Taru Lintunen (University of Jyväskylä, Finland) There is good evidence supporting the health benefits of increasing physical activity (PA).
Behavioural scientific and psychological theories may play an important role in promoting PA. The assumption of these theories is that psychological factors such as attitudes and beliefs are related to individuals’ behavior, often through a number of processes (e.g., direct or indirect effects through other factors). In the current symposium we present influential motivational frameworks for explaining PA and theory-based interventions that systematically target the motivational factors from the theories to change PA.
In the first study, a recent meta- analysis of research adopting the reasoned action approach on health behaviour including PA is extended by including additional studies and examining the critical effect of past behaviour on PA. Results will also provide formative evidence for the development of behaviour change interventions to promote PA. The second study introduces the development and validation of assessment tool to capture the effects of social influence perceived by young sport participants.
The three intervention studies adopt multiple motivational theories (the theory of planned behaviour, the stages of change framework, self-determination theory, and achievement goal theory) as a basis for interventions that promote participation in PA in various populations. Presenters are members and collaborators of the Increasing Motivation for Physical Activity (IMPAct) project, which aims to promote PA behavior change using motivational theories. 150Symposia Wednesday July 12th Keywords: motivation, interventions, determinants of exercise A motivational physical activity intervention in a residential psychiatric institution Marit Sørensen, Marte Bentzen (The Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, Oslo, Norway) Recent reviews demonstrate a lack of theory based physical activity interventions that systematically target and evaluate motivation as an outcome among populations with psychiatric illness.
This in spite of reports that such populations are often physically inactive, not very motivated for physical activity, and have increased co-morbidity and mortality that physical activity may counteract. This presentation will describe the development and implementation of an intervention consisting of coaching physical activity instructors who then carry out a physical activity intervention program for residents in a psychiatric institution. The coaching was based on the stages of change framework and self-determination theory.
The study was a time series design with multiple measurements during baseline and intervention. Two physical activity sessions were held each week of the intervention period that lasted for 8 weeks. Results on motivational variables, physical activity and general function are presented for those patients that completed the whole intervention.
Keywords: psychiatric patients, motivation intervention, physical activity Meta-analysis and path analysis of the reasoned action approach to understand pa and health behaviour: The effect of past behaviour Juho Polet (University of Jyväskylä, Finland), Martin S. Hagger (University of Jyväskylä, Finland and Curtin University, Australia), Taru Lintunen (University of Jyväskylä, Finland) There is good evidence supporting the health benefits of increasing physical activity (PA). An influential framework for explaining PA is the Reasoned Action Approach (RAA).
According to the RAA attitudes, norms, and capacity and autonomy beliefs explain prospective behaviour mediated by individual’s behavioural intention. We extend a recent meta-analysis of McEachan & al. (2016) by including additional studies and conducting a path analysis to examine the pattern of effects among RAA constructs, particular the critical effect of past behaviour in PA and other health behaviours.
Results will also provide formative evidence for the development of behaviour change interventions to promote PA. A path analytic model based on the meta- analysis fit the data well. We found a medium-sized effect of intention on prospective behaviour (β = 0.387).
Intention was predicted by capacity (β = 0.411) and affective attitude (β = 0.263). Adding past behaviour to model to predict all the proposed RAA constructs improved model fit. Past behaviour explained prospective behaviour (β = 0.375) and intention (β = 0.324), and its inclusion in the model reduced the effect of intention on prospective behaviour (β = 0.179).
Capacity (β = 0.367) and affective attitude (β = 0.213) remained predictors of intention when past behaviour was included. Past behaviour predicted affective attitude, instrumental attitude, descriptive norm and capacity (βs > 0.300), whereas past behaviour was a weak predictor of injunctive norm and autonomy (βs < 0.250). Results indicate that past behaviour is a predictor of prospective behaviour and including it in RAA theory diminishes the strength of the effect of intention on prospective behaviour.
This finding reduces the effectiveness of RAA in accounting for variance in intention. Results suggest that past behaviour should be taken into account when predicting health and PA behaviour using the RAA. Keywords: reasoned action approach, meta-analysis, path analysis, physical activity, intention, past behaviour Motivation for sustained behaviour change: the case within EuroFIT Glyn C.
Roberts, Marit Sørensen, Eivind Anderson, Øystein Røynesdal (Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, Oslo, Norway, and The EuroFIT Consortium) 151Symposia Wednesday July 12th EuroFIT involves 4 countries in Europe (Norway, England, Portugal and The Netherlands) and the consortium members developed an intervention including motivational strategies for sustained behaviour change for at-risk football fans. Both Self-Determination Theory (SDT) and Achievement Goal Theory (AGT) are integral components of the core intervention and measurement protocol. Specifically, the program is designed to help men develop autonomous and SMART goals, build self-referenced competencies through challenging physical activity and dietary changes, a mastery-oriented coaching climate, and strengthen relatedness with fellow fans.
The materials and activities help participants to embed the new behaviours into their everyday life to sustain the changes. Once the intervention was completed, we initiated a process evaluation with participants (focus group interviews), coaches and stakeholders. About 1200 middle-aged at-risk men (BMI<27) participated in the 12-week behavior change program delivered at their local professional football club.
Club coaches delivered the EuroFIT intervention. The men are encouraged to engage in behaviours that personally fit into their lifestyle. For the present study, we used part of the process evaluation interviews in Norway.
We were interested in whether the participants felt empowered by the motivation strategies we had built into the EuroFIT programme. Using a structured thematic analysis to interpret the data, the results presented here represent text samples derived from all three Norwegian clubs. The process evaluation gave evidence of the success of EuroFIT.
However, the data was drawn right after the programme finished. The real test of EuroFIT strategies to enhance sustained behaviour change will be in the 12 month follow up of the participants (March 2017 in Norway). Keywords: sustained behaviour change, motivation strategies, achievement goal theory, self-determination theory, EuroFIT School-based intervention programs in promoting leisure-time physical activity: Applying the theory of planned behaviour Sviatlana Kamarova, Nikos Chatzisarantis (Curtin University, Australia), Masato Kawabata, John Wang (National Institute of Education, Singapore), Martin S.
Hagger (University of Jyväskylä and Curtin University, Australia) Developed applying ideas of the theory of planned behaviour, the current research examined whether school-based intervention programs to change attitudes, perceptions of control, or both attitudes and perceptions of control in combination, were successful in promoting participation in leisure-time physical activities. The sample was comprised from 1372 pupils recruited from 10 secondary schools. The participants reportedly exercised for less than 3 days per week in the previous month.
Using a cluster-randomized design, participants were presented with one of the intervention conditions each lasting 10 minutes delivered as part of physical education classes twice per week over a period of 8 weeks. The interventions included: (i) an attitude-based intervention that targeted salient behavioural beliefs; (ii) an attitude-based intervention that targeted non-salient behavioural beliefs; (iii) a control-based intervention program that targeted salient control beliefs; and (iv) a combined intervention program that targeted both salient control beliefs and salient behavioural beliefs. Results indicated that while all of the intervention programs resulted in increased participation in leisure time physical activity, the combined intervention program targeting change in attitudes and perceptions of control was least effective.
Overall, the findings suggest that schools and teachers can promote leisure time physical activity through brief, cost-effective interventions. Keywords: additive effects, behaviour change, physical activity, theory of planned behaviour 152Symposia Wednesday July 12th Significant others’ positive reinforcement, punishment, and dysfunction behaviours in youth sport Derwin King Chung Chan (University of Hong Kong and Curtin University, Australia), Richard Keegan (University of Canberra, Australia), Chris Lonsdale (Australian Catholic University, Australia) Significant others, such as coaches, parents, teammates/friends, and PE teachers, are important to children and adolescence’s participation in sport. Research have been interested in exploring their social interaction and relationship quality with young sport players in sport, and what leads to an adaptive social environment that encourages adaptive sporting experience.
We present two studies that respectively introduce the development and validation of assessment tools (i.e., Perceived Social Influence in Sport Scale; PSISS) to capture the young sport participants’ perception of social influence from significant others. Study 1 was the initial development and validation of the first version of PSISS that measured positive reinforcement (i.e., praise or reward for achievement) and punishment (i.e., punishment for mistakes) of significant others among 433 young swimmers (Aged 9 to 12). Using qualitative data, expert panel review, and factor analysis among 355 young sport players (Aged 8 to 18), Study 2 revised the PSISS-1 and developed PSISS-2 that refined the items and introduced two more dimensions of perceived social influence that reflected the unconditional responses given by significant others, including affiliation (i.e., respect, affection, supportiveness, understanding) and dysfunction (e.g., conflicts, causing negative emotions, lack of respect, negative behaviours).
The score reliability and factor structure supported the hypothesized framework of perceived social influence, and the dimensions of PSISS-1 and PSISS-2 explained considerable variance of enjoyment, effort, competence, and trait anxiety among young sport players. In summary, Perceived Social in Sport Scale may help identify the specific types of social influence and the social agents that are important and adaptive to youth’s sporting experience. Keywords: coaching, parenting, friendship, role of significant others, youth sport, social influences Incidental physical activity in aging: A perspective from neuroscience Chair: Javier Sanchez-Lopez (Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of Verona) High levels of physical activity seem to positively affect health and cognition across the life span.
Nevertheless, the effects of Incidental Physical Activity (IPA) on health and cognition during aging have been little studied. The main topics in the study of the effects of IPA in elderly, comparing groups of healthy older participants with high (H-IPA) vs. low (L-IPA) levels of IPA are: a) the systemic effects on health and behavior, and b) the effects on brain functions during resting state and cognition, as executive functions and language.
Among the systemic effects, we observed differences in anthropometric characteristics, amount of oxygen in the blood and performance variables of the WAIS scores, suggesting advantages in H-IPA groups. Regarding to the effects on brain function at rest, it was observed slower baseline EEG activity involving frontal and temporal regions in the L-IPA, which suggest better brain adaptations in H-IPA. Brain functional advantages in H-IPA were also corroborated during cognitive tasks performance and event-related potentials recordings.
In the study of executive functions, better inhibition and frontal distribution of the brain electrical activity was observed in H-IPA during the Stroop task, and differences in the topography of the brain electrical activity of the H-IPA and the L-IPA during a working memory task. These results suggest that high levels of IPA produce positive effects on inhibition and a functional reorganization of brain activity during working memory. A less studied topic in relation to physical activity is the language.
However, our recent study about reading comprehension has reported better and faster identification of syntactic errors in H-IPA, which is a more similar pattern to that observed in young participants. The relevance of these findings lies in unraveling the importance of IPA as an active lifestyle in aging. 153Symposia Wednesday July 12th *Supported by IN225414 and IN200817 from PAPIIT-DGAPA.
Keywords: incidental physical activity, aging, cognition, health, brain electrophysiology Effects of incidental physical activity in aging on language processing Graciela C. Alatorre-Cruz (Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) During aging, older adults have difficulties in sentences comprehension. Structured physical activity has been related to improvements in cognitive processing; however, no effect on language has been yet reported.
The aim of this study was to evaluate how incidental physical activity (IPA) affects language processing on healthy older adults with high (H-IPA) vs. low (L-IPA) levels of IPA. Event-related potentials were recorded during two tasks: semantic priming (implicit memory) and language comprehension (low and high working memory load, and gender agreement between noun and adjective ).
20 H-IPA and 20 L-IPA older adults were compared using semantic priming task, while for the language comprehension task 34 H-IPA and 34 L-IPA were assessed. There were no differences between groups in semantic priming task. But, differences were found in the language comprehension task, H-IPA group had a better performance than L-IPA group in all conditions.
Electrophysiological results suggest that both groups use different strategies: H-IPA group directly identifies disagreement conditions, while L-IPA needed a syntactic re-analysis to solve the task. These findings suggest that IPA affects language comprehension in older adults, regardless of working memory required for its processing. The strategy used by H-IPA group is more similar to that of youngsters than L-IPA group; hence, IPA could be a protective agent of language comprehension in aging.
*Supported by IN225414 and IN200817 from PAPIIT-DGAPA. Keywords: incidental physical activity, language comprehension, semantic processing, aging, event-related potentials Effects of incidental physical activity on cognitive performance and physiological indices of healthy elderly Mauricio González-López (Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) It has been reported that physical activity has a beneficial effect on health and cognition across the lifespan and may even prevent cognitive decline in older adults. However, most studies have looked into the effects of structured physical activity, whereas incidental physical activity (IPA) has not been thoroughly studied.
Therefore, the aim of the present study was to assess the effects of IPA on cognitive functions and systemic physiological indices in healthy elderly. Volunteers underwent a series of psychometric and neuropsychological tests, as well as blood analyses and only those within the normal range of values were included, giving a total sample of 98 participants. Two groups were established, namely, those with high levels of IPA (n=49) and those with low levels of IPA (n=49).
There were no important differences neither in terms of socioeconomic status, life satisfaction, cognitive reserve and general cognitive status; nor lipid and thyroid profiles between the groups. However, we observed an effect of the group on the mean corpuscular hemoglobin indices (higher in participants with high level of IPA) and body mass index (higher in the group with low level of IPA). The neuropsychological assessments revealed significant differences in the performance variables of the WAIS-III-R scores, where the group with high levels of IPA showed higher scores than participants with low levels of IPA.
These results suggest that IPA may provide benefits across the lifespan and the mechanisms, both physiological and cognitive, may be similar to those proposed among the structured physical activity literature. *Supported by IN225414 and IN200817 from PAPIIT-DGAPA. 154Symposia Wednesday July 12th Keywords: incidental physical activity, elderly, cognition, physiology Effects of incidental physical activity on inhibition and working memory in aging Juan Silva-Pereyra (Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) During normal aging, incidental physical activity (IPA) becomes almost the only form of movement in daily life that promises caloric consumption.
However, the effects of IPA on general and mental health in aging have not been deeply studied. In the present study, we investigated the behavioral and brain effects of IPA on working memory and inhibition in older healthy participants. Two groups of older healthy volunteers with high (H-IPA) and low levels of IPA (L-IPA) performed two different task: a Stroop task in order to asses inhibition, and a working memory task (WM), while event-related potential (ERPs) were recorded.
Groups were compared in terms of their reaction times, accuracy and ERPs during both tasks. During the Stroop task, H-IPA showed slightly better inhibition than L-IPA group when interference occurred. Brain electrical response associated with inhibition was characterized by a greater frontal distribution of the effect on H-IPA and posterior distribution in L-IPA.
No significant differences between groups were observed during the WM task, but differences in the ERP topographical distribution were found at the stage of memory processing where the probe stimulus is identified to be stored in the memory and then make a decision. In conclusion, our results suggest that IPA likely produces brain adaptations than protect or enhance inhibition and working memory processes in aging. These beneficial effects on executive functions in older adults are similar to those found during the practice of structured physical activity.
*Supported by IN225414 and IN200817 from PAPIIT-DGAPA. Keywords: incidental physical activity, inhibition, working memory, aging, event-related potentials Electroencephalographic differences between physically active and passive elderly subjects Thalía Fernández Harmony (Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) Under the assumption that electroencephalographic abnormalities in baseline electroencephalogram (EEG) could be responsible for behavioral or cognitive alterations, and that physical activity improves cognitive performance in elderly subjects, we hypothesized that elderly subjects with more incidental physical activity (IPA) will show lower EEG power in slow frequency bands and higher EEG power in fast frequency bands. Based on Yale Physical Activity Survey (YPAS) applied to 98 elderly subjects, a Cluster Analysis was performed to obtain two groups: high (H-IPA) and low (L-IPA) levels of IPA.
EEG was recorded in the 10-20 system during rest with eyes closed. The EEG spectra was calculated in each lead, and absolute power with geometric power correction was obtained for each frequency band: delta (1.5-3.8 Hz), theta (3.9-7.5 Hz), alpha (7.6-12.5 Hz) and beta (12.6-19.9 Hz); Z values were obtained comparing raw values with normative database values. A multivariate permutation analysis was conducted to look for differences between the Physically Active and Physically Passive groups in EEG absolute power.
H-IPA group showed significantly (p<0.05) higher EEG alpha power and lower delta power in frontotemporal leads, mainly in the left hemisphere; increased theta powers in left temporal and right frontal regions were also observed in the L-IPA group. As we hypothesized, subjects with more incidental physical activity presented faster EEG activity. More alpha activity in anterior leads could be a sign of functional compensation to perform cognitive processes.
Incidental physical activity seems to promote changes in EEG compatible with improvement of cognitive performance, which probably reduces the risk of future cognitive decline. To our knowledge, this is the first report that relates incidental physical activity and quantitative EEG in this population. *Supported by IN225414 and IN200817 from PAPIIT-DGAPA.
Keywords: incidental physical activity, qEEG, aging, cognition 155Symposia Thursday July 13th Thursday July 13th Symposia Session 5. (8-9.30) Documenting athletes’ activity by articulating phenomenological data and third- person descriptions: A new avenue of research in sport psychology? Chair: Denis Hauw (UNI Lausanne, CH) Since Varela’s publications (e.g., Varela, 1996; Varela & Shear, 1999), a real interest in conceiving a circulation between first and third-person levels for data collection and analysis emerged in the cognitive sciences.
In sport psychology, some attempts were observed by joining analyses of experience and biomechanical data (e.g., Hauw & al., 2016; Sève, & et al., 2011). This kind of approach offers new perspectives for understanding the relationship between what emerged at the conscious level of athletes’ activity in relation to their body and environment. Conversely, it also makes possible to understand how the mental processes linked to the athletes’ experience can impact biological organization of human performance.
However, the epistemological and methodological implications of the combination of these different levels of analysis remain unclear and the consequences for applied sport psychology are not well known. Therefore, the aim of this symposium is to discuss the inherent issues of such approach and then, to identify impacts for research and practice in sport psychology. To do that, four studies in different sports using different measuring tools articulated in their research designs third-person descriptions to athletes’ accounts at the first-person level.
The first presentation shows how trail-runners’ experience over an ultra trail-running race is phenomenologically shaped and how it can be linked with running speeds. The second presentation highlights how the use of carrying systems in trail running is documented by the interplay of phenomenological experience and the vertical oscillations of both runners and carrying systems. The third presentation explores how the progressive way to surpassing the personal limits can be analyzed at the levels of crossfit athletes’ experience and at their cardiac activity.
Finally the fourth presentation introduces a protocol that combines EEG data with the phenomenological data in gymnastics. Keywords: first person approach, third person approach, dynamics, enaction, activity A neurophenomenological approach to sport performance sport: Associating phenomenological analysis of representative sports tasks in ecological settings with patterns of neural activity using EEG devices Joana Osorio, Denis Hauw, Vincent Hagin (UNI Lausanne, CH), Ricardo Chavarriaga (Defitech Chair in Brain- Computer Interface, Center for neuroprosthetics, EPFL Lausanne, CH), Enrico Staderini (HEIGVD, Yverdon, CH), Jose Milan (Defitech Chair in Brain-Computer Interface, Center for neuroprosthetics, EPFL Lausanne, CH) Recent situated and dynamic approaches to sport performance show that athletes’ activity at the phenomenological level is organized as a function of their interaction with the environment, and that experts and novice athletes differ in their modes of involvement with a situation (e. g., Hauw et al., 2016; Hauw & Durand, 2007, 2008).
Congruently, different patterns of neural activity are observed when sports tasks are analyzed in ecological settings as opposed to simple lab tasks (Park et al., 2005). A combination between neurological and phenomenological analyses provides an opportunity to bridge the gap between subjective experience and neural dynamics, providing a richer picture of how the human being interacts with the world (Petitmengin, Navarro, & Le Van Quyen, 2007). The aim of this study is to combine first (phenomenological) 156Symposia Thursday July 13th and third (neurological) person approaches in the analysis of sport performances.
Four participants with different levels of expertise volunteered to take part in this study. The main task consisted in performing a standing split on the floor on one leg. Data was collected through (a) video tapes of the athletes’ behaviour while performing the sporting task, (b) video-recorded and transcribed self-confrontation interviews, and (c) 64-electrode EEG during the task.
Qualitative analyses were performed using the course-of-action method to identify elementary units of meaning and their components (involvement, focus and general feelings). Results showed that each participant typically organized their activity around three or more sequences, with differences across expertise levels. Preliminary EEG results show the possibility of extracting neural activity correlated to the preparation of movements (Bereitschaftspotential) and we are currently assessing differences in these correlates depending on the participant’s level of expertise.
This study is a promising entry point to provide advances in learning and optimisation of sports performance. Keywords: neurophenomenology, first and third person approaches, enaction, EEG, “being and acting”, Consciousness Analyzing ultra-trail runners’ activity by associating phenomenological data and speed indicators Nadège Rochat, Denis Hauw, Vincent Gesbert, Tiffany Astolfi, Roberta Antonini Philippe (UNI Lausanne, CH.) Ultra-trail running is an outdoor endurance sport covering long distances requiring resources to adapt to environmental constraints, extreme fatigue or other physical issues. Previous studies provided physiological observations about neuromuscular damages or sleep deprivation effects (e.g., Hurdiel et al., 2014) and other ones explored runners’ experience using phenomelogical accounts (e.g., Simpson et al.
2014). However, it is unclear how runners’ experience that unfolds during a race can be documented by their speed and vice versa. In an enactive and phenomelogical framework, the aims of this study were to analyze ultra-trail runners’ activity by analyzing (1) the temporal emergence of their experience and (2) their elevation speeds.
Phenomenological data were collected from self-confrontation interviews with ten runners of the “Tor des Géants” (330km), who volunteered to run with a Physilog® sensor. The data were coded using the course of action methodology, by identifying the elementary units of meaning (EUM) and their components and then grouped together by sequential links forming macrosequences. Macrosequences were ranked in phenomenological gestalts, which are forms of experience that synthesize heterogeneous sensorimotor information.
Results showed three typical phenomenological gestalts (a) “Controlling global ease”, (b) “Enduring general fatigue and experimenting difficult situations” and (c) “Feeling the possibility to free pace”. Their temporal succession enabled to characterize typical runners (i.e., “careful runners”, “opportunist runners”, “unstable runners” and “struggling runners”), whose psychological activity was evidenced by changes of their running speeds. Our analysis highlighted methodological considerations for combining first and third- person descriptions.
As practical recommendation, runners should try to maintain their global ease to increase their chances to finish an ultra-trail race. Keywords: experience, enaction, speed, ultra-trail running, phenomenology, third-person descriptions Behavioural dynamics in trail running: interaction between individual and equipment Ludovic Seifert (Uni Rouen, FRA), Nadège Rochat, Denis Hauw (Uni Lausanne, CH) Research in the field of motor control following the Ecological Dynamics framework has emphasised continuous organism-environment interactions through the circular coupling between perception and action, as the relevant scale of analysis for understanding human behaviours in performance environments. Ecological Dynamics theory focuses on how coordination patterns emerge, adapt, persist, and change in humans when they interact with various constraints in order to satisfy task-goals.
In this talk, it is exemplified by studying the 157Symposia Thursday July 13th adaptive coordination between athletes and their equipment (e.g., backpack) during trail running in order to analyze how they perceived the tightness of the backpack on their backs, and thus adapted their hip vertical acceleration in order to run efficiently (i.e., best compromise between running speed and comfort relating to the backpack oscillation). For that, the vertical accelerations (in the Earth reference) of the hip and the backpack were collected and computed by using two inertial measurement units for nine experienced trail runners. From there, the vector coding technique was used from the hip acceleration - backpack acceleration plots and the local correlation was computed to assess the cycle-to-cycle coupling between the vertical acceleration of the hip and the backpack.
Additionally, we have interviewed the athletes right after running in order to explore how they perceived the task constraint (i.e., tightness of the backpack on the back). The interplay of such phenomenological and behavioral data helped to interpret the perception-action coupling relating to the hip-backpack coupling time-series during running. Our results showed that the level of backpack tightness impacted on the coupling between the hip and backpack vertical acceleration and helped to interpret the relation between comfort and performance.
Manufacturers should considered source of discomfort in cognitive design. Keywords: ecological dynamics, adaptive coordination, phenomenological and behavioral data, running Pushing beyond the limits in sport: linking phenomenological and cardiac data Tiffany Astolfi, Denis Hauw (UNI Lausanne) Performance achievement often required to push beyond personal limits and suggested the need to use coping strategies. Coping reduces the impact of the constraints when athletes experienced attaining their limits.
However, these limits are not well-known by athletes and surpassing them requires an exploratory activity. To analyze this phenomenon, we studied 10 crossfit athletes’ activity when performing their WOD (i.e., Work of the day). Cardiac activity during the WOD and phenomenological data elicited through selfconfrontation interviews were collected.
Phenomenological data were coded with the course of action methodology (e.g., Hauw & Durand, 2007), ranked in relation to the adaptation to the effort during the WOD and linked to their cardiac data (i.e., mean and SD). Results showed three profiles of crossfit athletes’ activity: (a) the « economical athletes » who paced at a low or medium intensity and only increased their pace at the end of the WOD, (b) the « competitive athletes » who kept their pace at a high but controlled level to finish their WOD incapable to increase their pace at any moment, and (c) the « resistant athletes » who despite suddenly feeling high level of pain, exhaustion, nausea or loss of awareness, tried to maintain their activity without modifying it, expecting they would feel better shortly. Differences between athletes’ cardiac activity were only observed when comparing « resistant athletes» to the two others.
These results were comparable to those observed in ultra trail running (e.g., Hauw et al., 2016) and showed that cardiac activity is a good indicator to distinguish controlled pace and uncontrolled experience in relation to personal limits in energetic sport. Such results provide evidences that could help coaches and sport psychologists to understand the real situation in which the athletes perform that help them to monitor the access to their limits. Keywords: coping, limits, cardiac and phenomenological activity, crossfit Values Symposium 1: Frontiers and futures for the value theory paradigm in sport psychology Chair: Jean Whitehead (University of Brighton, Eastbourne, UK) This symposium explores what we know (frontiers) and need to know (futures) about the role of values in sport and PE.
Values are enduring beliefs about what is desirable. They transcend situations and guide decisions and actions. The Schwartz (1992) value theory has been relatively neglected in sport, but provides an 158Symposia Thursday July 13th explanatory mechanism for the unethical sport behaviour which is a growing cause for concern.
Hierarchical value systems identify the relative importance of specific values which govern behaviour, while a circumplex value structure shows which values conflict. Together they indicate conflict situations, and the values to promote for behaviour change. Whitehead’s paper overviews the study of value systems and value structure in the UK.
It uses an interactionist model to summarise previous findings and identify gaps for future research. Aplin’s pedagogical paper explains the application of the Schwartz circumplex model as a tool to provide guidelines to enhance moral standards in teacher education. It demonstrates the model’s merit in identifying and resolving value conflicts which arise when students are required to teach physical education in an inclusive manner and also coach competitive sport teams.
An empirical paper by Balaguer’s team shows differences among adolescent female European footballers, basketballers, and non-participants, in 6 basic values of Schwartz (1992): achievement, hedonism, stimulation, self-direction, benevolence, and conformity. Values on different Schwartz axes predicted measures of perfectionism (self-enhancement values) and personal development and well-being (conservation values). A conceptual paper by Chambers & Sandford, explores the role of values in a digital age, and explains the need to develop and apply a notion of both digital literacy and value literacy in physical education, to translate and transfer appropriate values for different cultural contexts, both virtual and real.
Future directions will be discussed. Keywords: values, value systems, value structure, values based education, physical education, identity The application of value theory as a new paradigm in sport psychology Jean Whitehead (University of Brighton. Eastbourne, UK) Values are enduring personal beliefs about what is desirable.
They transcend situations, guide decisions and actions, and over time they form hierarchical value systems showing their relative importance to individuals. Drawing on work by Rokeach (1973) on value systems and Schwartz (1992) on value structure Martin Lee undertook a series of studies over two decades to apply the value theory paradigm to youth sport in the UK. This paper adopts an interactionist model (Lee & Cook, 1995; Whitehead, Telfer & Lambert, 2013) to outline research development in this new field.
Within the box representing Individual variables, a test of the value expressive theory of attitudes in youth sport showed that moral, competence and status values predicted prosocial attitudes (commitment to sport, respect for sport conventions) and antisocial attitudes (cheating, gamesmanship). A path model demonstrated that this relationship was mediated by task and ego orientation, and a further study showed that values also predicted self-determination variables. Interactions between Individual and Environmental variables showed that personal value systems (of school pupils) related to the values of significant others (PE teachers) and differed with type of school.
Field studies explored how the values of a Football4Peace programme and its coaches create a motivational climate to influence both personal value systems and behavioural consequences. Swimming data showed Consequences arising from both Individual and Environmental variables. The Schwartz (1992) circumplex value structure shows inherent neutral, conflicting, and compatible relationships among values based on their motivational content.
This underpins effective intervention for value change in conflict situations, e.g. there is conflict between playing fairly and winning at all costs, but personal improvement is compatible with playing fairly and may be substituted for a focus on winning. Discussion will include other scenarios.
Keywords: values, attitudes, goal orientations, significant others, motivational climate, value conflict The Schwartz values model: A pedagogical tool in the National Institute of Education Singapore Nick Aplin (National Institute of Education, Singapore) 159Symposia Thursday July 13th Faculty members of the Physical Education and Sports Science Academic Group at the National Institute of Education Singapore (NIE) are responsible for foundation courses in Physical Education Teacher Education (PETE). The Schwartz Values Model (1992) has been used in such modules, in conjunction with sociological instruments that portray organised sport (e.g. Ingham, 1979).
This paper demonstrates how this combination of theoretical constructs has been used to introduce tertiary level students to both cognitive and practical aspects of the study of PE and sport. These models reflect the educational and cultural context that prevails in Singapore. Concepts of hegemony underpin all aspects of life in Singapore, a meritocratic society, where a balance is sought between high moral standards and intense personal endeavour leading to enhanced status.
The espoused values relating to education as a whole are generated and driven by the Ministry of Education (MOE). There is a strong emphasis on character development and 21st century citizenship competencies. The core values are stated explicitly: respect, responsibility, integrity, care, resilience and harmony.
There are three main focal points in this paper. The first two relate to providing value guidelines for trainee teachers. An important implication is understanding the presence of conflict and conflict resolution for a teacher, who is expected to teach PE in an inclusive and enjoyable way, but also to coach competitive games and sports.
The third focal point relates to conceptualising the culture of sport itself and the values that have evolved locally and universally. This paper also explores the use of the Schwartz model as a practical tool for PE trainees when teaching games. It is assumed that all ten value types represent significant reference points for teachers.
Keywords: values, Schwartz values model, pedagogy, physical education, conflict resolution, Singapore A study of values with athletes and non athletes Isabel Balaguer, Isabel Castillo, Mª Ángeles Atienzar (Faculty of Psychology, University of Valencia, Spain), Joan Duda (School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK) In recent decades, increased attention in the study of well-being and its antecedents and correlates has been observed. Sagiv and Schwartz (2000) proposed that pursuing values should promote well being and pursuing deficiency values should undermine well-being. The objective is twofold: First to explore the differences in values among adolescent female Spanish footballers, basketballers, and non-athletes, in the 10 basic values defined by Schwartz (1992): power, achievement, hedonism, stimulation, self-direction, universalism, benevolence, tradition, conformity and security; and in the Values at opposing poles of 2 second order dimensions (Conservation, Self-transcendence, Openness to change, and Self-enhancement).
Second, to analyse the relationships between Values on the 2 Schwartz axes, and youth development (personal and interpersonal), personality (perfectionism) and well-being (subjective vitality and self-esteem) variables. 695 female adolescents (M=14.85+1.58 years), comprising 247 footballers, 217 basketballers, and 231 non-athletes, completed a questionnaire package. For the first objective MANOVA shows differences among footballers, basketballers, and non-participants, in 6 basic values: achievement, hedonism, stimulation, self-direction, benevolence, and conformity.
In general football players reported higher values than basketballers and non- athletes. In the second order dimensions, football players presented higher values in Openness to change and in Self-enhancement than basketball players and non-athletes. For the second objective, the 4 Values at the poles of the Schwartz axes, Conservation was the best positive predictor of the majority of variables studied (personal and interpersonal development, subjective vitality and self-esteem), in both athletes and non- athletes.
In contrast, Self-enhancement was a positive predictor of both dimensions of perfectionism (SOP and SPP) in athletes, and also of SOP in non-athletes. We will interpret results. Keywords: values, athletes, non-athletes, youth development, personality, well-being 160Symposia Thursday July 13th Lost in translation?
Proposing a model of values literacy for physical education Fiona Chambers (University College, Cork, Ireland), Rachel Sandford (Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK) There has been a proliferation of international interest in values-based education (VBE) in recent times and the field of physical education has been identified as a pertinent context through which values such as citizenship, character and life-skills can be taught (McCuaig et al., 2015, Luttrell & Chambers, 2013). Indeed, Spracklen (2015) argues that the geography of PE renders it a key space for meaning-making and identity construction. Others note that the contemporary negotiation/performance of identity is inherently linked to ‘lived spaces’ and the values embedded within these (Hopkins, 2010).
However, the increasingly complex geographies of young people are played out in both real and virtual space (Blundell, 2016) and there are challenges inherent in navigating ‘borderland’ areas where competing ideals/norms can abound (Sandford, in press). There are implications here for VBE, particularly with regard to the transfer and enactment of values across contexts. It is argued that as 'digital natives' (Prensky, 2001), contemporary youth do not fully understand the use/impact of global technologies and these ‘wired generations’ may need assistance in navigating the digital landscape (OECD, 2015).
We contend that digital natives inhabit hybrid topographies which are both real and virtual and therefore need to be both digitally literate and values literate if they are to successfully navigate the landscape. Values literacy is understood to be the ability to read a situation (real or virtual), make a value judgment on it and then enact that value judgment. Within the paper, a new model of digital praxis in PE (with embedded values literacy) is presented to show how young people can be taught to both transfer and translate values, to ensure a better ‘fit’ with different contexts.
The new model harnesses the notion of digital technologies as social forces (Fioriani, 2015) within the education, management, transfer and translation of values. Keywords: values based education, physical education, space, identity Sport as a tool for positive youth development: The TPSR model Chair: Gloria Balague (University of Illinois at Chicago) The symposium will describe a model using sport and physical activity for positive youth development. Hellison’s (1978, 1985, 1995, 2003 )Teaching Personal and Social Responsibility model will be described, highlighting its principles, foundational values and daily structure.
The presentations will also focus on specific applications of the model in different environments and cultures, the United States, the Caribbean, Mexico and Spain. Examples using Physical Activity as well as Sport Initiation and Competitive Sport will be described. Finally, the very crucial aspect of training the trainers will be addressed and specific interventions and their impact will be presented.
Keywords: positive youth development, teaching personal and social responsibility model TPSR: A Model for Positive Youth Development using Sport and Physical Activity Gloria Balague (UIC) TPSR is a model developed by Don Hellison (1978, 1985, 1995, 2003) to work with at risk youth using sport as a medium for teaching personal and social responsibility. The ultimate goal is to develop young men and women who are self-reliant and who also care for their peers and community . Its main principles are : Empowering youth, respecting their voices, seeing their strengths, not only their shortcomings, and encouraging self-direction and responsibility.
TPSR has a structure and methods but it is essential to understand that it is mainly a value-based approach. The foundational values are: Putting Youth First, Emphasis 161Symposia Thursday July 13th on Relationships, Global Development, not just physical or technical. The presentation will describe the structure of TPSR, which is organized as a series of levels, and the daily format: Level I : Self-Control, respect for the rights and feelings of others; Level II : Effort towards the goals set; Level III : Self-Direction, setting personal goals, making decisions and taking responsibility for oneself; Level IV : Helping others, coaching others, working together; Level V : Transferring outside the field, including winning and losing with respect, acknowledging the community, using good judgement and self-control in other areas.
Sports activities may need to be modified so that the program’s main goal, developing personal and social responsibility is achieved. Examples will be presented in the symposium. The daily format of TPSR programs includes Relationship time: connecting individually with each participant.
Focus talk: reminder of the goals of the program, Physical Activity: the main portion of the program. The activity must be structured respecting the values of TPSR; Group meeting : to hear the voice of the youth, ask for evaluation; Self-reflection. Keywords: Positive Youth Development, Teaching Personal and Social Responsibility Impact of a TPSR coach education program on participants’ self-efficacy beliefs related to teaching personal and social skills Paul Wright, Lucia Cabrera, Steve Howell, Jenn Jacobs, Jim Ressler (Northern Illinois University) The Teaching Personal and Social Responsibility (TPSR) model has been embraced by teachers and coaches in physical education and sport programs and there has been a recent increase in the focus on best practices for teaching coaches to implement this model.
Qualitative and observational studies have assessed the process and perceptions of coach education as well as subsequent implementation. However, few reports have directly measured the impact of these education programs on coaches or connected it to their learning experiences during the program. The current study draws upon Bandura’s social learning theory to assess changes in self-efficacy beliefs related to teaching personal and social skills.
Mixed methods were used to evaluate the extent to which the participants’ learning experiences fostered changes in their self-efficacy beliefs. Participants were 30 (17 male; 13 female) adult teachers and coaches from Belize, a small Central American nation. They participated in a four-day education program delivered through the Belizean Youth Sport Coalition.
All participants completed a self-efficacy survey before and after the program. Six (3 male; 3 female) were purposefully selected to participate in the qualitative component of the study which included interviews and observations. Results indicate there was a statistically significant increase in participants’ self- efficacy beliefs from pre- to post-survey (p<.001).
Qualitative analysis indicated all four of Bandura’s self- efficacy sources (vicarious experiences, mastery experiences, social persuasion, and emotional states) were supported to varying degrees in the participants’ learning experience during the program. Findings contribute to the literature on best practices for teaching coaches to use the TPSR model. Future research should confirm the impact of TPSR coach education programs on participant self-efficacy with a larger sample and a comparison group.
Keywords: positive youth development, TPSR Implementation of the personal and social responsibility model to improve positive youth development during physical education classes Amparo Escarti, Maria Martinez (Universidad de Valencia), Federico Carreres (Universidad de Alicante) This study analyzes the application of personal and social responsibility (TPSR) model to primary and secondary school physical education classes during an academic year. The goal was to evaluate its relevance as a method of positive youth development. The participants were 495 primary and secondary students of ages between 8 and 16 (mean=11.97, standard deviation=2.116) and 10 physical education teachers.
The intervention group was 250 students between 8 and 16 years old (mean =12,13, standard deviation = 2,15) 162Symposia Thursday July 13th (108 females and 142 males). The comparison group were 245 between 8 and 16 years old (M = 11,80, SD = 2,06) (112 females and 133 males). The intervention group and the comparison group were 10 intact physical education classes, located in the same area of a large city in Spain.
The teachers were given an intensive 30- hour training course before the program was implemented. The Multidimensional Scales of Perceived Self- Efficacy, and the Contextual Self-Responsibility Questionnaire were administered to each of the participants before and after the program. The results show the teacher’s participation in the TPSR model to be a positive experience for both, the teacher and the students.
A significant increase was observed in social responsibility, self-efficacy, and prosocial behavior of intervention group participants. The practical implications of this study are discussed. Keywords: positive youth development, teaching Training sport youth coaches in the implementation of the tpsr model María Pilar Rodríguez, Andrea Partida Ochoa (ITESO, Jalisco, Mexico) Hellison’s teaching personal and social responsibility model (TPSR) has been used to implement programs aimed to increase youth’s repertoire of life skills and protect them from risk factors, teaching them to be responsible for themselves and with others.
The success of these programs is closely tied to the performance and investment of the coaches, but many of them lack the necessary training for sports education, and even more the knowledge needed to have a positive impact in the development of the young athletes This presentation will describe the intervention program implemented with coaches of 8 activities, such as tae kwon do, basketball, volleyball, tennis, soccer and animation in a sport initiation academy in a large city in Mexico. The goal of the intervention was to train coaches in the use of the TPSR model with their teams. The intervention had 5 phases:: 1) identification of the philosophy and values.
2) instruction sessions , 3) individual follow-up, 4) modeling of behaviors and 5) outcome evaluation. We use the TARE observation tool to assess behavioral change before and after the intervention. Results show an increase of 72% in behaviors related to personal and social responsibility after the intervention.
The biggest increase was observed in the area of social responsibility, with the factor “modeling respect” showing the biggest increase, while the “transfer” factor showed the smallest level of change. Instruction sessions and individual follow-up were the intervention aspects most valued by the coaches. Keywords: positive youth development, sports initiation, TPSR TPSR Incorporated to a highly competitive academy Cristina Fink (Philadelphia Union/YSC Academy) TPSR has been applied mainly to underserved youth and its main goal is the development of the whole person, not just the athlete.
Skill development is a goal, but not the primary one. It may appear as if the goals and structure of TPSR would not apply to competitive sport, where the goal is to perform at the highest level possible. For the past four years a highly competitive soccer program and high school located in the North East of the United States has incorporated TPSR both in the school and soccer curriculum.
This presentation will argue that the TPSR values of self-management, self-respect, respect of others, and its emphasis on effort, decision-making and goal setting actually result in outcomes that favor competitive sport, including the path to elite sport. Examples of these outcomes are that players coached in the TPSR model will have more personal goals and intrinsic motivation, be better able to make decisions, be better team members by respecting themselves and others and helping their teammates. Finally, they will also be likely to function better outside the field and adjust to the stress of elite level sport.
The presentation will describe some of the specific TPSR strategies that have been incorporated into the coaching and teaching system. A commitment from teachers and coaches to abide by the principles of respecting the players, empowering them to have a voice and 163Symposia Thursday July 13th emphasizing respect of others and the ability to work independently and put forward effort regardless of who is watching has been crucial for the program to work. Keywords: positive youth development, competitive sport, TPSR Promoting parenting expertise in youth sport: From evidencing needs to innovative intervention programmes Chair: Chris Harwood (Loughborough University) Research on sport parent characteristics and experiences has burgeoned over the last decade, yet there continues to be a limited understanding of the needs of parents in executing their roles and the ways that they appraise and manage the challenges that they face within youth sport (Harwood & Knight, 2015).
In addition, organisational interventions to help develop expertise in supporting their child-athlete and managing environmental demands remain under-reported. This symposium will present research to practice initiatives that bridge gaps in the aforementioned areas of knowledge. Firstly, Chris Harwood will present his work investigating the stress and coping process in youth sport parents, including empirical data on stress appraisal, emotions, coping strategies and their effectiveness.
Secondly, Rachael Newport will explore the support needs of parents in youth academy football. Following immersion in the club environment, she will illustrate how parental needs and requirements change and evolve as the child-athlete progresses along the academy journey. Thirdly, Camilla Knight will share an evaluation of the UK’s Child Protection in Sport Unit (CPSU) “Parents in Sport week”.
This initiative sought to highlight to National Governing Bodies the key roles of sport parents and ‘change the conversation’ regarding the nature of parental involvement. The evaluation highlights the value of helping sports organisations to engage more appropriately with parents as stakeholders. In drawing the symposium further towards a focus on practical interventions with parents, Sam Thrower will present the development, implementation, and evaluation of an online education programme designed to address the needs of tennis parents during the initial stage of their involvement.
Finally, Professor Nick Holt will serve as the symposium speaker, given his expertise as a youth sport scholar interested in the experiences of parents and their development in the context of competitive sport Keywords: parents, interventions, youth sport, coping “I cope by not watching him play!”: Investigating the stress and coping process of parents in competitive youth sport Chris Harwood (Loughborough University), Sam Thrower (Kingston University), Lucy Frearson (Loughborough University), Faye Didymus (Leeds Beckett University) Within the field of sport psychology, the stress and coping process experienced by athletes has been well documented (e.g., Didymus & Fletcher, 2012; Neil, Hanton, Mellalieu, & Fletcher, 2011). However, although research has started to explore the range of stressors sport parents’ experience (Harwood & Knight, 2009a; 2009b; Harwood, Drew & Knight, 2010), little is currently known about parents’ cognitive and emotional responses to these stressors or the coping strategies they employ to manage them. Therefore, informed by Lazarus’ transactional model of stress and coping (Lazarus, 1999; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), the current study investigated the full stress and coping process in parents of competitive tennis players.
Adopting a novel mixed methods design, 135 British tennis parents completed an online questionnaire to examine cognitive appraisal, emotions, and coping strategies associated with prominent self-disclosed stressors experienced in their sport parent role. Qualitative findings revealed a wide-range of organisational, competitive and developmental stressors. These stressors were most commonly appraised as a threat or challenge with anxiety and anger serving as the most frequently cited emotions.
Findings also highlighted how parents used a number of 164Symposia Thursday July 13th problem and emotion-focused coping strategies, varying both in degrees of reported effectiveness and in terms of their adaptive versus maladaptive orientation. Quantitative analyses revealed significant differences between various components of the stress process leading to novel insights into the interactions between stressors, appraisals, emotions and coping strategies. The contribution of these findings to the stress management literature will be discussed in the context of better understanding the strategic needs of parents,.
Applied implications will also be offered for practitioners in relation to the education and support that may be offered to parents. Keywords: stress, coping, parents, tennis, emotions An examination of parental needs in youth academy football Rachael Newport, Camilla Knight (Swansea University) In 2009, The Football Association introduced the Respect Code of Conduct for Spectators and Parents/carers in an attempt to encourage good parental behaviour within its system. Preliminary research into parents within professional academy football has documented the transitional and social challenges facing parents (Clarke & Harwood, 2015) and the range of stressors associated with competitive, organisational, and developmental factors in this setting (Harwood, Drew & Knight, 2010).
However, we have limited understanding of more precisely what support parents need across different age groups in academy football. Consequently, the purpose of this study was to explore the needs of academy football parents across the age- related phases of youth football. Drawing on the work of Thrower, Harwood, and Spray (2015) in youth tennis, the researcher was overtly embedded in the youth academy football environment for four months.
Initial research focused on undertaking observations, informal conversations, and focus groups with parents from different age groups in training and match environments. To develop a broader understanding of the support needs of parents, semi-structured interviews were also conducted with parents. Data analysis indicated that parents’ experiences changed considerably over the course of their child’s involvement in the academy.
Specifically, parents described an initial period of excitement, followed by acceptance of their child’s engagement in the academy. Next the parents described a time of frustration relating to the demands, constraints, and expectations associated with their child’s football. Finally, parents moved beyond this frustration to focus on the bigger picture of their child’s development as an individual.
Consequently, as parents move through this journey their support needs change and particularly the emphasis placed on managing their own stressors versus the support they want to provide to their child seems to alter. Keywords: parents, youth football, qualitative Changing the conversation about parents in sport Camilla Knight (Swansea University), Paul Stephenson (Child Protection In Sport Unit) The current literature base in sport parenting highlights the critical need for parents to be positively involved in their children’s sport, as well as the numerous roles parents fulfil within the lives of young athletes (Knight, Harwood, & Berrow, in press). Unfortunately, perceptions of sport parents as “pushy,” “overinvolved,” and “pressuring” still dominate within popular media and many coaches seek to distance themselves from the parents of their athletes (Knight & Gould, 2016).
Recognising the need to change the dominant discourse regarding parents, in 2016, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) Child Protection in Sport Unit (CPSU) launched “Parents in Sport week” to encourage organisations and coaches to celebrate parents’ contributions within sport. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of “Parents in Sport week” across the UK and Ireland. Evaluation occurred through a number of avenues, namely an examination of engagement with the online information, analysis of online material produced by sports organisations and clubs, an online evaluation survey, and follow-up interviews.
Overall, more than 250 sports 165Symposia Thursday July 13th organisations and clubs from around the UK and Ireland registered their support for the initiative. Data from the CPSU indicated that there were twice as many visits to the CPSU website during parents in sport week than in the preceding weeks. The first day of the initiative was associated with the most website hits in the history of the organisation and access to parent resources on the CPSU website rose by 50% during the initiative.
Data obtained from 67 sports organisations indicated that the message of the week had been understood and supported with benefits noted from encouraging parents to be involved in their children’s sport. Key reflections from the implementation and evaluation of this initiative are presented with respect to the overall education and support of parents of young people in sport. Keywords: parents, policy, organisations, integrity Educating and supporting tennis parents using digital delivery methods: A novel online education programme Sam Thrower (Kingston University), Chris Harwood (Loughborough University), Christopher M.
Spray (Loughborough University) Despite academic interest in sport parenting, there is a lack of published intervention research with this population (Harwood & Knight, 2015). Researchers in the UK (Thrower et al. 2016) and US (e.g.
Dorsch et al. 2016) have recently engaged sport parent education programmes. Although initial findings have been encouraging, these studies highlight the cost, time and expertise needed to plan and deliver face-to-face programmes as well as the barriers to initiating and maintaining parents’ participation.
As a result, there have been calls to develop more innovative delivery methods to replace or supplement face-to-face programmes. The purpose of this study, therefore, was to design, implement and evaluate the effectiveness of an online education programme for British tennis parents (n=38) during the initial stage of their involvement. A website was developed which included eight 20 minute online workshops, workshop quizzes, a forum, and a library database.
The effectiveness of the programme and parents’ experiences of using this online resource were examined using a convergent parallel mixed methods design. A total of 13 (38%) parents finished the full programme, while a subset of nine participants also shared their experiences via an asynchronous email interview. Quantitative findings revealed positive directional changes (albeit not statistically significant) for almost all of the variables in relation to tennis parent efficacy, general parent efficacy, emotional experiences, and goal orientations.
Alongside this, six qualitative themes emerged: (a) awareness of the programme; (b) initiating engagement in parent education programmes; (c) online education and programme accessibility; (d) workshop content and intervention effectiveness; (e) programme design and intervention effectiveness; and (f) factors influencing programme completion. The contribution of these findings in relation to existing literature and their applied implications will be discussed Keywords: parents, tennis, intervention, digital methods Dealing with protective and risk factors in the athletic career transitions: a reflection on recent trends of psychological research and practice Chair: Chiara D'Angelo (Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Psychology Department, Milan) An athletic career is unique: it starts in early age, it condenses few years of the life and ends in early adulthood, or may stop suddenly for physical reasons; thus, the athlete must re-think himself into social contexts completely new for him. Recently, next to the normative transitions, new kinds of non-normative transitions were introduced in the athletic career, such as cultural adaptation (moving to a foreign country), entrance into high level centers of training or premature professionalization (Stambulova, 2016), which leads to a decrease in the time available for pursuing an educational path.
Moreover, environmental factors have been 166Symposia Thursday July 13th recognized of great importance in supporting or hindering the transition process (Henriksen, 2010). We’ll examine career transitions of athletes together with the issue of dual career, since this last often occurs contingently with the youth-to-senior transition, and could lead to a subsequent difficulty in the transitions to the work context. The challenge for sport psychologists that work with elite athletes is to sustain them in the transition process to develop the whole person, both in sport and non-sport contexts (Taylor, Ogilvie & Lavallee, 2006).
So, we propose that experts contribute to understand what could be protective or risk factors in the main transitions faced by athletes, in sport and in the educational context. The first contribution presents a literature review of qualitative research on career transitions; the second one is a qualitative research involving Italian athletes from different sports about the elements that can favorite or obstacle dual career and career transitions. The third presentation shows a comparison between male and female student- athletes’ opinion on the main skills necessary to deal with dual career in Slovenia; and finally, the last contribution presents the implications of an experience of a psychological service with young athletes in transition.
Keywords: new career transitions, dual career, athletic career, risk and protective factors Retiring from elite sports: a review of qualitative research Anna Jordana, Miquel Torregrossa, Yago Ramis (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain), Alexander T. Latinjak (Universitat de Girona, Spain) The aim of this review is to offer an integrated theoretical perspective of the different qualitative studies that have studied athletes’ experiences related to retirement from elite sport and the transition to an alternative professional career. We carried out a systematic research based on key words, following the CHIP tool (i.e., Context, How, Issues and Population).
After reading the title and the abstract, 20 papers have been obtained by searching databases in English, Spanish and Portuguese (e.g., PsycINFO, Web of Science, Scopus, SPORTDiscus, Latindex, SciElo, Psicodoc). Additionally, following the PRISMA method, we have registered the process of decision making that has allowed us to obtain the most relevant papers for the in-depth analyses of this meta-synthesis. As a result, we selected 17 qualitative studies, 14 of those in English (11 developed in Europe and 3 in North America) 2 in Spanish and 1 in Portuguese.
10 of this papers gather information through semi structured interviews, which were analysed in a thematic or inductive way. In general, that information shows, especially in a retrospective way, the experiences of retirement of Olympic and elite ex-athletes (mainly gymnasts), as well as the influence that a dual career exerts in this transition process. Most of the selected studies concur that conceptualizing the retirement from elite sport as a process instead of as an event, and having alternative dedications such as study and/or work are protective factors in the athletic career transition.
Keywords: meta-synthesis, qualitative studies, retirement, elite sport A psychological service for young football players in youth-to-senior transition: research in practice Caterina Gozzoli, Chiara D'Angelo (Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Psychology Department, Milan) The youth-to-senior transition occurs when an athlete enters the higher level of his sport, moving from age-grade competition to playing in open events where participation is unrestricted by age (i.e. the first team of a Club, the national team). A study found that: 17% of junior national champions became senior athletes, while 31% reported stagnation and became recreational athletes, 28% performed irregularly and inconsistently and 24% dropped out (Vanden Auweele, DeMartelaer, Rzewnicki, De Knop, and Wylleman, 2004).
Athletes frequently describe the youth-to-senior transition as the hardest of their career, giving the increase of athletic and non-athletic requests they must face (Stambulova et al., 2009). To manage this key passage Clubs should give psychological support to their young athletes. In this contribute we’ll present a project of psychological 167Symposia Thursday July 13th support dedicated to 16 talented footballers (17-18 years old) of a professional Club, facing the youth-to-senior transition during season 2015/16.
For each player has been set an individual path of meeting (4-5 meetings, 1-2 hours each) with a sport psychologist, to reflect on how they were facing the increasing demands from sport and extra sport life and working on their strength and weaknesses. 13/16 players spoke about normal transitions difficulties (i.e hard times at school, with girlfriends or in family), that they perceive must be hidden to coaches or tutor even if they adverse their performance. For 3/16 players, instead the path works only on strengths to face transition process.
Players appreciated the individual guarded setting outside team and club’s dynamics they had, where they face the critical issues of sport and non-sport contexts, without being judged. It seems important for professional Clubs and Federations to set up a psychological support service to facilitate the detection of possible risks factors that could cause the loss of many talented athletes. Keywords: youth-to-senior transition, psychological support, risk and protective factors Slovenian student-athletes' competences for dual career related scenarios: gender differences Saša Cecic Erpic (University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Sport, Ljubljana, Slovenia) Talented and elite athletes face numerous challenges combining education and high-level sport (Stambulova & Ryba, 2013; Tekavc, Wylleman & Cecić Erpič, in press; Wylleman & Reints, 2010).
The main aim of the ‘Gold in Education and Elite Sport’ (GEES) project was to study competences for dual career (DC) in order to assist athletes preparing for successful combination of education and elite sport. The purpose of this presentation is to study competences related to student-athletes’ (SA) coping with seven DC specific scenarios. A cross-sectional quantitative design was implemented, using questionnaire Gold in Elite Sport and Education (GEES) that consists of 7 DC typical scenarios (e.g., miss significant days of study, being injured) and a list of 38 DC competences (attitudes, knowledge, and skills).
It was administered to 198 Slovenian student athletes (97 males and 101 female) aged between 15 and 25 (M = 18.92 yrs; SD = 3.7 yrs). The athletes indicated whether each of scenarios was experienced, how well they coped with it and which five (from the list of 38) competences are most important for coping with these DC typical situations. The results showed several gender differences.
Female SA encountered more challenging situations than male athletes and were more successful in coping with situation related to missing significant number of days from school. Male SA were more successful in coping with scenarios related to injury and rich social life. Female athletes report to be stronger in life management (e.g., dedication, discipline, organization and prioritizing) and independency skills.
Male athletes on the other hand report to be stronger in emotion management, coping skills, career management and social skills. Keywords: GEES, dual career, competences, gender differences At the end of the match: comparing career termination process between football players and other-sport’s athletes Eleonora Reverberi, Diletta Gazzaroli (Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Psychology Department, Milan) A peculiar moment in the athletic career is retirement, that usually occurs at a very early age, unlike a “normal” worker, implying deep and fast modification in the athletic identity and a process of adjustment to another life (Alfermann & Stambulova, 2012). In Italy, this theme is little explored: there are few studies on football players’ career termination (Croce, Piani, Russo, 2011), but in mostly unexplored.
We involve 42 former high-level athletes (18 football players and 23 other sports athletes, from both individual and team sports), in a retrospective research to explore their lived experience of leaving sport context and identifying differences. We investigate the subjective meaning they gave to the transition outside sport, the adaptation process to retirement and the way they manage the educational path to prepare to post sport career (dual 168Symposia Thursday July 13th career), comparing football players with other sports athletes. We use semi-structured interviews and Professional Life-Space (PLS), an adaptation of the Family Life Space by Motswin (Italian version by Gozzoli & Tamanza, 1998, 2008), a graphic-symbolic tool by which the person draws his professional and personal network during different phases of his life.
It emerges that: dual career isn’t considered a support for retirement, nor by athletes nor by sport culture, because football players are more often favored in retirement by strong ties with their Clubs and they can easily remain in sport context, while other sport’s athletes have more difficulties to remain there, given the lack of resources. Families are considered a strong support factor and sport is often considered “the best place to remain” for a former athlete. Implications comprehend the necessity to sensitize athletes to post sport career just during their career, with the possibility to deal with a dual career path, to avoid identity closeness and post retirement crisis.
Keywords: career transition, dual career, retrospective interviews, career termination The game of emotions, under which rules? Chair: Alejandra Florean (APDA) The general objective of the present Symposium is to share and transmit the inferences, analysis and conclusions reached in the work with the emotions within the sports field for the different actors and situations of this environment. It is frequent to assign the word problem a negative connotation referring to it as an obstacle or difficulty.
However, we chose to link the term problem to an issue or situation, which should not necessarily create barriers to our professional work, although it may be difficult. Reflecting on the situations to be solved in the field of sports psychology that deserve a psycho-sociological approach, because they are components of the social fabric that weaves their actors from their interactions, that led us to notice the determining role emotions play. In other words, we notice that emotions play.
They play in the coach, in each one of the athletes and on them as a group under the team motto, and they also play in the sport´s psychologist. Not only we notice it, we live with it in the exercise of our role. Emotions prescribe ways of relating, of manifesting and behaving, and seem to be decisive in achieving goals and persistence in the task, both of coaches and athletes, as well as ours.
Emotions play, under which rules? Do they depend on the sport? Are they limited to the role?
Are there limitations or inequalities depending on gender or disability? The papers presented here were the result of empirical and experimental field work, in some cases, and resulted from the application of surveys and techniques for exploring personality and specific behaviors circumscribed to the sports field, among others. Keywords: emotions, coach, team , disability, performance, role "Teamless" emotions Sandra Ferro (APDA) The present work aims to place the role of emotions in team sports as a study variable: how often and in what way they are expressed and, in particular, if it is possible to work with them collectively as we do with other factors that Intervene in this sports modality.
The work with sports teams offers the sports psychologist different psychosocial problems he will face and which will be required to deal with. These problems have existed since the formation of a sports team until its structural strengthening, having crossed on its path interactional processes tending to achieve cohesion, identification, identity and feelings of belonging that generate transcendental ties among its members. It is in the field of our work that we notice emotions influence the athletes conditioning in particular the levels of individual and collective performance that they are intended to achieve.
Objectives as well as levels of motivation and trust need to transcend the singular to meet and amalgamate in collective functioning, emphasizing the degree of cohesion team members 169Symposia Thursday July 13th intentionally and deliberately direct towards that end. Emotions, on the other hand, seem to maintain the unalterable character of the singular, being considered a determinant variable in the heterogeneity of the behavior of a sports team. In this sense, the problem would then appear to emerge from the game of emotions and these put into play in the sports competition operating, in some cases, as a strong resistance to group effects.
From the application of CPRD-f and CCD, which gives a framework to a descriptive and exploratory study of two sports teams, an attempt will be made to verify the existence of "teamless" emotions in collective performance. Keywords: emotions, teams, cohesion, subjectivity Emotions in the role of sports psychologist Alejandra Florean (APDA) The objective of the present work is to know what emotions are experienced by sports psychologists in the exercise of their role and if these are evident. Frustrations, anger, joys, sadness, how they come into play and how they influence the professional?
The exercise of the role requires different resources and/or personal and professional skills to meet sports, cultural, institutional, and even psycho-social demands. Dr. Chirivella Canton, E.
"Another challenge we face in our area is to continue improving our training and education for professional performance, which involves optimizing three elements: increase and update training, be able to integrate knowledge with professional practice, and to develop our personal skills or abilities involved in the effective exercise of the profession. " Professional practice in a sports institution can be oriented to improve the performance, management of emotions, social skills, and resources of athletes, coaches and leaders. However, it is scarcely possible to consider the emotions of the institutionalized sport Psychologist.
As if the professional was not crossed by the same emotions and variables of other actors. The methodology used to respond to our objective was a survey designed ad hoc, with variables and specific characteristics that will make possible to investigate experimentally the sports psychologists perceptions regarding the emotions involved in their professional work. It was based on an exploratory longitudinal study.
Keywords: emotions, role, education, institutional traversing In sport and disability, emotions count Belen Pineda (APDA) The following work has the purpose of sharing some reflections on sport and disability, taking as a transversal axis the emotions placed in the athlete, coaching team, and public/society. The same arises from the professional experience of the author working on the psychology of sport with blind Paralympic athletes. In recent years the development of inclusive and Paralympic sport has been very significant.
Moreover, the last Games of Rio 2016 broke the record of participants, 4360 were the number of athletes, representing 175 countries and 22 sports. Also we are frequently told stories about people with some incapacity (physical, sensorial or cognitive) that choose to practice a sport either in a recreational or competitive way. Additionally, there are more and more institutions that offer proposals for adapted sports.
In many cases these athletes become referents or "models of inspiration", as is the case of medalist Irene Villa whom Simeone summoned to motivate the Atletico team. As sports psychologists we can reflect on our contribution in this area. The adapted sport collaborates in the development of the person who practices it and its environment; promotes self- improvement, favors the development of mental strength, propitious habits of autonomy, self-management, collective responsibility and overcoming of communicational and social barriers.
An empirical and experimental field work was done in the approach of disabled athletes. Conceptually, the term "disability" will be used with reference to the International Classification of functioning Disability and Health (WHO), understood as a result of the interaction between the deficit of the subject and his/her environment. 170Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: adapted sport, Paralympic sport, inclusive sport, disability, motions Socio-emotional variables in the psychological preparation of national teams Nely Giscafre (CENARD) The work consists of exposing and sharing the author's experience in the psychological preparation of the Argentinean National Hockey Team on female turf in international competitions from 1994 to 2010.
Team work invites the Sports Psychologist to pay special attention to the socio-emotional variables that arise during the whole cycle of sports preparation and in the different stages of the competition, as well as the pedagogical influence and the training methods to grant the psychological qualities required to meet hockey requirements. The psychological task primarily consisted in assessing the character of the players and their emotional states, giving them the possibility of self-regulation through mental training (goal setting, breathing and relaxation techniques, focus on attention, activation control and development of self-confidence). At the same time it was very important to identify and get to know the leaders of the team, as well as the way in which they faced the possible conflicts derived from the activity that called them upon.
For this purpose, different interventions were carried out in order to achieve the cohesion of the team and the effective interaction between the team and the coaching staff. A psycho-deport evaluation was made to each player. For this, several techniques and tests were applied, such as Martens' Anxiety, Eysenck's Character Inventory, Gonzalez's 10 Desires Method, Butt Short Scales and Carron's Group Cohesion test, in parallel with the realization of Group dynamics and guidelines for athletes and coaches.
Keywords: national teams, cohesion, mental training, leadership Current professional skills on sport, health and exercise psychology experts in Spain Chair: Joaquín Díaz (FEPD Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology) In this Simposium we will talk about the Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology and the main events of the history of psychology of sports in Spain and we will show some of the diferents current professional skills that the sports psychologists performans in Spain. The topics that we will address are the following: The FEPD and the competencies of sports psychologists, professional intrusions, the diffusion of the profession and associationism. A description of the roles that professionals play, and focus on knowledge, attitudes, and applied skills.
Weaknesses, Threats, Strengths and Opportunities of Sports Psychology in Spain SWOT Analysis. In this presentation we intend to conduct a SWOT study (weaknesses, threats, strengths and opportunities) of the psychology of the current sport in Spain, reflecting on possible future improvements for the profession. Improvement of health and general well-being through sport, physical activity and exerciseThe goal we want with this presentation is to take a tour of the literature in Spanish from which the three challenges are addressed; As well as to carry out a first approximation of the role that the so-called placebo effect in the practice of exercise can develop.
The Sports Psychologist in multidisciplinary teams. Counseling, counseling and psychological intervention in sports and sports groups. The goal of this topic is the competences related to its performance as a sports psychologist: to negotiate the working conditions well, to wait for the right moment to act, to recognize the psychological needs to work, to use the best strategies according the cinscruntancias.
Keywords: specialist, skills, health, physical excercise, Spain Improvement of health and general well-being through sport, physical activity and exercise Felix Arbinaga (Universidad de Huelva y Secretario de la FEPD) 171Symposia Thursday July 13th It has been considered that the practice of physical exercise, regularly and immersed in the habits and lifestyles of the person, reports a varied and wide range of possible health benefits. It can be said that three have been the great challenges and objectives that science has maintained in this regard. The first is to define the mechanisms by which these benefits are achieved.
The second of the objectives has been to determine which exercises, and forms of execution, are useful and beneficial for each of the pathologies; Either as a form of treatment and preventive. Finally, the third great challenge is to establish that the practice of exercise is a habit of behavior immersed in lifestyles; That is, how to achieve a change in the sedentary lifestyle and achieve adherence to physical practice that is maintained over time. Thus, it can be seem that the idea that the practice of physical exercise has physical and psychological benefits is widespread among the population and professionals; and the data seems to show it.
However, from a methodological point of view, many authors point out in their studies that a psychological improvement derived from exercise practice cannot eliminate the possibility that, in someway, a placebo effect was present. The goal we want with this presentation is to take a tour of the literature in Spanish from which the three challenges are addressed; As well as to carry out a first approximation of the role that the so-called placebo effect in the practice of exercise can develop. Keywords: health, exercise, sport, placebo, wellness The FEPD and the competencies of sports psychologists, professional intrusions, the diffusion of the profession and associationism Pablo Jodra Jiménez (Vocal de la FEPD) The consolidation of the Sport Psychology as a professional discipline requires the presence of organizations that bring together the different theoretical-practical tendencies that make up their applied development.
The representativeness of the professional group must serve to strengthen the areas of presence, its dissemination in the social context, drawing the necessary structures for the organization of professional practice. Competencies provide a description of the roles that professionals play, and focus on knowledge, attitudes, and applied skills. The structural organization makes possible the advance of the discipline as a labor category, based on the basis of scientific knowledge Keywords: professional competence, associationism, intrusism The Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology: main events of the history of psychology of sports in Spain and current state of affairs Joaquín Díaz (FEPD) In 1986, the first National Congress of Sports Psychology was held in Barcelona and it acquired the commitment to work on the constitution of a Spanish Federation that brings together the different regional associations.
The Spanish Federation of Associations of Psychology of Physical Activity and Sport (FEPD) was created in 1987. The FEPD is currently formed by 11 associations, each one of which has different number of partners, objectives and initiatives. On the international front, the FEPD is a member of the International Society of Sport Psychology (ISSP) and the European Federation of Sports Psychology (FEPSAC), in which it actively participates as a full member.
In its recent history, regardless of the number of members, it is necessary to emphasize its active participation in the activities developed by the FEPD, as well as the quality achieved. This is reflected in the level of participation in congresses, conferences and seminars held so far, as well as the publications done. The Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology organizes a National Congress with the participation of national and international experts.
It is held every two years, together with one of the autonomic associations. Up to date, fourteen National Congresses have been held. The next national congress will be held in 2019 in Zaragoza 172Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: history, Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology, congresses The Sports Psychologist in multidisciplinary teams.
Counseling, counseling and psychological intervention in sports and sports groups David Peris (Vicepresidente de la Federación Española de Psicología del Deporte) In modern sport, where the work of the professionals involved is increasingly specialized and specific regarding a methodology of work and each sporting modality, the professional of the sports psychologist needs special competences to perform his work well. Besides having the necessary skills regarding the knowledge that must possess the psychologist of the sport it is necessary that this professional knows how to do his work fine; That is to say, it has competences related to its performance as a sports psychologist: to negotiate the working conditions well, to wait for the right moment to act, to recognize the psychological needs to work, to use the best strategies according to the cinscruntancias ... and all that as a Professional team within an interdisciplinary team (with all that entails) are fundamental aspects in counseling, counseling and psychological intervention in sports groups and athletes.
Keywords: psychological intervention, sport psychologist, multidisciplinary work Weaknesses, Threats, Strengths and Opportunities of Sports Psychology in Spain SWOT Analysis Jaume Martí Mora (Treasurer of the Spanish Federation of Sports Psychology) The sport psychology as a professional discipline in Spain has kept a variable evolution in function of many circumstances that have accompanied the sport throughout its trajectory, since Olympic Games in Barcelona 92 that took it to a high level of participation of professionals of the sport psychology, to different economic crises in the country with its consequences in the sport that has led to a decrease in the recruitment of specialists psychologists in the field. At present we could add a lot of supposed professionals who without having the qualification or sufficient knowledge, have landed in the world of the sport and of intrusive form for the professional psychologists of the sport. In this presentation we intend to conduct a SWOT study (weaknesses, threats, strengths and opportunities) of the psychology of the current sport in Spain, reflecting on possible future improvements for the profession.
Keywords: SWOT, professional sport psychologist, intrusion, sport psychology, evolution Interventions for Enhancing Flow in Sport and Exercise Chair: Nektarios Stavrou (1-Faculty of Physical Education and Sport Science, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece, 2-National Sport Research Institute, Olympic Athletic Center of Athens, Athens, Greece) The concept of flow has created increasing research attention in sport and exercise. Flow is a subjective experience of total absorption in a task in which individuals possess skill and face a challenge equaling that skill. Csikzhentmihalyi (1975) proposed nine key dimensions of flow.
In addition, to Challenge-Skills Balance, these are Action-Awareness Merging, Clear Goals, Unambiguous Feedback, Total Concentration, Sense of Control, Loss of Self-consciousness, Time Transformation, and Autotelic Experience, which refers to the enjoyable, self- motivating aspect of flow. As well as promoting enjoyment and intrinsic motivation for tasks, flow is often associated with high levels of performance, making its presence valuable to sports performers and exercisers. Thus, developing interventions to enhance flow state is a key area of research.
In this symposium, presenters report on studies that each examined the efficacy of an intervention designed to enhance flow experience. 173Symposia Thursday July 13th First, Hamzah et al. report research examining the effects of listening to music on flow state, heart rate, rated perceived exertion and performance during a single session of moderate intensity exercise among sedentary individuals.
Then, Waraphongthanachot and colleagues focused in their study on using imagery to enhance flow antecedents to promote flow and increase performance. Next, extending the research of Pates et al. (2001), which showed the positive impact of hypnosis on flow, Dao and colleagues discuss the effects of hypnosis on flow and performance in golfers, focusing on the similarity between flow concomitants and phenomena associated with hypnosis.
Finally, continuing the hypnosis theme, Savadelavar et al. report on the effect of a Neuro-linguistic Programming (NLP) intervention on sub-elite air-pistol shooters’ flow state and performance. These studies refine understanding of several key intervention directions with implications for practice.
Tony Morris will lead audience discussion. Keywords: flow, music, flow dimensions, imagery, hypnosis, NLP Effects of music listening on flow state, heart rate, RPE and performance during a single session of moderate intensity exercise Nurul Hamzah, Tony Morris, Dan van der Westhuizen (College of Sport and Exercise Science, Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia) In the present study, we applied a two-group randomized experimental design to examine the effects of listening to music during a single exercise session on flow state, heart rate (HR), rate of perceived exertion (RPE), and aerobic exercise performance. We randomly assigned physically inactive participants (N = 20; Mage = 29.3, SDage = 6.5) into a Music Condition (n = 10) and a No Music Condition (n = 10).
Participants in both conditions performed cycling for 30 minutes at a moderate-intensity (40-60% Heart Rate Reserve, HRR). During cycling exercise, we recorded HR, RPE, and power output (Watts). We also assessed participants’ flow state using the Flow State Scale-2, immediately after exercise.
There was no between-condition difference for global flow state, however, the dimension of time transformation was significantly higher in the Music Condition than the No Music Condition (p < .05). Mean RPE was lower and mean HR was higher in the Music Condition than the No Music Condition across three time intervals (10-min, 20-min, 30-min). There were no between- condition differences for HR and RPE.
The percentage increment of power output was higher in the Music Condition than the No Music Condition across three time intervals. The present study suggested that music contributed to participants’ perception that the duration of the cycling exercise was shorter than the actual duration of the session. In addition, RPE was relatively low in the Music Condition despite participants cycling at a higher power output, suggesting they were more at ease to physically cope with the higher workloads.
Keywords: music, flow, heart rate, RPE, performance, moderate intensity exercise Enhancing flow antecedents to promote flow and increase performance Phatsorn Waraphongthanachot, Tony Morris (Institute of Sport, Exercise & Active Living, Victoria University, Melbourne), Anthony Watt (1Institute of Sport, Exercise & Active Living, Victoria University, Melbourne, 2College of Education, Victoria University, Melbourne) Imagery is a powerful technique that has been shown to enhance performance and flow state in sport (Pates et al., 2002). Stavrou and Zervas (2004) proposed that five dimensions of flow are antecedents that can enhance the experience of flow. Flow is a peak experience associated with enjoyment, motivation, and performance in sport (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975).
Three key antecedents of flow are challenge-skills balance, clear goals, and unambiguous feedback. We examined the impact on flow and performance of an imagery intervention designed to increase these three antecedents, illuminating mechanisms underlying the positive experience of flow in sport. Eighteen male and 8 female basketball players (Mage = 30.73 years) from a Melbourne league completed a pre-test, shooting 40 shots (8 trials x 5 locations around the basketball key) at 174Symposia Thursday July 13th 4.5 metres (2-point) and 40 shots (same five angles) at 6.75 metres (3-point shots).
Participants were randomly assigned to an imagery intervention condition and a video placebo condition. The Flow Antecedents Imagery (FAI) condition involved imagining clear goals and unambiguous feedback of shooting in an individualized challenge-skills balance context, for six 15-minute sessions over two weeks. The Video Placebo condition involved equivalent time watching video of elite performers shooting in competition.
All participants then completed the same 80-shot shooting task at post-test. We used one-way ANOVA at pre-test and post-test on all nine flow dimensions and two-way mixed-design ANOVA and Tukey post hoc to examine performance. Results indicated that both the FAI and Video Placebo conditions increased flow state (p<.05) and enhanced athletes’ shooting performance (p<.01).
However, the FAI condition improved 3-point shooting significantly more than the Video Placebo condition (p<.05). We concluded that imagery of key antecedents did enhance flow and performance. Also, we discuss the possible positive effect of incidental video modeling.
Keywords: flow antecedents, imagery, intervention, performance, basketball The effect of a neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) intervention on sub-elite air-pistol shooters’ flow state and performance Meisam Savadelavar, Garry Kuan (Exercise and Sports Science, School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM), Kelantan, Malaysia), Tony Morris (Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living, College of Sport and Exercise Science, Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia) Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) is a cognitive-behavioural approach to changing thoughts, feelings, and behaviours based on the use of language (Tosey & Mathison, 2010) and non-conscious cognitive processes. Koehn et al. (2014) suggested that cognitive interventions can increase flow state, which in turn could enhance athletes’ performance.
Thus, the aim of this study was to examine the effectiveness of an imagery-based NLP intervention on 12 sub-elite shooters’ flow state, as well as their shooting performance scores. Six female and six male shooters, aged from 15 to 20 years (M=16.58, SD=1.44), volunteered to participate in this study. Before and after the intervention, we measured shooting performance based on a standard 10-metre air-pistol competition target using 60 shots within 90 minutes.
We evaluated flow state using the Flow State Scale-2 immediately after each performance test (Jackson & Eklund, 2002). We conducted eight sessions of face-to- face NLP, anchoring memory of optimal performance to participants’ left knee. Then we did future pacing of the experienced mental state during the sessions.
We used paired samples t-tests to identify mean differences between pre-test and post-test on flow and performance scores and Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient to examine the relationship between changes in flow scores and gain scores on performance from pre- to post-test. Results indicated that flow state did not change significantly (t11 = -1.755, p > .05). However, shooters’ performance increased significantly (t11 = -9.574, p < .05).
Also, there was no significant correlation between changes of flow state and gain scores on performance (r = -.511, p = .09). These results suggest that the kinaesthetic anchoring pattern of NLP was a suitable strategy for enhancing air-pistol shooting performance, but further study is needed to understand the effect of NLP on flow state. Keywords: neuro-linguistic programming, flow state, shooting The effects of hypnosis on flow and performance in golf putting Dung Tien, Tony Morris, Daryl Marchant (Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia) Csikszentmihalyi (1975) introduced the flow concept, involving total absorbsion in the task, control, with effortless, automatic movement.
Flow dimensions divided into five antecedents and four concomitant dimensions (action-awareness merging, loss of self-consciousness, time transformation, and autotelic experience), which have similarities with hypnotic trance states. We evaluated whether a hypnotic state facilitates flow and enhances performance via its concomitant dimensions and whether the trancework 175Symposia Thursday July 13th component of traditional hypnosis is crucial. Participants were 16 golfers (3 females, 13 males, aged 31 to 59) with handicaps from +1 to 20 (M=11.84).
We matched participants for hypnotic susceptibility. Golfers performed 56 4-metre test putts at pre- and post-test. We measured radial error of each putt from the centre of the hole to the centre of the ball.
Then Traditional Hypnosis participants undertook a 60-minute, face-to- face active session, then listened to a recording of that session for seven days, whereas Neutral Hypnosis participants experienced a face-to-face session (no trancework) then listened to the recording for seven days. Using two-way mixed-design ANOVA, for putting performance, we found no significant effect of hypnosis, F=1.28, p=.28, or occasion (pre-test, post-test), F=0.64, p=.436, but a significant interaction effect, F=16.16, p=.001. For global state flow, we observed no main effect of hypnosis, F=1.00, p=.33, but there was a significant main effect of occasion, F=20.28, p<.001 and a significant interaction effect, F=5.03, p=.04.
There was no significant main effect of hypnosis for the time transformation, F=.878, p=.365, but we observed a significant main effect of occasion, F=37.11, p<.01, and a significant interaction effect, F=9.97, p<.01. We concluded that active hypnosis enhanced golf-putting performance and global state flow. Findings suggested that traditional hypnosis improved performance and flow through the time transformation.
Keywords: hypnosis, golf putting, flow, hypnotic putting, putting performance Bridging the gap – Helping young sport psychology enthusiasts stepping out into the real world Chair: Svenja Wachsmuth Being finally recognized as an international non-profit organisation, the European Network of Young Specialists in Sport Psychology is stepping into a new era, ENYSSP 2.0. Starting as an alumni network of the European master’s studies in sport and exercise psychology (Wylleman & Seiler, 2016), ENYSSP has since grown in numbers, diversity (e.g., education, specialisation, culture), and professionalism. It is one of many organisations aiming at the dissemination and development of knowledge and practice in sport and exercise psychology (SEP).
Most of these organizations, like FEPSAC or AASP, are led by SEP experts who rely on their extensive experience and understanding of the field. In contrast, ENYSSP has to rely on its young members’ enthusiasm and creativity, on their skills to critically evaluate the fields’ status quo, as well as on their heart to push for innovative and sometimes unconventional ideas. While Wylleman and Seiler (2016) acknowledge ENYSSP as an “active and innovative partner” of FEPSAC, its positon and responsibilities within the wider field of SEP, however, need to be re-evaluated.
This symposium offers an opportunity to reflect upon ENYSSP’s development, contributions to the field and its future potential. The presentations will start with an evaluation of the core principles and values of the organisation, which are thought to facilitate young sport psychologists’ own ethical and professional development. The remaining presentations will draw upon ENYSSP members’ experiences of “stepping into the real world”, providing an overview of young sport psychologists’ perceived challenges and hopes in regards to research, education and applied work.
Overall, it is aimed at stimulating thought and debate about how organisations, such as ENYSSP, in cooperation with senior SEPs may support the development of young professionals and shape the future sport psychology. Keywords: professional development, networking, enyssp, novice practitioners Introducing applied working philosophies for young practitioners Peter Schneider (FC Carl Zeiss Jena, e.V.), Snezana Stoljarova (Tallinn University) Sport psychology practitioners demand goals and clear direction from their athletes, but how often do they evaluate and research their own core values, goals, and philosophies? How deep is a sport psychology practitioner’s understanding of various philosophical underpinnings of modern-day applied psychological 176Symposia Thursday July 13th techniques?
Andersen (2005) highlighted the importance of working philosophies through practical experiences, and Poczwardowski et al. (2014) argued against “intervention-based” thinking, and working rather from a consistent philosophical approach. Where does one begin to build a personal and effective working philosophy in sport psychology?
The temptation is to begin with classic modern psychological theories, such as psychodynamic (Freud), humanistic (Maslow), or social-cognitive (Bandura) approaches, but this would not give the full human story. For example, whilst an understanding of a psychodynamic approach can assist in the structure and framework of a young practitioner’s daily work, philosophical works provide alternative understandings of human interaction; a vital skill, which could assist in creating a deeper connection with clients. ENYSSP pushes its young members to dig behind the modern theories and evaluate classical philosophical approaches.
Through workshops including texts and quotes from such classics as Plato`s “Allegory of the Cave”, Descartes` “Passions of the Soul”, or Lao Tzu’s Taoist teachings we see how humans have tackled their thoughts and motivations for behaviour for centuries. In this seminar, we will discuss some classic and modern philosophical works which have greatly influenced the ENYSSP working philosophy, their relation to psychological theories used in applied sport psychology, and how these philosophical underpinnings can help a young practitioner starting out. Keywords: professional philosophy, career development Applying research skills in diverse professional contexts Malgorzata Slawinska (Independent Consultant), Maximilian Pelka (Ruhr University Bochum) One of the main strengths of ENYSSP is the promotion and facilitation of cross-national cooperation for research in Sport and Exercise Psychology (SEP).
Sharing knowledge from a multicultural perspective allows for deeper understanding of opportunities that can be reached when looking for a career in SEP. The foremost aim of our department in ENYSSP is to promote and disseminate research within sport and exercise psychology. This aim is achieved by stimulating interest and practice through various research activities such as peer consultations, where we analyse various research methods used in SEP, conducting webinars on research related topics, such as statistical methods of analysis, leading group meetings and discussions, and supporting individual and group research initiatives among ENYSSP members.
The goal of our research department is to create an international network that supports research initiatives as well as to help the integration of ENYSSP members into the scientific community by coordinating European links between aspiring, settled and successful researchers. Drawing on collective experiences we provide an example how knowledge gathered from studies could be translated into practice. Understanding how research skills, which are learnt during Master and PhD studies, could be used to further career or find a position is an important feature of transition from the university to a professional career.
For example, entering the competitive field of science requires publishing at a high rate and of high quality. Journal articles are the currency through which young researchers move forward in their careers. Getting one’s manuscripts published is tough work and dependent on others’ reviews.
During this symposium we will provide an outline of our work in the research department and provide specific examples of our activities and how we support young sport and exercise psychologists to transit from a student into their professional career. Keywords: international cooperation, multicultural research, knowledge dissemination ENYSSP education department: Helping members on their journey in academia Cristiana Conti (University of Chieti) Being one of three ENYSSP departments, Education team’s main objective is providing support to undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral students all over Europe. The department provides regular up-to- date information regarding sport psychology educational programs in Europe – whether it is accredited degree 177Symposia Thursday July 13th programmes, international conferences, PhD offers or short-term intensive courses in sport psychology.
Early career academics are also one of the target groups of the department, and can benefit from online discussion group Teasers For Teachers (T4T) that offers novice lecturers an opportunity to share good practice examples or discuss any issues they might face. Another aim of the department is regular reviews of the sport psychology literature, including classic academic textbooks and cutting-edge academic publications. These reviews are published in ENYSSP regular newsletters.
More recently, Education department has been working with ENYSSP’ country reps (members that represent the network in their respective countries) in order to collect (and consequently present) information on the requirements on working as a sport psychologist in various European countries, including legal job title protection, professional education requirement etc. This presentation will focus on more detailed discussion of the Education department’s aims and activities (particularly online webinars), and will be followed by the analysis of the survey conducted within ENYSSP’ members, which explored their expectation of sport psychology education in Europe, and their reflections on the support and opportunities they receive during their academia journey. Keywords: sport psychology education, webinar, students, support First steps in the world of applied sport psychology Michala Bednáriková (Independent Consultant), Grzegorz Wieclaw (Independent Consultant) For young professionals in the field of sport psychology, finishing a master’s degree is an important milestone, but in the world today even the best degree does not guarantee employment and development.
In many ways it is a challenging task to start and develop one’s own professional practice, and only persistent sport psychologists will achieve their goal to work as a full-time applied practitioner. Although there are many documented paths to develop a successful career in this field and different ways of disseminating academic knowledge (cf. McCarthy & Jones, 2014), it remains difficult to make the first steps into the real world.
There are many challenges one needs to manage in order to build a successful career in the applied field. These may include intrapersonal (e.g., low self-confidence due to limited experience), interpersonal (e.g., limited access to supervision and peer support), educational (e.g., limited access to continuous education), as well as financial factors (e.g., not having funds to rent out an office or a space to work in. Furthermore, experiences may differ between countries as requirements for certification vary across the world (Keegan, 2016).
As early-stage applied sport psychology practitioners we will present some of the challenges we have come across at the beginning of our careers and show how being part of the European Network of Young Specialists in Sport Psychology (ENYSSP) has given us an opportunity to gain peer support from other professionals who are facing similar challenges at this early stage of their career development. At ENYSSP we offer, for example, regular online meetings known as the peer consultation sessions (Bednarikova, Schneider, & Więcław, 2016), applied webinars, and workshops at the annual conference. These professional connections gained at ENYSSP are extremely valuable both for now and the future.
They can give inspiration and the right push in coping with professional challenges ahead. Keywords: novice practice, supervision, consulting, professional challenges Understanding and preventing doping in sport Chair: Maria Kavussanu (University of Birmingham) The purpose of this symposium is to enhance our understanding of doping in sport. It consists of five papers.
The first paper reports a latent profile analysis of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, doping attitudes and moral disengagement and presents three athlete profiles that differ significantly in doping susceptibility. The second paper is an experimental manipulation of moral disengagement and examines its interactive effects 178Symposia Thursday July 13th with moral identity in predicting doping likelihood. The third paper examined the relationship between implicit doping attitude and athletes’ awareness of unintentional doping in Australian athletes.
The fourth study reports a school based anti-doping intervention on variables from the theory of planned behavior, while the fifth paper is a qualitative study of doping investigating clean athletes’ beliefs about the legitimacy of anti- doping control procedures. Overall, the research reported in this symposium enhances our understanding of doping in sport. Keywords: doping attitudes, moral disengagement, intervention, implicit association test Interactive effects of moral identity and moral disengagement on doping: An experimental investigation Nicholas Stanger, Susan H.
Backhouse (Leeds Beckett University) Moral disengagement has been linked with higher susceptibility to dope. However, the temporal direction, or potential moderators, of this relationship have not been examined. In this project, funded by the World Anti-Doping Agency, we experimentally investigated the interactive effects of moral identity and moral disengagement on doping.
Seventy-two team sport players completed measures of moral identity and doping moral disengagement. Then, at least 3 days later participants engaged in a moral disengagement manipulation involving doping-related scenarios reflecting conditions of low or high moral disengagement. For each situation, participants reported their likelihood to dope, anticipated guilt and moral judgment.
A within- subjects design was employed with experimental conditions fully counterbalanced. Participants reported being significantly more likely to dope, anticipated less guilt and perceived doping as less morally wrong in the high, compared to the low, moral disengagement condition. Hierarchical regression analyses revealed that dispositional moral identity negatively, and dispositional moral disengagement positively, predicted likelihood to dope in the low moral disengagement condition.
A two-way interaction indicated that dispositional moral disengagement was a positive predictor of likelihood to dope for individuals low in moral identity, but not for those high in moral identity. Conversely, in the high moral disengagement condition – moral disengagement positively predicted likelihood to dope, however moral identity was not a significant predictor and no interaction was revealed. Our findings suggest that moral identity can protect athletes from being likely to dope even if athletes are prone to morally disengage.
However, this protective effect can be over-ridden in situations, where the potential for moral disengagement is heightened. Keywords: doping, emotion, morality Implicit Doping Attitude and Awareness of Unintentional Doping Derwin King Chung Chan (University of Hong Kong), Martin S. Hagger (Curtin University) This study examined the relationship between implicit doping attitude and athletes’ awareness of unintentional doping.
Participants were 143 Australian athletes (Mage = 18.13, SD = 4.63) who completed a brief single-category implicit association test for measuring implicit doping attitude, and Self-Reported Treatment Adherence Scale for the assessment of behavioural adherence to the avoidance of unintentional doping. In addition, we evaluated participants’ awareness of unintentional doping (reading the ingredients of an unfamiliar food product, and awareness of the presence of banned substances) using a standard lollipop decision-making protocol developed in a previous study about unintentional doping awareness. The results showed that implicit doping attitude was negatively related to athletes’ likelihood of reading the ingredients table of an unfamiliar food product, and positively related to athletes’ awareness of the presence of banned substances in the given food product.
Implicit attitude did not form a significant relationship with the behavioural adherence to the avoidance of unintentional doping. In conclusion, athletes who reported positive 179Symposia Thursday July 13th implicit doping attitude were less likely to read the ingredients table of an unknown food product, but they were more likely to be aware of the possible presence of banned substances in certain food products. Keywords: implicit association test, automaticity, awareness to doping, banned substances, nutritional supplement, avoidance of unintentional doping Doping susceptibility in young Australian athletes: A latent profile analysis Maria Kavussanu (University of Birmingham), Daniel Gucciardi (Curtin University), Geoffrey Jalleh (Curtin University), Robert Donovan (University of Western Australia), Vassilis Barkoukis (Aristotle University) Doping is a pervasive phenomenon in sport with the number of athletes using illegal substances and methods to enhance performance increasing in recent years.
As doping itself is difficult to investigate, researchers have typically examined proxies of doping, such as doping susceptibility. The purpose of this study was to identify psychological profiles of athletes using variables linked to doping in previous research and determine whether these profiles differ in doping susceptibility. A total of 983 competitive athletes from a variety of individual and team sports completed a baseline survey, as part of a larger study, funded by the Australian Research Council.
Latent profile analysis with intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, (positive) doping attitudes, and moral disengagement as the indicators revealed three profiles, which were distinguished pimarily by the level of doping attitudes, extrinsic motivation and moral disengagement. The three profiles differed significantly in doping susceptibility. Specifically, the athlete profile that was most susceptible to doping (n = 119, M = 3.15, SE = .14) was characterized by moderate levels of doping attitudes, and low-to- moderate levels of extrinsic motivation and moral disengagement.
In contrast, the least susceptible to doping profile (n = 868, M = 1.74, SE = .04) had low extrinsic motivation and very low doping attitudes and moral disengagement. Finally, the profile that had some susceptibility to doping (n = 35, M = 2.64, SE = .25) was characterized by very high doping attitudes, low-to-moderate extrinsic motivation, and low moral disengagement. Intrinsic motivation was high in all three profiles.
These findings suggest that the critical factor that could make athletes susceptible to doping is their propensity to morally disengage, combined with extrinsic motivation and positive doping attitudes. In addition, high levels of intrinsic motivation do not protect the athlete from doping. Keywords: intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, moral disengagement, doping attitudes A new school-based intervention program against doping: Early empirical evidence supporting its effectiveness Fabio Lucidi, Andrea Chirico, Luca Mallia, Fabio Alivernini (Sapienza University of Rome) The use of illegal Performance and Enhancing Substances poses significant threats to adolescent health.
Several scholars (e.g., Barkoukis, 2016) identified the need to develop effective anti-doping interventions. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of a school-based intervention in changing adolescents’ beliefs about the use of doping in sports, attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioral control toward doping. Overall, 389 students (52% male; mean age =16.56 SD=1.26) participated in the intervention group, while 103 students (mean age =16.10, SD=1.38) formed the control group.
The intervention was developed in order to transfer knowledge to adolescents in an interactive way. Participants were asked to develop a sensitization campaign against doping having as target their peers. Students in both groups, completed a questionnaire twice within 3 months, measuring social-cognitive beliefs (i.e., attitudes, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control) doping use and supplements use in the previous 3 months.
Repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted with Group (Intervention Vs Control) as between-subjects factor and Time (Before Vs After) as within-subjects factor. The changes in doping and supplements self-reported use were evaluated through McNemar test. The results showed a significant interaction between the Group and Time only for the positive doping attitudes (F(1,472) =7.02; p=.008).
The intervention group showed a significant decrease in the positive doping attitudes (Mean(time 1)= 2.2, SD = .85; and Mean(time 2)= 2.05, SD= .82), while the control 180Symposia Thursday July 13th group reported an increase in these attitudes (Mean(time 1)= 1.96, SD = .85; and Mean(time 2) =2.09: SD = .94). The intervention group also showed a significantly lower level of supplement use after the intervention (Use(time1)=6.7%; Use(time2)=3.8%; p=.05 for McNemar Test ), while the control group showed an increase in this use. Keywords: anti-doping interventions; school; social-cognitive beliefs Elite athletes’ beliefs about the legitimacy of anti-doping control procedures: A qualitative study Vassilis Barkoukis, Ioannis Ntovolis (Aristotle University) The purpose of the present study was to investigate clean athletes’ beliefs about the legitimacy of anti- doping control procedures.
A qualitative approach with the use of semi-structured interviews was used. More specifically, 18 Greek elite athletes participated in four focus group interviews. One group comprised individual sport athletes, one included team sport athletes, and two groups were mixed.
A former elite athlete was trained and served as interviewer in order to facilitate establishing rapport with participants and ensure higher participation rates. The questions about the legitimacy of anti-doping policies were based on past research on athletes’ perspectives of doping and anti-doping, and on Tyler’s review of the literature about the psychological perspectives on legitimacy of regulatory authorities. Focus group data were transcribed verbatim and processed using specialist qualitative data analytical software.
The results of the focus groups were analyzed using thematic analysis and revealed that the athletes believe that the anti-doping control procedures are not transparent and they don’t protect the values of sport. Additionally, the athletes reported that sport authorities do not act always in a transparent manner and do not promote the values of sport. Furthermore, the results of the analyses demonstrated differences between individual and team sport athletes with the former believing that team sports are protected and the doping controls are not often transparent.
The findings of the study offer insight about the legitimacy of current anti-doping programs and approaches and valuable information about developing alternative approaches to anti-doping. Keywords: sports integrity, sports transparency, values of sport Psychology of performance in soccer Chair: Erkut Konter (Dokuz Eylül Üniversity) Soccer is the most popular sport worldwide attracting millions including sport psychology consultants, coaches, players, officials etc. Soccer has many unique features in need of specific investigation and intervention (e.g., psychological skills, courage, standard situations like free kicks, corner kicks etc.) in relation to performance.
Therefore, the purpose of this symposium is to discuss different aspects of the performance psychology in soccer. Data were collected and analyzed using a number of different approaches including qualitative, quantitative methods, parametric and non-parametric statistics. The first study is on psychological skills in relation to level of courage in soccer indicating significant results with the data of N = 380 male soccer players.
The second study is on psychological interventions to stabilize performance in standard situations in soccer. In modern football games are frequently decided through standard situations like a free kick, a corner, or a penalty shot. These decisive situations put pressure on players which can result in failure, i.e.
they choke under pressure. The research addresses the effects of integrating the embodiment technique into a more encompassing pre-shot routine for standard situations, as well as a specification of conditions for optimal technique application. The third study also focus on the relationship between Courage and Coping among soccer player in Kelantan State indicating significant relationships between sport courage and coping skills.
The final presentation is on expert approaches to sport psychology consulting in high performing teams including 181Symposia Thursday July 13th soccer. Interviews were conducted with eight esteemed applied practitioners (5 men & 3 women with the elite level professional experience). Findings suggest that psychological consultancy, psychological skills, courage, coping skills and optimizing performance in standard situations in soccer can significantly predict success and performance in soccer.
Keywords: soccer, performance, psychological skills, courage, consultancy Psychological skills of soccer players in relation to level of courage, individual and performance variables Erkut Konter (Dokuz Eylül Üniversity) The exact nature of the relationship between courage and psychological skills in soccer performance are still uncovered. Therefore, purpose of this study was to research psychological skills of soccer players in relation to level of courage, individual and performance variables. Data were collected from 370 male soccer players aged 12 to 35 (M=17.04 ± 3.91 yrs; 305 amateur, 70 professional and 5 unstated).
soccer players administered the “Sport Courage Scale-31” (SCS-31) and the “Soccer Psychological Skills Scale-16” (SPSS-16). Further CFA analyses of the SPSS-16 indicated good fit (χ2 (380) = 2490.33, p < .001, CFI = .98, AGFI = .94, RMSEA = .046, SRMR = .042) and Croanbach Reliability Coefficients (range between .0.68 and 0.81) with four factors (imagery, commitment, peaking under pressure, and coping with stress) and 12 items (each factor has three items) (SPSS-12). These scales (SCS-31 and SPSS-12) were administered to association football players with the personal information form to collect data.
Collected data was analyzed by spearman correlations, various parametric and non-parametric tests, and revealed a number of significant (p<.05) differences between courage scores of soccer players and their indicated psychological skills. Spearman correlation analyses indicated positive significant results between the SPSS-12 and the SCS-31 factors. The both scales are positively and significantly correlated ranging between .274 and 487.
Results of SPSS-12 in relation to level of soccer courage factors revealed a number of significant differences. In general, soccer players with high points of total SCS-31 have significantly higher points of imagery, commitment, peaking under pressure, coping with stress than soccer players with low points of total SCS-31. More research is needed to have more conclusive results.
Keywords: psychological skills, courage, soccer, individual variables, performance Psychological interventions to stabilise performance in standard situations in soccer Jürgen Beckmann (Technical University of Munich, Germany) In modern football games are frequently decided through standard situations like a free kick, a corner, or a penalty shot. Because players are aware of the decisive role of their performance in these situations, they experience pressure which can result in failure, i.e. they choke under pressure.
In a series of experimental studies an embodiment technique was successfully employed to eliminate choking in football penalty shooting as well as other sports (Beckmann, Gröpel & Ehrlenspiel, 2013). This embodiment technique consists of contracting the left hand before shooting (dynamic hand grip). Only players (German 3rd league and higher) in the experimental conditions with left hand clenching penalty shooting performance was unaffected by pressure (identical to base line performance) whereas in the condition with right hand clenching choking occurred.
The neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the effects of this embodiment technique were clarified in an EEG study (Cross-Villasana et al., 2015). Current research addresses the effects of integrating the embodiment technique into a more encompassing pre-shot routine for standard situations, as well as a specification of conditions for optimal technique application (such as required duration of hand contraction; Gröpel & Beckmann, in press). Keywords: soccer, stabilise performance, standard situations, interventions 182Symposia Thursday July 13th Relationship between courage and coping among soccer player in Kelantan Aizuddin Bin Hidrus, Garry Kuan (Universiti Sains Malaysia), Erkut Konter (Dokuz Eylül Üniversity), Yee Cheng Kueh (Universiti Sains Malaysia) Psychological skills such as coping and courage are important components for athletes who compete at national or international level.
The study aimed to examine the relationship between athletes coping skills and their courage in sport. Participants were 19 male soccer players from Kelantan State with their age mean age, 22 years old (SD = 2.0). They volunteered and agreed to complete the questionnaires within 30 - 45 minutes.
Two questionnaires used in the present study were, the Sport Courage Scale-31 (SCS-31; Konter & Ng, 2012) and Athletic Coping Skills Inventory-28 (ACSI-28; Smith, Schutz, Smoll, & Ptacek, 1995). SCS-31 consists of five subscales namely mastery/self-confidence, determination, assertiveness, venturesome, and self-sacrificial behaviour. ACSI-28 consists of goal setting and mental preparation, confidence and achievement motivation, coachability, concentration, coping with adversity, peaking under pressure, and freedom from worry.
Data was analysed using SPSS version 22. All subscales are calculated and summed up. Due to the small sample size, Spearman’s Correlation was chosen to determine the correlation coefficient (r) between the subscales from SCS-31 and ACSI-28.
The significant correlations ranged between 0.120 to 0.769, where the highest correlation showed between Determination (SCS-31) and Coping with Adversity (ACSI-28) with r = 0.769. Determination (SCS-31) and Confidence & Achievement Motivation (ACSI-28) also showing high correlation with r = 0.749. The present study revealed that there were significant relationships between sport courage and coping skills.
Results also showed that athletes who had a higher level of courage could also have a higher ability to cope with stress. This study provides us information that sport courage, and coping skills are related, and can be considered as a pair of attributes for soccer sports. Keywords: sport psychology, sport courage, coping skills, correlation Expert approaches to sport psychology consulting in high performing teams Anders Haugen Rønning, Henrik Gustafsson, Frank Abrahamsen (Norwegian School of Sport Sciences) As sport psychology develops and is recognized as an increasingly important part of sport performance, it is essential to understand how we can deliver effective and high quality support to athletes.
Previously some experienced sport psychologists have offered their first-hand experiences of working with athletes, giving valuable insight into the real world of applied sport psychology. Most of this literature however, discuss the classical situation of working one-on-one with an athlete. Less information is published on the complex role of being a sport psychologist within a team context.
For the present study, interviews were conducted with eight esteemed applied practitioners (5 men & 3 women, with experience from the Olympic Games and some of the best professional teams - in for example soccer), and they shared indispensable experiences from the inside of high performing teams in several sports. The information was gathered through semi-structured interviews, and a thematic analysis undertaken, based on the guidelines of Braun and Clark (2006). The participants discuss areas like confidentiality, the importance of offering something unique, authenticity, self-development, how to avoid fateful mistakes and the use of supervisors.
Their stories are strengthened by their reflections about the role and delivery within teams, what kind of behaviour that is expected and different ways of solving this role. On this basis, an area like confidentiality will for example be discussed in regard to how it in some ways restrict the work of the consultant, but might also be his/her most valuable tool in professional team sport settings. The purpose of this presentation is therefore to depict valuable lessons and advice given by some of the most experienced and recognized sport psychologists in the area of team sport.
Keywords: sport psychology consulting, professional development, team sport 183Symposia Thursday July 13th Application of mindfulness and acceptance approaches before and during the Olympics: A Scandinavian approach Chair: Carsten Hvid Larsen (Team Denmark & University of Southern Denmark) Being an Olympian or winning a medal at the Olympics is often described as the ultimate goal and highlight of an athlete’s career. Athletes often emphasize Olympic Games as a unique and peak experience, however by many athletes also described as a very stressful event (Pensgaard, 2008). Experiences from delivering sport psychology service at the Olympics (Henriksen, 2015) describe that the athletes are facing a range of stressors and events that they are rarely able to foresee and plan for.
The pressure of the Olympic games is unlike anything that the athletes ever tried before (and difficult to prepare for in specific details) and often evoke new and difficult feelings and thoughts. The present symposium describes four different sport psychology interventions in Olympic level based on third-wave cognitive therapy methods such as acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) and mindfulness (Gardner & Moore, 2007). In the first contribution from Sweden there will be a closer look on principles of the performance psychology services provided by the Swedish Olympic Committee (NOC) and provide an example of Cognitive Behavioral Training.
The second contribution will illustrate key aspects of service delivery of the Danish elite sport institute (Team Denmark) and in-depth describe mindfulness training, functional behavioral analyses, accept strategies, formulation of personal values, and collaboration with coaches to develop game plans for the specific sailing courses in the bay of Rio during the Olympics. The third contribution from Denmark describes the service delivery for the Danish national swimming team at the Olympics and outlines an ACT intervention with an individual swimmer. The final and fourth contribution will address sport psychology consultants who work across the blurred lines between performance enhancement and clinical issues with elite athletes from and ACT approach at the Olympics.
Keywords: Olympics, mindfulness, consulting, sport psychology services, elite sport Psychological preparation in Swedish Olympic athletes: A Cognitive-Behavioral Training approach Henrik Gustafsson, Carolina Lundqvist (Karlstad University & Swedish Olympic Committee) In this presentation we will describe the underlying principles of the performance psychology services provided by the Swedish Olympic Committee (NOC). The Swedish NOC model is based on Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. However, when communicating with athletes and coaches we have call it Cognitive Behavioral Training, to avoid negative connotation and also since the main bulk of work involves behavior change and not therapy (CBT: Gustafsson & Lundqvist, 2016).
A major part of the psychological preparation is to change dysfunctional performance related behaviors (e.g., avoiding certain anxiety provoking situations) into functional behaviors (e.g., follow the game plan or taking the penalty kick despite experiences of anxiety). CBT is based on two branches, cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy. A recent development in CBT is the so called “third wave”, where the focus on changing emotions and thoughts are replaced with a more acceptance based approach.
The third wave, including mindfulness and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) have gained research support in anxiety research and have several useful aspects in sport settings. This includes helping athletes to accept strong emotions as well as staying focused without exerting efforts on avoiding negative or unwanted thoughts. Our work is also influenced by traditional sport psychology, yet incorporated in a CBT framework.
A classification system adopted from Gardner and Moore (2006), including (a) performance related, (b) subclinical and (c) clinical issues guide the interventions and when referral is required. Lessons learned will also be described as well a future model for performance psychology provision in the Olympic context. 184Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: mindfulness, acceptance, interventions, Olympics In the eye of the hurricane.
Helping a Danish sailor maintain present-moment focus and valued behavior during the turmoil of the 2016 Olympic Games Kristoffer Henriksen (Team Denmark & University of Southern Denmark) “In the eye of a hurricane” was a metaphor used by a sailor during the 2016 Olympic Games. It described her intention to remain calm, present-moment focused and aware of her values, while at the same time a storm of media attention, results speculation, and social invitations was raging all around her. The present paper outlines my work with a sailor during the Games.
Through her story, I will illustrate key aspects of the way the sport psychology team of the Danish elite sport institution (Team Denmark) aims to help athletes deliver top performance in the most important and stressful events. These aspects are aligned with third wave cognitive mindfulness and acceptance based approaches. The preparatory work included mindfulness training, functional behavioral analyses, accept strategies, formulation of personal values, and collaboration with the coach to develop game plans for the specific sailing courses in the bay of Rio.
The sailing completion consisted of ten races over six days. During the games, daily sessions revolved around preparing for adversity. We formulated adversity scenarios and the sailor visualized of how she managed to deal with these scenarios in a value-based way while being mindful of the difficult emotions and thoughts that could potentially lure her into dysfunctional actions.
In the end she was successful and won an Olympic medal. Danish athletes often spontaneously view mental strength as the eternal presence of self-confidence and a corresponding absence of negative thoughts and emotions. Cases such as the present one have led the Team Denmark sport psychology team to develop a different definition of mental strength as: “The ability to act in accordance with your values and game plan even when you are under pressure and face difficult thoughts and emotions”.
Keywords: Rio, mindfulness, MAC approach, performance mindset, sailing, Olympic Games Going the distance: Service delivery for the Danish National swimming team during the Olympics Carsten Hvid Larsen (Team Denmark & University of Southern Denmark) In this presentation I will outline the service delivery for the Danish National swimming team and provide an example of my work based on mindfulness and acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) with an individual swimmer during the Olympics. Being part of the Olympics involves a range of stressors and distractions such as a tight packed swimming schedule (up to 12 starts across seven days), a lot of media attention, social media, others and own expectations. In my service delivery during the Olympics I tried to create an awareness of these stressors and distractions.
On a normal day at the Olympics I had a short talk with the swimmer in the morning. I observed the swimmer during warm-up and performed mindfulness sessions before or after warm-up and before finals. In between preliminary races and finals, I performed short mindfulness sessions and body-scans to ensure restitution and relaxation before finals.
Being successful as a swimmer at the Olympics is related to the degree to which a swimmer can accept the presence of negative thoughts, physiological arousal, emotions such as anxiety or anger, and remain engaged in the task, while behaving in accordance with his or her values (Henriksen, Diment, Hansen, & Larsen, 2016). Therefore it was my task to help swimmers to three key aspects: (a) teaching swimmers to open up, to accept, and to be willing to experience the full range of thoughts and emotions during a high pressure event; (b) teaching swimmers to mindfully engage in the present moment, including task-focused attention; and (c) helping swimmers to behave in accordance to personal values that describe how they would like to be as an athlete and help them engage in actions that display these values. Keywords: Olympics, mindfulness, consulting, sport psychology services, swimming 185Symposia Thursday July 13th Applying ACT in the context of elite sports: a reflection on blurred lines between clinical issues and performance enhancement Göran Kenttä (The Swedish Sport Confederation & The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences), Karin Moesch (The Swedish Sport Confederation & Halmstad University), Andreas Claeson (The Swedish Sport Confederation) Being an athlete at international level is primarily about performance accomplishments, and sport psychology has traditionally focused on performance enhancement and clinical issues has received limited attention.
However, mental health is becoming a greater concern in the context of elite sports (Baltzell, 2016; Gardner & Moore, 2006). Acceptance Commitment Therapy (ACT) is regarded as the third wave of Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) in clinical psychology (Hayes, 2004). Interestingly, ACT is becoming increasingly applied to the context of sports (Baltzell, 2016; Gardner & Moore, 2006).
Basically, brief interventions of ACT can conceptually be described by three core pillars represented by open, aware and engaged (Strosahl, Robinson, & Gustavsson, 2012). Open is about the ability to accept uncomfortable sensations and distress without resistance and struggle. Consequently, when open, behaviour is shaped by direct results rather than rigid rules.
Awareness is essentially the ability to experience the present moment and to take perspective on self and the story about self. Finally, engaged is the behaviour oriented dimension and is expressed by strong connection with values and the ability to sustain value-consistent actions. Moreover, value driven recovery behaviours may potentially enhance health and performance.
Committed actions are specific behaviours that arise as “reflections” based upon values. Ultimately, athletes should be able to stay connected to valued driven behaviours, on purpose, in the present moment, and do it with full acceptance. This presentation will address sport psychology consultants who work across the blurred lines between performance enhancement and clinical issues with elite athletes with ACT-based interventions at the Olympics.
Finally, the presentation will discuss some future directions with emphasise on preventive ACT-interventions applied to the elite sports. Keywords: Olympics, mindfulness, consulting, sport psychology services, elite sport Personality-trait-like individual differences and psychophysiology Chair: Sylvain Laborde (German Sport University Cologne) This symposium will be located at the crossroads between personality psychology and psychophysiology. So far, there are only few studies investigating personality-trait-like individual differences (PTLID) together with psychophysiological variables in sports, a joint approach that would help to better understand performance under pressure.
This symposium will therefore first endeavor to present, from both the athlete and the coach perspective, several PTLIDs relevant for performance. Three PTLIDs will be introduced (i.e., perfectionism, mental toughness, and emotional intelligence), together with their association to sport expertise. Second, the emotional intelligence of coaches will be discussed, together with its relationship with the perception and satisfaction of the athletes’ basic psychological needs.
To introduce the psychophysiological part, a theoretical approach on cardiac vagal control, the activity of the parasympathetic nervous system contributing to cardiac regulation, will be presented, and we will detail how it can be combined to the study of PTLID. Further, a unique study linking PTLID and cardiac vagal control will be presented, showing how PTLID relate differently to cardiac vagal control according to pressure, illustrating the principle of trait activation depending on context. Finally, given the links existing between PTLIDs and psychophysiology, a breathing technique having the potential to influence cardiac vagal control will be introduced, which may serve as a basis for a psychophysiological intervention triggering PTLID changes.
Keywords: personality, psychophysiology, traits, pressure, emotions, emotional intelligence 186Symposia Thursday July 13th The contribution of coping related variables and vagal tone on dual dart throwing performance under pressure Emma Mosley (Southampton Solent University, UK), Sylvain Laborde (German Sport University Cologne), Emma Kavanagh (Bournemouth University, UK) The aims of this study were 1) to assess the predictive role of coping related variables (CRV) on vagal tone (derived from heart rate variability), and 2) investigate the influence of CRV (including vagal tone) on dual dart throwing performance under low pressure (LP) and high pressure (HP) conditions. Participants (n = 51) completed the trait CRV questionnaires: Decision Specific Reinvestment Scale, Movement Specific Reinvestment Scale and Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire. They competed in a dual dart throwing task under LP and HP.
During the experiment vagal tone measurements were taken at baseline, task and recovery for 5 minutes. Self-reported ratings of stress were taken at the same time points via a visual analogue scale. After the dart throwing task, self-report measures of motivation, stress appraisal, attention, pressure and dart throwing experience were taken.
Results indicated that baseline vagal tone had no predictors, task vagal tone was predicted by baseline vagal tone in both pressure conditions with the addition of a trait CRV in HP. Recovery vagal tone was predicted by baseline vagal tone in both pressure conditions with the addition of a trait CRV in HP. Reactivity from baseline to task was predicted by a trait CRV only in HP.
Reactivity from task to recovery was predicted by a state CRV only in LP. Dual dart throwing performance was predicted by a combination of both CRV and vagal tone. Theorectically this study supports the notion that vagal tone during stress can be predicted by resting levels and demonstrates that vagal tone is a salient predictor of dart throwing performance.
At the applied level practitioners need to consider the role of attention and vagal tone on aiming tasks under pressure. Overall the current research suggests that coping related variables and vagal tone influence dual dart throwing performance differently dependent on pressure condition. Keywords: pressure, performance, dual task The relationship between coaches’ emotional intelligence and basic need satisfaction in athletes Matt Watson, Jens Kleinert (German Sport University Cologne) Emotional intelligence (EI) is a potentially important factor within coaching effectiveness, although there is a paucity of related empirical evidence.
From a basic needs theory perspective (Deci & Ryan), this study tested the hypotheses that coaches’ EI is positively linked to the perception and satisfaction of their athletes’ basic psychological needs. Coaches (N=16, Male = 68.8%; Mage = 33±11 yrs) and youth athletes (N=171, Male = 46.9%; Mage = 15±1.5 yrs) from 16 non-elite German sports teams (basketball n=3; football n=5; handball n=3; and volleyball n=5) took part in this cross-sectional study. The short form of the Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire (TEIQue-SF) was used to assess coaches’ EI.
Athletes’ need satisfaction and perceived autonomy support was assessed using the Contextual Basic Need Satisfaction questionnaire for training (CBANS) and the short form of the Sport Climate Questionnaire (SCQ), respectively. Through hierarchical linear modelling (HLM), coaches’ EI self-control emerged as a significant positive predictor of the accuracy of the coaches’ perception of athletes’ competence satisfaction. Furthermore, coaches’ EI well-being significantly related to athletes’ perceived autonomy support.
These findings suggest that EI has a role in effective coaching, although further research is warranted to clarify the intrapersonal and interpersonal mechanisms through which these results are realised. Keywords: emotional intelligence, athlete motivation, coaching effectiveness 187Symposia Thursday July 13th The relationship between mental toughness, emotional intelligence, and perfectionism in elite, amateur and non-athletes Robert Vaughan (York St John University, UK), Sylvain Laborde (German Sport University Cologne), Isobelle Kennedy, Kate Fallon (York St John University, UK) The purpose of this study was twofold; first to assess the differences across elite, amateur and non- athletes on Personality Trait Like Individual Differences (PTLID), namely mental toughness, emotional intelligence, and perfectionism, and second to investigate the relationship between those three traits. In total, 622 participants aged between 18 and 35 years with a range of athletic expertise e.g.
elite (n = 140), amateur (n = 272) and non-athletes (n = 209) from various sports completed a battery of general questionnaires assessing mental toughness, trait emotional intelligence and multi-dimensional perfectionism. Overall, results indicated that elite athletes scored higher than non-athletes on all three factors. This pattern also indicated that non-athletes consistently scored lower than athletes (elite and amateur), with elite athletes also outscoring amateur athletes on self and other orientated perfectionism.
Correlation analyses indicated a positive relationship between trait emotional intelligence and mental toughness with correlations between subscales ranging from r = .17 to r = .65. On the other hand, results indicated a largely negative relationship between multi-dimensional perfectionism and trait emotional intelligence with correlations between subscales ranging from r = -.29 to r = -.13, and similarly between multi-dimensional perfectionism and mental toughness with correlations between subscales ranging from r = -.35 to r = .28. Athletes with higher levels of expertise reported higher PTLID scores which may in turn facilitate performance.
This could be explained by the increased ability to control emotions and remain committed to achieving goals despite imposing high standards on oneself. These findings pave the way to future research investigating how these traits develop in athletes and influence performance. Keywords: mental toughness, emotional intelligence, perfectionism, elite athletes Vagal tank theory: a functional approach to self-regulation resources, bridging the gap between neurophysiology, cognitive psychology, and social psychology Sylvain Laborde (German Sport University Cologne), Emma Mosley (Southampton Solent University, UK), Alina Mertgen (University of Luxembourg) The aim of this presentation is to set the stage for the vagal tank theory, showcasing a functional resource account for self-regulation.
The vagal tank theory, building on neurophysiological, cognitive and social psychology approaches, will introduce a physiological indicator for self-regulation that has mainly been ignored from cognitive and social psychology, cardiac vagal control. Cardiac vagal control reflects the activity of the vagus nerve, the main nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system, involved in cardiac regulation. We propose cardiac vagal control to be an indicator of how efficiently self-regulatory resources are mobilized and used.
Three systematic levels of cardiac vagal control analysis are suggested: resting, reactivity, and recovery. Based on this physiological indicator we derive the metaphor of the vagal tank, which can get depleted and replenished. Overall, the vagal tank theory will enable to integrate previous findings from different disciplines and to stimulate new research questions, predictions, and designs regarding self-regulation.
At the applied level, the vagal tank theory will allow to understand the precise time course of action of factors influencing cardiac vagal control during resting, reactivity, and recovery situations. This knowledge can then be used to foster cardiac vagal control on a short-term and long-term basis. Keywords: heart rate variability, self-control, executive functions, vagal activity 188Symposia Thursday July 13th Slow paced breathing: Does the rhythm (inhalation/exhalation ratio) matter?
Martin Klämpfl, T. Hentschel (Department for Sport Science, University of Federal Armed Forces Munich) Slow paced breathing has beneficial effects on well-being, especially of persons with autonomic dysfunctions (e.g., Hasset et al., 2007). Cardiovascular resonance can be achieved by breathing in a frequency of six breaths per minute (Hirsh & Bishop, 1981).
Although it is known that a prolonged exhalation period increases the activity of the parasympathetic system, no information on the most effective rhythm (inhalation/exhalation ratio) is available yet. The aim of the present study was to examine the acute effects of different rhythms in paced breathing sessions. In a repeated measures design, twenty-eight male students participated in an initial resting condition and subsequently performed four paced breathing conditions (rhythms: 50:50, 45:55, 40:60, 35:65) featuring six breaths per minute, lasting for five minutes each and being presented via a smartphone app.
Both electrocardiography and subjective ratings about relaxation and practicability were recorded. The paced breathing sessions had positive significant effects on psychophysiological parameters compared to the resting condition. Rhythm only had a substantial effect on the subjective ratings about relaxation and practicability.
Thus, the selection of one specific breathing rhythm does not seem to be essential for obtaining acute positive bodily effects through slow paced breathing, but it is relevant for aspects of practicability and subjective feelings of relaxation. Future studies are suggested to apply longer practice sessions over a longer period of time to test possible different chronic effects of breathing rhythm. Keywords: psychophysiology, HRV, breathing rhythm, paced breathing, breathing app Innovations in athlete career research: Young scholars’ presentations and mentors’ panel Chair: Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden) Athlete career research in sport psychology has evolved dramatically during the last decade, with several new trends emerging and young scholars across the world interested in and contributing to its development.
This symposium brings together three young scholars from different countries (who are approaching the end of their doctoral project or just recently completed the degree) and their research mentors with the twofold purpose: (a) to introduce several recent trends in athlete career research through presentations of the young scholars, and (b) to discuss the projects and professional development of young researchers through the mentors’ panel. The organizer will begin with a brief overview of the recent and innovative trends in the athlete career topic (e.g., those derived from the cultural praxis of athletes’ careers paradigm; Stambulova & Ryba, 2013) and the content of the symposium. Following this, the first presenter will share results of a qualitative study aimed at investigating student-athlete and staff members’ perspectives of the challenges and support provided to British dual career athletes in their transition to university.
The second presenter will share the experiences of creating an empirical career model of Swedish handball players based on the holistic athletic career model (Wylleman, Reints, & De Knop, 2013) and in-depth interviews with the players. The third presenter will challenge the existing career development models in terms of their one-sided interpretation of athletic career termination by approaching this issue from the existential and narrative psychology perspectives. The symposium will be concluded by a mentors’ panel discussing the young scholars’ projects, their mentorship experiences, and strategies to establish and maintain cross-generation professional links to ensure sustainable development of the athlete career topic in future.
Keywords: athlete career development, research innovations, mentorship, professional development 189Symposia Thursday July 13th Dual career transitions: The UK university student-athletes’ and stakeholders’ perceptions Emma Vickers, Robert Morris, David Tod, Martin Eubank (Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, England) Recent EU guidelines on dual careers of athletes (2012) were outlined to ensure optimal support for dual career (DC) athletes. Within these guidelines, national stakeholders have been encouraged to develop national DC guidelines adapted to their respective cultures, based on research exploring national DC systems. The current doctoral study aimed to understand the experiences of student-athletes’ transitions to university within two UK universities.
Its innovative aspect relates to exploring overlaps and divergences in student- athletes and stakeholders’ perceptions of the DC transition in terms of the transition demands and social support. Data were collected from focus groups (n = 5) and interviews (n = 4) with student-athletes (n = 7), athlete support staff (n = 13) and academic staff (n = 3) and thematically analysed. Results revealed that student-athletes experienced the DC (i.e., education and sport) transition that coincided with their transition from adolescence to young adulthood.
Stakeholders recognized many student-athletes’ demands, including the difficulty of balancing club, university, and social life commitments, and changing priorities between the athlete and student role. In addition, student-athletes and stakeholders perceived that academic and athletic departments at the focal universities have no system of communication, leading to inconsistencies in the DC support. Data analysis also revealed divergences between student-athletes’ and stakeholders’ perspectives.
Stakeholders believed that they provide support to facilitate the sport-education balance that is specifically tailored to the student-athletes’ needs. Student-athletes, however, believed that there were occasions where the DC support did not facilitate their needs. These divergences may occur as a result of the different positions that student-athletes and stakeholders hold within the system.
Based on the study, recommendations on how to optimise the DC support are provided. Keywords: dual career, student-athletes, sport, education, psychological development From career initiation to discontinuation: an empirical career model of Swedish handball players Johan Ekengren, Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden) This doctoral project was inspired by a set of challenges articulated in the cultural praxis of athletes’ careers paradigm (Stambulova & Ryba, 2013), and especially in regard of contextualizing career research and existing ‘general’ frameworks. Innovative aspects of this study consisted of: (a) exploring career experiences of Swedish handball players with foci on stages and transitions in their athletic and non-athletic development, and (b) consolidating the players’ first-hand data into an empirical career model of Swedish handball players (further – the empirical model).
The holistic athletic career model (Wylleman, Reints & De Knop, 2013) served as a prototype for the empirical model and was useful in structuring the players’ career experiences. Eighteen elite Swedish handball players (retiring or just recently retired) took part in narrative type interviews about their whole careers with an interest in both athletic and non-athletic developments. Thematic analysis initially took a deductive turn to identify the handball career structure, and then the empirical data relevant to each stage/sub-stage were analysed inductively to identify themes describing players’ career experiences at each stage.
Finally, the themes were incorporated into the stage-like structure, and the empirical model was completed. The model describes careers of Swedish handball players as having four stages – initiation, development (with three sub-stages), mastery (with four sub-stages), and discontinuation. It also contains eight layers – athletic categorisation in terms of age, pathways of the Swedish Handball Federation, academic/vocational, psychological, psychosocial, and financial developments – all aligned with age markers and complemented by sets of themes describing players’ stage-by-stage career experiences from the holistic perspective.
Further in the project the empirical model will be used to create the ‘whole career’ psychological support system for Swedish handball players. 190Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: career experiences, cultural praxis, empirical model, handball, holistic athletic career model. When is the “right” time to retire?
An existential-narrative perspective on endings in athletic careers Noora J. Ronkainen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK), Tatiana V. Ryba (University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland) Recent scholarship has promoted cultural praxis of athletes’ careers as the third wave of career research which implies “reflexive situatedness of career projects in relevant socio-cultural and historical contexts” and “draws attention to diversity in career patterns and trajectories” (Stambulova & Ryba, 2014, p.
10). In the first author’s doctoral research, we employed a novel theoretical approach, an existential-narrative framework, to explore subjective careers of Finnish endurance athletes. The study sought to understand how these athletes construct narratives surrounding athletic retirement and explored the forms of resistance they develop towards negative cultural assumptions surrounding ageing athletes.
Ten Finnish male endurance athletes, aged 25-62, were interviewed with the life story approach. By participating (or planning to participate) in competitive sport also several years after reaching their athletic peak, several athletes challenged the assumption that an athletic career has a normative end point. That is, their athletic practices and narrative constructions challenged modernist models of an athletic career, which are built on an implicit understanding of sport as a project of youth.
Since the scholarship on athletic careers carries a prescriptive assumption of career termination when athletes’ physical performance starts to decline, there is a danger that our research practices work to legitimise the monological performance narratives of sport while alienating athletes whose experiences do not comply with these storylines. The findings are discussed in light of existential and narrative psychology, Nordic movement culture, and implications for applied practitioners working with mature athletes. Keywords: ageing athletes, career transitions, Nordic sport culture, athletic identity Ensuring sustainable development of athlete career research: Mentors’ perspective David Tod (Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, England), Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden), Tatiana V.
Ryba (University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland), Robert Morris (Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, England), Martin Eubank (Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, England) The panel will consist of four mentors led by a moderator (discussant). The panellists will be invited to elaborate on: (a) innovations in athlete career research in general, and particularly on the projects and presentations of the young scholars, (b) their mentorship experiences and how they help young scholars to navigate their careers, and (c) strategies on improving international collaboration and cross-generation professional links to ensure continuity and integrity in further development of the athlete career topic in sport psychology. The moderator will encourage discussion between the panellists and facilitate audience questions and feedback.
Keywords: athlete career research, mentor-trainee experiences, professional reflections, professional development 191Symposia Thursday July 13th Symposia Session 6. (10.30-12) Dual career and transitions: a Mediterranean perspective Chair: Cristina López de Subijana (Sport Sciences Faculty-Technical University of Madrid) The major idea of this symposium is to explore in deep the dual career and transitions in some Mediterranean countries like Lebanon, Eslovenia and Spain. We will have the chance to analysis some topic in each of those countries.
First of all, from Spain, Elena Conde of the Catholic University of Murcia will describe the dual or triple career that 96 elite athletes of non Olympic sport have to face. Continuing in Spain, Jose Luis Chamorro from the European University of Madrid will show how 478 junior soccer players of elite clubs cope with the transition to senior level in terms of passion and behavioural regulation. Then, Aurelie Ledon from the University of Antonine, Lebanon, will present how the Young athletes in the Middle East take decisions about the sport career (moving or not to a high performance center, for example).
She will show us the results of 60 semi directive interviews. Finally and to conclude Javier Ramos will present differences found at 447 ex-elite athletes at the retirement transitions among to dual career paths in Spain: the convergent and parallel models. Keywords: dual career, elite athletes, transitions, culture, mediterranean Dual career of non-olympic athletes in Spain Elena Conde (Sport Sciences Faculty-Murcia Catholic University), Cristina López de Subijana (Sport Sciences Faculty-Technical University of Madrid) The goal of the present study was to explore the factors that could influence the dual career of high level athletes of non-Olympic modalities in Spain.
A cross-sectional descriptive study was used, based on an ad hoc questionnaire. The sample was 96 high level athletes (25.1±8.1 years-old) of non-Olympic modalities with 13.2±6.7 hours of training load per week. Regarding the studies in which they were enrolled, 33.7% of them were studying higher education studies while 23.2% did not study any type of courses.
41.1% of athletes worked at the same time as they were developing their career in the elite sport, being 61.1% full-time workers and 38.9% part-time workers. This fact should be taken into account because most of these athletes study, work and develop their sport career at the same time. It seems that they have a triple career.
The difficulty for reconciling sports life and training, in a scale from 1 to 4, was high (3.4±0.6). With respect to barriers to study, in a scale from 1 to 3, the high price of studies (2.5±0.8) and the time management issues appeared (2.3±0.8 for “I don’t have time”; 2.3±0.8 for “the study center is far away”; 2.3 ±0.6 for “timetables are not flexible”) in a higher degree. It was also remarkable how 56.2% of athletes did not receive information regarding the benefits mentioned in the Royal Decree 971/2007 of Elite athletes.
Keywords: dual career, difficulties, elite athletes, non-olympic Passion and behavioural regulation in the junior to senior transition José María López Chamorro (European University of Madrid), Miquel Torregrossa (Autonomous University of Barcelona), Tomás García-Calvo (Extremadura University), Juan Jose Pulido (Extremadura University) In the last decade, the concept of Dual Careers (DC) has gained importance and interest among researchers and political and sports organisations. However, athletes frequently prioritize their athletic career at the expense of academic achievement (Cosh & Tully, 2014). For this reason, the effort in the promotion of the DC from institutions political or federative and from others professional (i.e., sports psychologist, researchers) could lose powerful for those athletes or clubs focused on sport success if it separate athlete level 192Symposia Thursday July 13th of academic/vocational level (Wylleman et al., 2013).
This study aims to explore the relationship between psychological variables that have influence in athlete level, as passion and behavioural regulation, with the appreciation of future achievements in different life domains (i.e., sport and academic lifes) in Spanish young elite football players. Participants were 478 soccer players, ranging in age from 16 to19 years old (M = 17.45; SD = .71) belonging to the maximum Spanish under-18 division clubs. Bivariate correlations analyses showed that amotivation, controlled regulation and obsessive passion were negatively correlated with the appreciation of getting future achievements in academic life, whereas this relationship was positive regarding to harmonious passion.
Regression analyses showed that amotivation negatively predicted the appreciation of future achievement in both life spheres, harmonious passion positively predicted also the appreciation of future achievement in both life spheres but, obsessive passion negatively predicted the appreciation of future achievement in academic life. Results suggests that behavioural regulation and passion could have influence in the decision of carrying out a DC. It will be discussed the implication that could have these results regarding to link athlete with academic levels.
Keywords: transitions, professional sport, soccer, junior Career transitions among high level young athletes: Elite access in Europe and Middle East Aurélie Ledon, Isabella Fren, Elie Alam, Léa Farhat (Sport Sciences Faculty-Antonine University-Lebanon) In the majority of sports, elite athletes frequently need to make decisions which involve their career and one of them concerns the choice of whether or not to integrate an elite sport training center. This is the case in Europe but it’s not the same system in the Middle East. This entrance has multiple implications to which the athlete will have to adapt to himself/herself.
The first question is to know which elements are susceptible to influence ahletes’decisions. This study model takes into account four factors susceptible to influence this decision (i.e., model push-pull-antipush-antipull) (Schultz, Morton, & Wercherle, 1998): (1) elements of attraction (i.e., interests which offers new situation), (2) elements of incentive (i.e., elements of the current context which urge going towards something else), (3) elements of attachment ( i.e., what can be lost in the change) and, (4) of the deterrents (i.e., costs and risks which occur in the new situation). The second question concerns the differences between Europe and Middle East in access to elite sport.
Sixty semi directive interviews were held, focusing on the entrance to sports practices and processes influencing these choices. Keywords: decision-making, elite athletes, transition of career, Europe, Middle East Analyzing in deep dual career models Javier Ramos, Cristina López de Subijana, Maribel Barriopedro, Carlos Muniesa (Sport Sciences Faculty- European University of Madrid) The aim of this study was to analyze if the academic level, the academic support and the degree of difficulties experienced after the sport retirement were different by the athletes following convergent and parallel dual career models (Pallarés et al., 2011). Four-hundred and forty-seven retired athletes fulfilled a 52 items questionnaire.
The results showed that the academic level at retirement and at the moment of the study were independent of the model of Dual Career they took. However, the athletes that followed a parallel model achieved more frequently 2nd and 3rd level of higher education. Significant differences were found regarding the academic support received.
Athletes following a convergent path benefited more of the 3-5% for accessing the university (χ2 (3) = 9.2; p= .027), with changes of group of class (χ2(3)= 11.2; p=.011), in flexibility with the continuous evaluation of the courses (χ2(3)= 8.5; p=.036) and for moving their records from one study center to another (χ2(3)= 15.8; p=.001). Athletes that combined studies in a parallel model obtained more changes for exam dates due to competition (χ2 (3)= 19.9; p <.001). Athletes enrolled in a parallel model perceived fewer difficulties at the retirement in respect of professional career (F3,411=4.6; p=.004) and economic affairs 193Symposia Thursday July 13th (F3,411=6.6; p<.001).
Despite achieving similar academic levels, athletes that followed parallel careers benefited less from academic support and experienced fewer difficulties after retirement. Funding: This project was funded by the Research Advance Grant Program of the International Olympic Committee. Keywords: dual career, career paths, career models Individual differences, self-regulated learning, and practice-enhancement through a sport expertise lens Chair: Bradley W.
Young (University of Ottawa) Although self-regulation has been studied for decades in sport psychology, focus has been on self- regulatory skills for competitive readiness. Little work has attended to how self-regulation enhances the learning, training or deliberate practice of athletes (i.e., a practice-enhancement orientation). There is a need to understand whether individual differences variables for self-regulated learning (SRL) and the personal control of preparatory efforts relate to practice measures, and expertise levels, in athletes (Baker & Young, 2014; Tedesqui & Young, 2015; Toering & Jordet, 2015).
This symposium synthesizes emerging data on this topic from various international research groups. First, Tedesqui and Young examine how different individual difference variables explain deliberate practice and commitment in North American athletes, documenting the unique associations of grit, self-control and conscientious characteristics. McCardle and colleagues examine whether SRL is being reliably and validly surveyed in the sport training domain.
Drawing from emerging work in a pan-Canadian sample, they use psychometric analyses to note advances in an SRL survey, highlight remaining limitations, and provide a template for future confirmation. Weissensteiner et al. detail the deployment of an SRL instrument in the Australian system.
They discuss whether scores for SRL subscales can reliably discriminate expertise levels and what this may mean for talent identification strategies. Toering, drawing upon her work in Scandinavian and Dutch samples, revisits the pragmatics of assessing SRL, real-world implications of SRL diagnostics, and problematizes whether prior efforts have faithfully examined self-regulation. Finally, Young and Baker integrate and discuss whether/how these results support key tenets of expert development frameworks, the implications for predictive validity on key criterion measures, and future considerations for measurement and application.
Keywords: sport expertise development, individual differences, self-regulated learning, deliberate practice Investigating the roles of self-control, conscientiousness, and grit on athletes' practice and commitment to their sport Rafael A.B. Tedesqui, Bradley W. Young (University of Ottawa) Self-Control (SC; Tangney et al., 2004), Conscientiousness (C; McCrae & Lockenhöff, 2010), and Grit (Duckworth et al., 2007) are dispositional characteristics consistently linked to achievement outside sport (e.g., Credé et al., 2016).
Little research has investigated their role on athletes’ expertise development (Tedesqui & Young, 2017; Toering & Jordet, 2015). We examined the role of SC, C, and Grit subscales for predicting athletes’ engagement in practice amounts and commitment-related variables related to sport expertise. Participants included 293 athletes (135 female, M¬age = 21.13, SD = 6.82; M¬practice = 14.05 hr/week, SD = 8.04) who completed a survey comprising SC, C, and Grit subscales, and measures for engagement in deliberate practice, mandatory and optional practice, and thoughts about switching and quitting one’s sport.
For each dependent variable, we used backward hierarchical regressions to assess the relative prediction of personality subscales, controlling for age. Perseverance of Effort (Grit subscale; βPE = .27, partial R2 = .04), Dutifulness (C subscale; βDut = -.25, partial R2 = .05), and Achievement Striving (C subscale; βAch = .16, partial R2 = .01) explained 194Symposia Thursday July 13th deliberate practice (R2 = .14). Perseverance of Effort (βPE = .27, partial R2 = .06) and Self-Discipline (SC subscale; βSCSD = .19, partial R2 = .03) explained mandatory practice (R2 = .14).
Achievement Striving (βAch = .18, partial R2 = .02) and Self-Discipline (βSCSD = .18, partial R2 = .02) explained optional practice (R2 = .10). Consistency of Interests (Grit subscale) solely predicted switching (R2 = .11; βCI = -.33), and explained quitting (R2 = .11; βCI = -.20, partial R2 = .03) along with Self-Discipline (βSCSD = -.15, partial R2 = .02). These findings suggest that the investigated traits have differential roles in predicting athletes’ sport expertise development, related to directing and sustaining efforts on developmental pursuits and focus on preparatory tasks.
Keywords: self-control, conscientiousness, grit, personality, sport expertise development Building on the SRL-SRS: Psychometric evaluation of measures of self-regulated learning in a sport practice context Lindsay McCardle (University of Ottawa, York University), Bradley W. Young, Rafael A.B. Tedesqui, Dora Bartulovic (University of Ottawa), Sharleen Hoar (Canadian Sport Institute - Pacific), Maxime Trempe (Bishop's University), Joseph Baker (York University) Considering self-regulated learning (SRL) as a correlate of quality practice and performance requires valid measurement of SRL.
Toering et al. (2012) created the Self-Regulated Learning – Self-Report Scale (SRL-SRS) to measure SRL as a stable attribute in multiple domains. Bartulovic, Young, and Baker (2017) refined the scale to be specific to sport training, meeting recommendations SRL be context-dependent (Winne & Hadwin, 1998).
We aimed to confirm the SRL-SRS for sport training and extend items to include conceptually-pertinent content previously omitted. From a pan-Canadian sample, 297 individual-sport athletes (age=13-59;48% female) completed 33 SRL-SRS for sport training items representing metacognitive (planning, self-monitoring, evaluation, reflection) and motivational (effort, self-efficacy) subscales, plus 15 new items (e.g., goal setting, concentration). Confirmatory factor analysis on these 33 SRL-SRS items showed acceptable model fit (CFI=.90); subscale correlations were very high, particularly across metacognitive subscales (r=.80-.99).
Maximum shared variance (MSV) values (.44-.98) were concerning, with self-monitoring, evaluation and reflection converging. To develop a psychometrically and conceptually sound structure, we ran a series of exploratory factor analyses (EFA) on the SRL-SRS for sport training items, iteratively deleting and moving items, resulting in 24 items on 4 factors. To extend this model, we ran a series of EFA and exploratory structural equation modeling (ESEM) analyses to iteratively add new items, resulting in 32 items on 6 factors (planning, checking, reflecting and evaluating, self-efficacy, task perseverance, task concentration).
ESEM model fit (CFI=.96), subscale loadings (all >.38) and subscale correlations were good (.29-.74), with convergent validity greatly improved (MSV=.32-.55). We discuss this model as it relates to the evolution of Toering et al.'s original work, and next steps toward a reliable and valid instrument. Keywords: self-regulated learning, sport practice, measurement, survey Measuring and facilitating athlete self-regulation within an Australian context Juanita R.
Weissensteiner, Daniel Green, Courtney R. Porter (Australian Institute of Sport - Canberra), Clare MacMahon (Swinburne University) There is little doubt psychological factors and in particular self-regulation (Zimmerman, 1986) is central to not only an athlete enduring the developmental journey to an elite level (Mathews et al., 2012; Toohey et al., 2015) but also critical to associated learning and performance both in and out of sport (Jonker et al., 2010, 2011). Further enquiry is required to transpose these theoretical underpinnings into effective Talent Identification and Development (TID) strategies.
To confirm the criticality of self-regulation within the Australian sporting context, the Self-Regulation of Learning Self-Report scale (SRL-SRS; Toering et al., 2012) was administered to over 1000 Australian athletes across the FTEM (Foundation, Talent, Elite & Mastery) Athlete 195Symposia Thursday July 13th Development Pathway (Green & Weissensteiner, 2015; Gulbin et al., 2013; Weissensteiner, 2017). The results revealed that elite and mastery level athletes were indeed characterised by significantly higher levels of self- regulation compared to a recreational ‘control’ group. Interestingly however, the results also revealed a ‘spike’ specific to newly identified sporting talent and a ‘drop’ specific to athletes within the pre-elite development and transition to elite phases.
Moreover, inclusion of a measure of social desirability, the Marlowe-Crowne Questionnaire (Crowne & Marlowe, 1960) within the SRL-SRS, revealed an association between self-reporting and social desirability, suggesting potential limits to administering psychological inventories in isolation to behavioural confirmation within the context of formalised TID initiatives. These learnings have directly informed current TID practice, including athlete profiling and feedback utilising these ‘Australianised’ sport- specific benchmarks and subsequent education and tailored interventions for both athletes and their coaches. These strategies will be showcased in this presentation along with potential future directions.
Keywords: self-regulation; skill groups; talent identification and development; skill learning; athlete development pathways Self-regulation, expertise development, and performance in sport: Are we really bridging the science-practice gap? Tynke Toering (Norwegian School of Sport Sciences) Self-regulation in the learning context refers to self-directed processes that enable individuals to transform their thoughts into performance skills. This means that individuals set and live up to their own standards for reaching a certain goal, they know how to meet these standards, and they undertake the necessary action.
Self-regulation processes have been proposed to help people learn more effectively as opposed to immediately produce high levels of expertise (Zimmerman, 2006). They seem to help athletes become aware of what is required at several performance levels, which then sets the standards for their practice efforts (e.g., Cleary & Zimmerman, 2001; Jonker et al., 2010; Toering et al., 2009). Several talent development studies have indicated that self-regulation may be one of the factors facilitating the development of promising performers (e.g., Baker & Young, 2014).
However, does the research sufficiently contribute to bridging the science-practice gap? The following three issues related to the previous question will be discussed. 1) What do questionnaires scores mean if they are not connected to “the real world”?
For example, some of our own exploratory studies suggest that junior elite footballers do not yet fully understand the requirements of professional football and therefore believe they do better than they really do. 2) The use of some of the research-based tools meant to facilitate self-regulation can be questioned. For instance, one can ask whether obliging athletes to keep a training log goes hand in hand with the definition of self-regulation.
In addition, is it enough that a coach asks questions instead of telling athletes what to do, to make them self-regulate? 3) Many measurement instruments for self-regulation and related concepts such as self-control and grit have been developed in average populations. It can be discussed whether these instruments sufficiently capture what these concepts mean to elite athletes.
Keywords: self-regulated learning; sport talent development; research-based applied tools; measurement instruments Where are we? Where do we go? Integrating and extending perspectives on key personality and self-regulatory variables for the enhancement of sport practice Bradley W.
Young (University of Ottawa), Joseph Baker (York University) The last decade has seen resurgence in the study of psychological variables that might underpin successful sport performance. This symposium explores variables ranging from personality, self-control, and grit to elements of self-regulated learning (SRL). In this final presentation, we discuss the merits of merging 196Symposia Thursday July 13th personality variables that assess ‘higher-level’ dispositions for hard work and consistency of interests with ‘lower-level’ variables for proficiencies/processes that are more proximally related to training tasks.
We make the case that a synergistic understanding of these variables adds to dominant sport expertise development frameworks. Most expertise research investigates two empirical tenets, using variables of interest to (a) discriminate escalating skill groups, and (b) explain maximal variance in deliberate practice (Ericsson et al., 1993). We appraise the aforementioned presentations and other emerging research to demonstrate how well each of these tenets is supported, and to problematize how little research considers the quality of practice, instead focusing on variables that maximize practice amounts.
Further, we discuss whether newfound understandings of SRL can help refine the operationalization of deliberate practice in sport. Finally, we appraise the evolution of self-report measures for the study of individual differences and SRL competencies, from their origins in non-sport domains with non-elite samples, to more recent instruments claiming to be specific to the sport training context and relevant to elite samples. Discussion focuses on what this evolution means for assessment, predictive validity and effect sizes, and the pragmatics of these instruments in applied diagnostic (talent identification) settings.
We also consider the limits to these surveys and how future methods might capture the fullest range of SRL processes, including in situ examinations of athletes’ self-regulated practice efforts. Keywords: self-regulated learning; personality; sport expertise frameworks; talent identification; quality sport practice Fighting the stereotypes: working in martial arts and combat sports Chair: Anastasiya Khomutova (University of Brighton) Work within combat sports (MMA, boxing, judo, etc.) has received comparatively little attention in the way of academic research or applied case studies within recent sport psychology literature, despite an abundance of attention within sport sociology and related fields (for instance, Sanchez Garcia and Spencer, 2013; Spencer, 2011; Woodward, 2007). With the recent emergence of a new, international and multi- disciplinary academic field dedicated to martial arts studies (see Bowman 2015), interest in the value of sport psychology research for understanding and making effective interventions into such practices is warranted.
The potential contributions of scholars and practitioners in sport psychology can be said to centre on a number of key topics, such as supporting athletes and resolving ethical dilemmas of working in this domain (Lane, 2006; Schinke, 2007, 2014), exploring athletes’ narratives of the practice of cutting weight (Brito et al., 2012; Morton & Close, 2010), and understanding the processes associated with mental preparation for competitive fights (Jensen et al., 2013; Simpson & Wrisberg, 2013). This symposium aims to highlight the value of academic knowledge and applied experience in these thematic areas. The first presentation will focus on the reflections of a neophyte practitioner in sport psychology on a year spent with a local amateur boxing club, helping boxers of different gender and age categories to prepare for local and national competitions.
The following study will discuss the journey of an Olympic judo athlete and the support that was given to her on the road to the Rio Olympic Games. The third presentation will focus on a key contemporary issue within combat sports, exploring the practice of weight cutting among Dutch judoka. Following that, the last presentation will discuss the pedagogical opportunities that arise when examining the moral boundaries that are constructed through and within martial arts and combat sports.
Keywords: combat sports, boxing, judo, violence, mixed martial arts, reflective practice Reflections on a year working with a boxing club: fight or flight? Anastasiya Khomutova (University of Brighton) 197Symposia Thursday July 13th This presentation will reflect on a year spent working with a local amateur boxing club as a volunteer performance psychologist. Although the importance of mental preparation in competitive boxing has been recognised by sport psychology scholars and practitioners (Cunningham & Turner, 2016; Schinke, 2015), entering boxing spaces can be quite difficult for ‘outsiders’, such as sport psychology professionals.
Furthermore, neophyte practitioners in sport psychology often face additional obstacles when starting their careers and have to adjust their expectations of applied work based on their initial experiences in the field (Owton, Bond & Tod, 2014). Several such issues will be addressed in this presentation, including difficulties with entering this sport, working as a female in a predominantly male domain, and the importance (and difficulties) of establishing rapport and gaining trust from both the boxers and their coaches. These reflections will conclude with recommendations to the early career sport psychologist as well as to more experienced practitioners who are considering entering the world of boxing, including the importance of mentoring and supervision for junior practitioners, advantages of regular note-taking (or updating reflective diaries) (Moon, 2004), close work with coaching staff, and some ethical considerations, e.g.
athletes’ eating habits; friendship with clients (Heyman, 1990). Elite Judoka athlete: Reflecting on psychological support leading up to Rio 2016 Claire Rossato (University of Greenwich) Some athletes and teams thrive in the Olympic arena and attain peak performances, while others with similar talent and preparation under-perform (Fletcher & Wagstaff, 2009). In addition, the application of mental skills in sports is linked with the development and maintenance of expert performance (Orlick, 2000).
In particular several psychological variables have been linked with enhanced performance within martial arts, for example self-talk (Ferrai, 1999), concentration strategies (Williams & Elliott, 1999); anxiety control (Taylor, 1996) and imagery (Weinberg, Seabourne & Jackson, 1981). The purpose of this presentation is to examine and explore my experiences of working within combat sport leading up to the Rio 2016 Olympics. In this instance, professional judgment and decision making are important constructs to evaluate regarding the effectiveness of applied practice (Martindale & Collins, 2007).
A Pre-Performance Routine (PPR) was adopted to help the athlete focus upon performance. The PPR included reframing (Meyers, Whelan & Murphy 1996) and self-talk interventions (Hardy, Gammage, & Hall, 2001). These were adopted in order to aid in improved performance (Mesagno, Marchant & Morris, 2008).
Evaluation instruments such as a performance profile (Butler & Hardy, 1992) were adopted to assess the impact of psychological interventions alongside regular psychological consultations. Evaluating applied practice should exam quality of support, psychological skills and athlete’s response to support and performance (Anderson, Miles, Mahoney & Robinson, 2002); these areas will be discussed throughout. Making weight or making trouble?
The extent and nature of weight cutting of Dutch competitive judokas Karin de Bruin (Sportpsycholoog, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands), Jessica Gal (Sportartsen, Amsterdam, the Netherlands), P.J. Beek (VU University Amsterdam, MOVE, the Netherlands) Weight-class sports are identified among the sport types at-risk for eating disorders (Sundgot-Borgen & Torstveit, 2004). Actual studies into this area seem to be an exception (Artioli et al., 2010; Franchini et al., 2012).
More insight is needed into the extent and nature of weight making and the experienced antecedents and consequences. For this study, a questionnaire into weight making was developed and validated (de Bruin, Gal, & Beek, 2015) and afterwards completed by 461 Dutch elite and non-elite competitive men and women judokas over 12 years of age among all weight classes. In addition, interviews were held with 18 (former) elite judokas along with focus group sessions with parents, trainers, and sports staff.
The results showed that weight 198Symposia Thursday July 13th making is widely spread among Dutch judokas. The extent and nature of this weight cutting appears to differ between the level of competition, gender, age, and weight class. Some athletes felt stimulated by their club culture to start in time and train at their competition weight.
Yet, gradually dieting is experienced as difficult. Perceived behavioural control and behavioural intention appeared to be significant factors in explaining the severity and aggressiveness of weight making. Long-lasting aggressive weight making seems to be accompanied by injuries and mental complaints, and could also negatively impact performance.
Frequent weight cutting and its subsequent focus on weight, body and food, might even lead to eating disorder symptomatology in certain athletes. In conclusion, it takes a cultural U-turn to beat the current trouble making way of weight making with Ippon and go to a widespread healthier approach. Love fighting hate violence: Constructing moral boundaries in combat sports Alex Channon (University of Brighton) This theoretically-focused presentation will outline a symbolic interactionist (SI) reading of the manner in which practitioners of martial arts and combat sports (MACS) construct frameworks of meaning around their engagement in activities centring on fighting (Matthews and Channon 2016; Jackson-Jacobs 2013).
It will argue that SI can significantly aid our understanding of aggression and violence in sport, although its uptake as a theoretical framework by sport psychology scholars has been limited despite a long-standing fascination with the topic in this field (Baird & McGannon 2009). By articulating how SI can be used in this manner, the presentation will argue for more cautious scholarly use of the term ‘violence’ with respect to MACS, particularly by attending to the consequences such language has for identity work among martial artists/combat athletes (Matthews and Channon 2016). Following this, the presentation will outline the Love Fighting Hate Violence campaign (www.lfhv.org) – a developing, research-informed intervention program designed and implemented in line with SI principles, which seeks to build and support anti-violence advocacy within and among MACS practitioner communities.
It will outline the construction of original pedagogical tools for delivering robust anti-violence education through MACS practice, based on participatory action research in collaboration with various partners, including experienced MACS instructors (n=6), NGB representatives from a variety of MACS disciplines (n=5), an international anti-violence charity, and an international sport-for- development program. The presentation will conclude by inviting critical engagement with the aims of this project and its theoretical underpinnings. Can you compete?
A BBC online intervention study. Research with reach, scientific value and real-world impact Chair: Andy Lane (University of Wolverhampton) With an estimated 3 billion internet users worldwide, online research and practice has potential for wide reaching effects. In the present study, we worked with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) Lab UK to develop and test an online task that incorporated interpersonal competition.
Narrated by former Olympic gold medallist Michael Johnson, an excess of 100,000 participants were involved. The objective was to create pressure conditions so that participants would seek to regulate emotions as part of mental preparation. As use of online methods in sport psychology is relatively novel, this data has significance both practically and theoretically.
The aim of the present symposium is to review the undertaking of online research in sport psychology and report findings from three studies produced from this data. First, given wide-ranging interest in emotion-performance relationships, we investigated differences between emotions that participants associated with best and worst performance, examining the potentially moderating effects of age and gender. Second, we investigated the utility of Lane and Terry’s (2000) conceptual model.
This model identifies 199Symposia Thursday July 13th depression as a pivotal emotional state. We sought to test and extend the model by examining the influence of dejection on pre-competitive emotions, emotion regulation, psychological skills, effort, performance, beliefs, and performance. Third, we investigated the notion that interventions which require self-control could negatively affect performance through depleting cognitive resources.
We selected imagery as an intervention requiring self-control. Specifically, we investigated imagery focused on the task, and imagery focused on achieving an outcome when compared to control and placebo group data. Our fourth presentation reviews the lessons learned from this process, and how our research has flourished as a consequence.
We report how we extend this research into the area of emotional eating. Keywords: online, impact, interventions, emotion, mood, performance Emotions related to best and worst competitive performances: Effects of age and gender Andy Lane, Andrew Friesen (University of Wolverhampton), Tracey Devonport (Sheffield University), Peter Totterdell (University of Wolverhampton) Successful performance has been associated with pleasant emotions and positive mental health whereas failure has associated with unpleasant emotions and negative mental health. Best and worst performances are defined in relative terms whereby success and failure is measured by whether or not someone achieves or fails to achieve her/his goal in a competitive setting.
The present study examined differences in the intensity of emotions related to best and worst performance in a competition recalled from memory. Data were collected from an online competition where participants (n = 69,550) recalled how they felt during their best and worst performance. With such a large sample, interpretation of results focused on the size of effect.
Results from a repeated measures MANOVA revealed weak but significant 3-way and 2-way interaction effects between best- worst performance, age and gender, and so the nature of these differences was not emphasized. The largest effect size was found for best and worst performance (partial eta2 = .50). Best performance were related to higher scores for feeling happy, excited, and energetic and lower scores for feeling anger and dejection, compared to worst performance.
The difference between best and worst performance was much smaller for anxiety. Best performance associated with moderately intense anxiety and worst performance with high anxiety. Results revealed a weak main effect (partial eta2 = .08) for gender whereby males reported higher anger and females reported higher anxiety in both best and worst competition.
In conclusion, results show large differences in the emotional responses related to best and worst performance and revealed a small gender effect. Future research should investigate the effects of individual beliefs of the effects of emotions on performance. Keywords: emotions, mood, age, gender, regulation A test and extension of Lane and Terry’s (2000) conceptual model of mood-performance relationships using a large internet sample Andy Lane (University of Wolverhampton), Peter Terry (University of Southern Queensland) According to Lane and Terry (2000) depression is a key emotion that moderates the mood-performance relationship.
The present study tested and extended Lane and Terry’s (2000) conceptual model of mood- performance relationships using a large dataset from an online experiment. Participants (N = 73,537) completed measures of trait emotion regulation, emotion regulation beliefs, regulation efficacy, use of psychological skills, and rated their anger, anxiety, dejection, excitement, energy, and happiness before completing a competitive concentration task against a virtual opponent. Post-competition, participants completed measures of perceived exerted effort exerted, beliefs about the quality of their mental preparation, and subjective performance.
Results from a MANOVA showed that dejection associated with worse performance as individuals reporting no feelings of dejection performed 3.2% better. Dejection was related to 200Symposia Thursday July 13th higher anxiety and anger scores and lower energy, excitement, and happiness scores. The proposed moderating effect of dejection was supported for the anxiety-performance relationship but not the anger- performance relationship.
In participants who did not report feeling dejected, those who reported moderate or high anxiety outperformed those reporting low anxiety by about 1.6%. Overall, results showed partial support for Lane and Terry’s model. In terms of extending the model, results showed dejection related with greater use of suppression, less frequent use of reappraisal and psychological skills, lower emotion regulation beliefs, and lower emotion regulation efficacy.
Further, dejection related with greater effort during performance, beliefs that pre-competition emotions did not assist goal achievement, and low subjective performance. Future research is required to investigate the role of intense unwanted emotions in emotion regulation and performance. Keywords: self-regulation, affect, competition, mood, depression Imagery: An intervention to improve performance or an act of self-control that hinders performance?
Andy Lane, Tracey Devonport, Andrew Friesen (University of Wolverhampton), Peter Totterdell (Sheffield University) The strength model of self-control posits that repeated acts of self-control are related to poor performance. Traditional self-control studies are designed using sequential tasks with each task requiring self- control. Performing a psychological intervention such as imagery requires self-control in order to produce and hold an image.
Imagery has been found to be effective among individuals with sufficient imagery skills. However, recent theory posits that performers can counter the effects of resource depletion from self-control. The present study investigated self-control using a sequential task design.
The self-control task was an online imagery intervention intended to enhance performance on a competitive concentration game task. Participants were randomly allocated to one of four intervention groups: a) outcome imagery, b) instructional imagery, c) an active control group (placebo) who received encouragement only, and d) an inactive control group (inert) who received no treatment. ANOVA results from an online sample of 16,017 participants indicated that outcome imagery and placebo groups performed better on the concentration task, and reported more positive emotions than the inert control and instructional imagery groups.
In summary, we found that an imagery intervention was associated with better performance in a subsequent competitive concentration game task, and did not therefore impair performance in line with proposals in the self-control literature. We propose that where an initial self–control task (such as imagery) affects emotion in a way that might be beneficial to completing the next task, the resources depleted by self-control are masked by resources activated from increased emotion intensity. Keywords: self-regulation, imagery, intervention, performance, motivation, emotions The promise of online interventions: From sports to the dining table Andy Lane, Tracey Devonport, Andrew Friesen (University of Wolverhampton), Peter Terry (University of Southern Queensland), Peter Totterdell (University of Sheffield) An exciting development from the BBC project was the possibility of studying emotion regulation interventions and providing valuable feedback to other areas of human functioning.
Specifically, we examined emotion regulation in the context of eating behaviours. The use of food as a means to regulate emotions, known as ‘emotional eating’, has been evidenced in both community (Thayer et al., 1994) and clinical populations (Stein et al., 2007). In the first of two systematic reviews we completed, negative mood, sadness, tension and instability of emotions were found to be antecedents of binge eating in an adult binge eating disordered-obese sample (Nicholls, Devonport, & Blake, 2016).
In a second review, stress, depression, and 201Symposia Thursday July 13th sadness consistently elicited increased food intake or poor nutritional food choices among normal and overweight adult populations (Devonport, Nicholls, & Fullerton, 2017). As emotional eating has been associated with a failure to maintain weight management goals in overweight and obese individuals (Elfhag & Rössner, 2005), interventions that target emotional eating are of interest to researchers and practitioners. Fairburn (2008) suggests that interventions targeting emotional eating might be focused on self-monitoring, proactive problem-solving, cognitive restructuring, mood acceptance, the use of any number of mood modulatory behaviours (e.g., exercising), or managing situational circumstances.
Online interventions have the potential to empower individuals in managing behaviour change, and complements the objectives of weight management practitioners on occasions when face-to-face contact is not practical or possible. The purpose of the present paper is to offer an overview of the lessons learned from the use of online interventions in sports/performance contexts. In doing so, implications in developing online self-help intervention that addresses emotionally elicited eating will be discussed.
Keywords: emotions, diet, food, regulation, obesity Interventions to alleviate choking under pressure and improve performance Chair: Peter Gröpel (University of Vienna) Choking under pressure refers to performance decrements under pressure circumstances despite individual striving for superior performance. Research evidence suggests that this inferior performance depends on maladaptive attention and a dominant left-hemispheric activation. This symposium addresses interventions that may help improve attention and suppress the dominant left-hemispheric activation, ultimately ameliorating choking and improving performance.
The interventions included are a pre-performance routine (PPR), hemisphere-specific priming, and neurofeedback training. A PPR is a set of cognitive and behavioral elements an athlete systematically engages in prior to performance execution, which helps to maintain task-related attention. Hemisphere-specific priming refers to the selective stimulation of the right brain hemisphere by clenching the left hand, which reduces the activity of the left hemisphere.
Neurofeedback training is a non-invasive method to self-modify brain oscillations and hemispheric activity. Four papers on the effectiveness of these interventions are presented. Mesagno will discuss how both PPR and hemisphere- specific priming promote accuracy in tenpin bowling.
Gröpel will explain how combining a PPR and hemisphere-specific priming can help improve competition performance of elite air pistol shooters. Wergin extended this line of research to beach volleyball, but found weaker effects, which indicates that the effectiveness of choking interventions may be moderated by the type of sport. Finally, Mirifar conducted a systematic review on the effectiveness of neurofeedback training for sport performance and found principally positive evidence.
In sum, these papers indicate that PPR, hemisphere-specific priming, and neurofeedback training may promote athletes’ performance under competition pressure. Implication for research and practice will be discussed. Keywords: interventions, performance, choking, neurofeedback Primed to perform: Testing and comparing pre-performance routine interventions to alleviate choking in sport Christopher Mesagno (Federation University Australia) A pre-performance routine (PPR) is a set of cognitive and behavioral elements an athlete systematically engages in prior to performance execution, which helps to maintain task-related attention.
To date, researchers have identified that extensive PPR development improves performance under pressure. Furthermore, hemisphere-specific priming have also shown beneficial effects on performance under pressure. 202Symposia Thursday July 13th Researchers, however, have yet to compare whether hemisphere priming is as beneficial to sport performance as extensive PPRs.
Thus, the purpose of this study was to determine whether hemispheric priming is a comparable PPR to an extensive PPR in improving tenpin bowling accuracy and in-game performance using real-world competition (i.e., bowling league scores). Forty-nine experienced league bowlers were randomly allocated into one of five intervention (or not) groups: PPR, hemisphere-specific priming, combined PPR and hemisphere-specific priming, temporal consistency, or control. Participants then took part in a low-pressure, 15-minute intervention development, and high-pressure phases with accuracy and in-game performance (league scores) being the dependent, performance variables.
Performance accuracy indicated no significant Phase or Group main effect, but a significant interaction. Post hoc comparisons indicated that the PPR group improved performance from pre- to post-intervention phase, other intervention groups showed relatively stable performance, whereas the control group decreased bowling accuracy. Bowling league performance results indicated no significant main or interaction effects.
From these results, extensive PPR development is the most effective routine for performance under pressure, with hemisphere-specific priming also having a positive effect on accuracy under pressure. Interventions to improve shooting performance in air pistol Peter Gröpel (University of Vienna) Two studies tested the effect of pre-performance routine (PPR) and hemisphere-specific priming on shooting performance among German air pistol shooters. In the experimental Study 1, skilled junior shooters (N = 34) took 30 shots under normal condition (i.e., pretest) followed by another 30 shots under time pressure conditions (i.e., posttest).
Before the posttest, participants were randomly allocated into one of three intervention groups (PPR, hemisphere-specific priming, and combined PPR and hemisphere-specific priming) or control group. Participants in the intervention groups improved their shooting accuracy from pretest to posttest, with the combined PPR and hemisphere-specific priming group showing the highest improvement, whereas performance of the control group did not change. In the field Study 2, 14 elite shooters developed and trained individualized pre-performance routines combined with hemisphere-specific priming under supervision of a sport psychologist.
Following the sport psychology consulting, participants significantly improved their competition performance compared to competition performance before the coaching. The present results indicate that PPR combined with hemisphere-specific priming is an effective field intervention, which will be discussed further. Choking interventions in beach volleyball Vanessa Wergin (Technical University of Munich) Prior researchers have suggested various interventions to alleviate choking under pressure, such as pre- performance routine (PPR) or hemisphere-specific priming, mainly for individual, self-paced sports.
This study extended this line of research to team sports (e.g., beach volleyball). 53 skilled beach volleyball players were assigned to one of four groups, including three intervention groups (PPR, hemisphere-specific priming, and a combination of both), as well as one control group. Participants performed 10 serves, aiming at a target on the beach volleyball court, in a pressure-free pretest followed by another 10 serves in a posttest under pressure.
To induce pressure, the posttest performance was video-recorded and participants were told that the recordings would be broadcasted in a German television documentary. Analyses of performance accuracy revealed no significant differences between the intervention groups and the control group. On a descriptive level, however, all intervention groups improved and the control group worsened performance, with non-significant results.
These results indicate that the effectiveness of PPR and hemisphere-specific priming in team sports is not as high as in individual sports. The type of sport may thus moderate the effect that choking interventions has on 203Symposia Thursday July 13th performance. An additional explanation may be that these interventions are especially effective for tasks based on accuracy, whereas a good beach volleyball serve is a combination of accuracy and speed of serve.
Researchers may therefore focus on testing choking interventions in different types of sports and different sport tasks to determine their effectiveness. Evidence for effects of neurofeedback training to improve sport performance: A systematic review Arash Mirifar, Felix Ehrlenspiel, Jürgen Beckmann (Technical University of Munich) It has been argued that brain oscillation patterns have a pivotal role in sport performance. A good example is the relationship between alpha oscillatory activity and shooting performance: A successful shot execution is associated with enhanced activation of the right hemisphere, which is associated with visual- spatial processing, and, at the same time, decreased activation in the left temporal lobe (specifically in verbal- analytic areas), which is associated with suppression of irrelevant information.
Neurofeedback training (NFT), as a non-invasive method, can be utilized for modifying human brain oscillations and developing skills for self- regulation of brain activity. Although NFT have been initially introduced and applied in clinical psychology, its applications are also common in sports in order to improve performance. This presentation will provide a systematic review of NFT effectiveness in sports.
Using the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA), 16 published studies were selected and evaluated. The results indicated that the majority (81%) of the studies reported that NFT effectively improves sport performance. Various protocols in various sport disciplines were tested and resulted in principally positive effects.
However, the evaluated studies also showed substantial limitations in procedure and methodology. Therefore, it is still unknown whether NFT is an effective method to improve performance in sports. Shortcomings of these evaluated studies and implications for future research will be discussed.
Physical activity, cognitive function and well-being Chair: Eduardo Cervello (University Miguel Hernández) The scientific community is showing great interest in the study of chronic and acute effects of physical exercise on cognitive function and psychological well-being (McMorris, 2016). There is currently a consensus about the positive effects of physical exercise on cognition (Chang et al., 2012) and well-being (Redd and Ones, 2006) and the study of dose-response relations in exercise is a current challenge in physical activity science (Curlik, and Shors, 2013). However, more studies are needed to understand the relations between intensities, durations and type of exercise and cognitive function and well-being (Harveson et al., 2016).
To answer these questions, this symposium will present investigations that study these topics from different perspectives. In this symposium we will present; a) Two studies evaluating the effect of a set of sessions of physical activity with different intensity and type, on the stroop effect in older people. b) Studies that show that the epigenetic changes are related to a molecular response adaptive to physical exercise and stress, and the relationship of these changes on the preservation and maintenance of health.
c) A review about the effectiveness of exercise for preventing and treating Alzheimer´s disease (AD) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), with a special emphasis on the benefits of a specific exercise program for people with MCI. d) The preliminary results of a study analyzing the motives for adherence to a long term exercise program of people with MCI and mild AD, including methodological considerations for working with this population. Keywords: exercise, cognitive function, alzheimer, epigenetic changes, stroop 204Symposia Thursday July 13th Exercise intensity and cognitive inhibitory function Diego Pastor Campos (Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche) Aging population is increasing all over the world as a consequence of increased life expectancy (Fehlings et al.
2015). Aging is a biological process unstoppable for all humans, and produce during late life span an inevitable function decline along different physiological systems (Park & Yeo, 2013). This degenerative process is determined by genetic and environmental factors, with lifestyle as a key of the process (Park & Yeo, 2013).
There are many studies in adults about the acute effect of exercise in cognition (Koutsandreou et al. 2016). In older people there are different studies relative to exercise, fitness and cognitive function (Voelcker-Rehage et al.
2016), but this studies are oriented to long time effects of exercise and there are few studies about acute effect of different physical exercise stimulus and cognition. This work studies the effects of different intensities and different kinds of physical exercise sessions over reaction time and inhibitory cognitive function measured with stroop test. Keywords: exercise, cognition, aging, stroop Facilitators and barriers people with mild cognitive impairment to continuing with a physical activity programme Nuria Caus Pertegaz (University of Alicante) Older people with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) or the onset of Alzheimer's disease (AI) are living with cognitive characteristics proper to normal ageing and dementia and also a possible precursor to dementia.
In addition, they show different behaviour and personality changes as affective disorders and apathy. Though there exists increasing evidence that regular physical activity promotes physical, cognitive, and emotional health in people with MCI, it's still to be determined which characteristics that must fulfill the physical activity programmes for individuals who have cognitive challenges and specially, to obtain the adherence to these programmes. There is no doubt that physical activity programmes for individuals with MCI face many of the same challenges as those targeted to cognitively intact older adults, including participants' reluctance to start exercise, lack guidance about what exercise are appropriate for them, fear of injury, or lack of social support for participating in these programmes.
In addition, these programmes also must foresee the cognitive obstacles that exist in the participation in these types of activities, such as learning new routines; the assimilation of the correct execution of the exercises; the spatial organisation of the activities and itineraries, etc. Four years after the implementation of a physical activity programme for individuals with MCI and AI at University of Alicante, such programme has been reviewed with a qualitative methodology, different design and didactic questions that they continue to attend the needs of an older person with deteriorating executive function. Questions that are especially relevant in the continuance of participation in the exercise programme.
Keywords: mild cognitive impairment, adherence, physical activity programme Physical activity, cognitive function and well-being Eduardo Cervello (University Miguel Hernandez) The scientific community is showing great interest in the study of chronic and acute effects of physical exercise on cognitive function and psychological well-being (McMorris, 2016). There is currently a consensus about the positive effects of physical exercise on cognition (Chang et al., 2012) and well-being (Redd and Ones, 2006) and the study of dose-response relations in exercise is a current challenge in physical activity science (Curlik, and Shors, 2013). However, more studies are needed to understand the relations between intensities, durations and type of exercise and cognitive function and well-being (Harveson et al., 2016).
To answer these questions, this symposium will present investigations that study these topics from different perspectives. In 205Symposia Thursday July 13th this symposium we will present; a) Two studies evaluating the effect of a set of sessions of physical activity with different intensity and type, on the stroop effect in older people. b) Studies that show that the epigenetic changes are related to a molecular response adaptive to physical exercise and stress, and the relationship of these changes on the preservation and maintenance of health.
c) A review about the effectiveness of exercise for preventing and treating Alzheimer´s disease (AD) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), with a special emphasis on the benefits of a specific exercise program for people with MCI. d) The preliminary results of a study analyzing the motives for adherence to a long term exercise program of people with MCI and mild AD, including methodological considerations for working with this population. Keywords: exercise, cognitive function, alzheimer, epigenetic changes, stroop Epigenetics in health and neurosciences Mari Paz Quesada (IMIB/Arrixaca) At present we know the importance of lifestyle factors in our general well-being, both physical and mental health, as well as in addressing healthy aging.
Although an organism have identical genetic code in all cells, each cell type presents its own gene expression pattern, depending on cell functionality, which is driven by a specific epigenetic signature. Specifically, epigenetics direct gene expression by modulating the access of the transcription machinery to the chromatin: DNA methylation and specific histone modifications have the role of compacting the chromatin by recruiting methyl binding proteins, while others modifications would open it. Even more, epigenetic factors are part of important processes in life as they are embryonic development, cell differentiation, imprinting, genomic stability, X chromosome silencing, aging,...It is shown that epigenetic machinery is aberrantly expressed in a big spectrum of different pathologies where epigenetic marks are not the appropriate for normal cell functioning: cancer, neurodegenerative, psychiatric, cardiovascular and immunology diseases, etc..
We have shown in Friedreich Ataxia (FRDA) aberrant expression of epigenetic elements as it is miR-132 and DNMT1. More and more studies show that epigenetic changes are also related to a molecular response adaptive to lifestyle factors such as stress, diet, physical exercise and psychologist state. For example it have been seen that whole genome methylation was decreased in skeletal muscle biopsies obtained from healthy sedentary men and women after acute exercise.
How we live and think about the things we live, our perception, has much more impact in our health than it was thought long time before. Childhood abuse or maternal well-being and child health outcomes are now being studied down the look of epigenetics as mediators between the environment and the genome. More future research is needed to real understand what is happening in our mental and physical bodies.
Keywords: DNA methylation, Friedreich Ataxia, mental and physical well-being Exercise prescription and mechanisms mediating exercise benefits in people with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer´s disease Juan Tortosa-Martinez (University of Alicante) Exercise may improve memory and executive function, especially in older adults. There is a growing body of evidence showing that regular physical activity has protective effects against mild cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia, and Alzheimer´s disease (AD). Furthermore, exercise programs have shown positive outcomes for people with AD and other dementias as well as for people with MCI.
However, the most appropriate type, duration, frequency and intensity of exercise for this population are currently unknown. In parallel, the mechanisms of action of these positive effects are not fully clear either, but it has been recently suggested that it is possible that the benefits of exercise may be at least partially mediated by effects on the neuroendocrine stress system. In this communication, we will review the current knowledge about exercise prescription for MCI, AD and other dementias.
A brief review about the possible mechanisms that mediate exercise benefits 206Symposia Thursday July 13th will also be conducted, including some emerging evidence supporting the hypothesis of a relationship between exercise, stress and cognition in people with MCI. Keywords: Mild Cognitive Impairment, Alzheimer´s disease, exercise prescription, memory, executive function ID364. Adversity in the coach-athlete relationship: Power abuse and interpersonal conflict Chair: Svenja Wachsmuth (Loughborough University) The coach-athlete relationship is central for sport participation and an important component for performance success (Jowett & Shanmugam, 2016).
A coach-athlete relationship that is characterized by mutual trust and respect, as well as commitment to and collaboration with each other enhances performance success while relationships that lack these characteristics may severely impair performance as well as wellbeing. Low-quality relationships have been associated with experiences of conflict, low self-esteem, depression, and burnout as well as controlling or negative coaching behaviours (e.g., Jowett, 2009; Jowett et al., in press). In recent years, special attention has been devoted to developing coaching environments that are effective and positive through coach-athlete interactions that foster athletes’ basic psychological needs and allow them to grow and succeed.
The objective of this symposium is to expand our understanding of negative interpersonal dynamics between coaches and athletes and to identify strategies that can be employed to support coaches and athletes to overcome and manage interactions and relationships that are negative and disruptive. Thus, the first presentation focusses on coaches’ use of public shaming in an attempt to instil control and influence. Within the second study, the focus shifts towards the challenging impact of cultural diversity upon coach-athlete interactions, concluding with recommendations for fostering cultural awareness and positive coach-athlete relationships.
The central role of high-quality relationships is highlighted in the third presentation. In this presentation, the links between high-quality coach-athlete relationships and athletes’ motivation as well as wellbeing are explained through the satisfaction of the three basic needs across diverse cultures. The final study provides insights into the role of sport psychologists in promoting high-quality coach- athlete relationships while managing interpersonal challenges.
Keywords: coaching, abuse, conflict, basic needs Public shaming of athletes by coaches Gretchen Kerr, Ashley Stirling, Ellen MacPherson, Anthony Battaglia, Joseph Gurgis (University of Toronto) The significant power imbalance existing between a coach and athlete and the ways in which a coach’s position of power and authority can be used to harm athletes have been well-documented. Examples of the ways in which coaches may use their power negatively include: sexual abuse (e.g. Brackenridge, 2001), emotional abuse (e.g.
Stirling, 2013), disordered eating (e.g. Kerr et al., 2006) and controlling coaching behaviours (e.g. Mageau & Vallerand, 2003).
Public shaming of athletes by coaches has received less attention in the sport-related literature and is another way in which power may be used in a harmful manner. Public shaming refers to the process in which an individual or group of individuals express contempt or disapproval towards another person as a result of that person’s perceived deviation from a norm or expected behaviour (Cheung, 2014; Harris, 2009; Jacquet, 2015; Whitman, 1998). Athletes from a variety of sports have described public shaming experiences that include directives to engage in exercise for the purposes of punishment.
In some instances, a team is forced to exercise as a result of one athlete’s infraction; at other times, an individual athlete is singled out to engage in excessive exercise for a behavioural transgression, and on occasion, selected team members are directed to administer the exercise as punishment to their teammates. All of these experiences of engaging in excessive exercise as punishment reportedly occur in a public manner. Coaches 207Symposia Thursday July 13th identify the use of such practices as effective ways to address poor performance and behavioural transgressions and to ensure compliance with team rules and expectations.
In this presentation, various forms of public shaming will be addressed, as well as the reasons for its use, perceived effects on athletes, and implications for coach education. Keywords: emotional abuse, coaching, power ‘My job is to make all the players play by my rules’: Coach-athlete relationships in culturally diverse teams Anastasiya Khomutova (University of Brighton) During the last few decades ever more athletes and coaches have migrated from one country to another in order to establish or improve their sporting careers, which have led to a more diverse professional sport and a ‘cultural turn’ in sport psychology. Although some separate aspects of cultural diversity in sport have been extensively examined by scholars, this area still remains under-researched.
While several recent studies in the area of cultural sport psychology have focused on the adaptation of immigrated athletes and difficulties they face in a new country, the phenomenon of inter-cultural coach-athlete relationships has not been explored in full. Earlier studies conducted in this area pointed to (among other factors) the prevalence of racial stereotyping in interracial coach-athlete relations; however, the majority of the studies took place in the Northern American context. This presentation will focus on the experiences of six basketball coaches in Europe who work with culturally diverse teams, and the main issues they had to overcome within the relationships with their athletes – both local and immigrated.
These issues include navigating value differences between local and immigrated players; dealing with the formation of ethnic subgroups within the teams; and race as still a potential problematic factor within coach-athlete relationships. The presentation will conclude with the proposal of educational program for coaches working with culturally diverse athletes, focusing on cultural diversity awareness. Keywords: interracial coach athlete relationship, cultural diversity, cultural sport psychology Motivational processes in the coach-athlete relationship: A multi-cultural self- determination approach James W.
Adie (Coventry University), Sophia Jowett (Loughborough University), Kimberley J. Bartholomew (University of East Anglia), Sophie X. Yang (Sichuan University), Henrik Gustafsson (Karlstads Universitet), Alicia L.
Jiménez (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid) In extending the motivational model of coach-athlete relationships (Mageau & Vallerand, 2003), the present study examined the cultural invariance of the following hypothesized model: perceived coach-athlete relationship quality > basic psychological need satisfaction > self-determined motivation > well-being among multi-national athletes. Employing a cross-sectional design, 756 elite athletes from five different nations (British, Chinese, Greek, Spanish, and Swedish) completed a questionnaire that measured the target variables. Multi-group SEM (EQS 6.2, Bentler, 2006) found the hypothesized model provided a satisfactory fit of the data: X2 (370) = 758.689, p < 0.01, R-CFI = .92, SRMSR = .06, RMSEA = .03 (90% CI = .03-.04).
Specifically, the results revealed that athletes who perceived a high quality relationship experienced heightened levels of basic need satisfaction regardless of cultural background. Need satisfaction positively predicted self-determined motivation, which, in turn, linked to enhanced well-being. Mediational analyses supported the indirect effects of need satisfaction and self-determined motivation within the model.
The hypothesized model was found to be largely equivalent among the multi-national athletes. The results support the universal application of self- determination theory and the central role interpersonal relationships play in promoting well-being. 208Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: self-determination theory, wellbeing, cultural variance Sport psychologists’ role in coach-athlete conflict Svenja Wachsmuth, Sophia Jowett, Chris Harwood (Loughborough University) Sport psychologists (SPs) have been challenged with taking up diverse roles within various sport organisations.
While mainly focusing on performance-enhancement, they are also expected to provide pastoral care and consider sport participants’ wellbeing (Gamble et al., 2013). Additionally, SPs play a significant role in ensuring that coaches and athletes work in harmony (Rhind & Jowett, 2012), and in managing interpersonal issues such as conflict, misunderstandings and disagreements when they occur (Wachsmuth et al., 2016). The current study investigated the roles SPs perceive and the challenges they experience, as well as methods used to prevent and manage conflict within coach-athlete dyads.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with nine SPs who have been working as applied practitioner five to forty-three years. The interview schedule covered SPs’ 1) background/philosophy, 2) approach to conflict, 3) challenges/barriers in managing conflict, and 4) recommendations for practitioners and researchers. Interviews were transcribed and a thematic analysis conducted.
This presentation will focus on SPs’ approaches to facilitate coach-athlete interactions on an individual and dyadic level. The interviewed sport psychologists reported to play an active role in shaping relationships between coaches and athletes, especially concerning the prevention and management of conflict and its consequences. While it was commonly agreed that conflict can and should not always be prevented, SPs agreed upon the significance of quality coach-athlete relationships and individuals’ awareness for their importance.
They emphasized the need to facilitate constructive conversations between coaches and athletes by supporting self-reflection, perspective taking and action planning on an individual level, as well as by guiding through common meetings. SPs emphasized the need to create a safe environment in which opinions and needs can freely be discussed without fearing negative consequences. Keywords: conflict management, communication, sport psychology practitioner Culture, sport, mind and society Chair: Antonio M.
Pérez-Flores (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) Sport generates social relations and is inextricably bound up with the creation of identities, fostering benefits through the creation of social capital. In a society where primary relations are becoming ever more fragile, sport is a major resource for creating and rebuilding primary affectional bonds, which are at the root of so much anxiety today. Sport meets the needs of individuals for socialisation, fostering micro-groups.
It provides a balanced outlet for emotions, offering an ideal environment for developing intimate primary relationships based on affection and empathy. Sport, like social capital, is based on cooperation and trust, and can even be regarded as a public good. In addition, sport also provides an organisational structure for the public, that can be exploited by the community for other purposes.
Sporting groups and associations meet the primary need of social actors to take part in sporting activities. But they also offer further benefits, such as the generation of relationships that extend beyond the strictly sporting, and that can develop into relations of trust that form part of the support network for the actors involved, providing them with multiple resources and benefits. Sport fosters relationships of mutual awareness and social cooperation.
This makes it ideal terrain for building support networks based on relationships of trust, generating substantive psycho-social benefits associated with identity, mutual support and enhanced organisation of civil society. Keywords: sport, primary relations, secondary relations, social capital 209Symposia Thursday July 13th Physical activity in relation to the self-esteem and social situation of the elderly Evaristo Barrera Algarín (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) This presentation examines some of the research carried out in southern Spain into the relationship between ongoing physical-sporting activity and the functional capacity of (non-institutionalised) elderly people, and their psycho-social profile, self-esteem and social situation. This was a joint study involving the Physical Education and Sports Department of the University of Seville, the Andalusia Centre for Development Biology at the Pablo de Olavide University-CSIC, CIBERER, the Carlos III Health Institute, and the Social Work and Social Policy Research Group (PAIDI Sej-452).
Some of the data from the research has already been published . An experimental methodology was used to analyse a group of 8 physically-active subjects and a control group of 8 subjects with sedentary lifestyles. Using different scales, including VATAD and the Rosenberg scale, it is established that: Firstly, physical activity in the elderly correlates with higher levels of self-esteem.
Pearson's correlation is significant in ,701 (bilateral significance ,005. N = 16). Secondly, physical activity in the elderly correlates with a better social situation.
Pearson's correlation is significant in ,574 (bilateral significance ,040. N = 16). And Thirdly, physical activity in the elderly correlates with a ‘Healthy Old Age’ profile.
Pearson's correlation is significant in ,556 (bilateral significance ,039. N = 16). The data also show us a better sociability and relationship with the environment, more community participation activities, more activities with friends, and more activities outside.
This presentation focuses in particular on the highly positive assessment of fostering and spreading physical activity among the elderly, particularly given the ageing of the population that has been underway since the 1970s. This will benefit the public as a whole, both through its preventive capacity and because of reduced social and healthcare costs. Keywords: sports, physical activity,sociability, healthcare Sports policy versus popular participation Alvaro Rodríguez Díaz (Universidad de Sevilla) Until the late 1980s, there were few sports policies in Spain, and the few that existed were weak.
However, they were aimed at fostering and promoting sport in society against a backdrop of a population with little interest in taking part in physical activity. In the first decade of the 1978 regime, policies were implemented with strong social content, enhancing public facilities as sport was democratised, leading to a boom in sporting activity countrywide. The thrust of policy changed in the early 1990s, as the tenor of government economic policies changed from a social to a commercial approach.
This greatly enhanced the focus on elite sports, to the detriment of sport for the masses, with construction of grand stadiums for sporting competitions, at the expense of basic, local facilities. This process also reveals a parallel contradiction between increased government investment in competitive sporting success, and a gradual increase in physical exercise among the public, as a form of recreation and for health reasons, rather than for competition. The data analysed is taken from indirect official sources, using historical series.
Keywords: sport, primary relations, secondary relations, social capital The relevance of social relationships in sport: Friends, family, classmates and individual sportspeople Antonio M. Pérez-Flores, Víctor M. Muñoz Sánchez (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) There is a huge quantity of research in the scientific literature on the impact of sport on public health.
However, very little of this focuses on the social relations involved in sport. This presentation analyses the relevance of primary relations in the way that sport is configured. A longitudinal study of the main forms of primary relations in sport has been carried out, demonstrating the interrelationship of the objective and 210Symposia Thursday July 13th subjective elements involved in taking part in sporting activity.
This study is based on opinion surveys and specific studies relating to sport carried out by the CIS statistical institute from 1995 to 2014. The techniques used include: frequency analysis in the longitudinal study of social relations in sport; multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) to identify the factorial dimensions relating to the type of social relations established through sport (homogeneous-heterogeneous); and binary logistic regression analysis to identify the socio-demographic variables with the greatest explanatory impact on the various forms of primary relations involved in contemporary sport in Spain. The results give us two dimensions into which sporting activity is structured: a dimension defined by the type of social relations established in the sport (homogeneous-heterogeneous); and a second dimension defining the purpose of the sporting activity (instrumental-substantive).
These dimensions lead in turn to three models of sport: sport for competition; sport for leisure; and sport for health and aesthetics. Each of these models is defined through its social value and the meaning of its practice. Sport is an important inter-relational resource in contemporary society, where individuals also meet their needs for socialisation, fostering micro-group relations structured around different degrees of normative supports.
Sport provides people with a balanced outlet for their emotions, fostering an ideal environment for developing primary relations. Keywords: sport, primary relations, secondary relations, social capital Analysis of the commitment of amateur canoeists in team boats. Differences due to sex Juan Gavala González (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) To analyse the commitment (individual performance) of amateur athletes (canoeists/kayakers or rowers) as part of a team, in relation to their sex.
The sample comprised rowers and canoeists (kayaks and canoes) from two of the most important national feeder clubs for these sports (rowing and flatwater canoeing). The study featured a univariable, multivariate conditional, intra-subject design with repeated measurements. The method is quasi-experimental, as the subjects were not assigned randomly to the various experimental conditions.
The most significant results are that the involvement of athletes in team boats does not depend so much on sex. Keywords: performance, sports psychology, canoeing, Ringelmann effect Forming agents of change for enhancing positive practice of youth sport Chair: José Carlos Jaenes (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) Sport is an important contributor in the fields of education and social inclusion. However, sport is confronted with a number of threats from which young athletes need to be protected, such as violence, any kind of discrimination and intolerance and the manipulation of results.
Psytool is an European project, funded by Erasmus+ Sport Programme, that aims to foster the relevance of Sport Psychology as a tool for training different Agents of Change -such as coaches, physical educators, referees, officials…- for recognizing potential dangerous situations and for reacting in the adequate way in the youth sport context. In the first communication of the symposium a brief overview of the design of the project and the theoretical background will be provided. In the second communication, the Psytool online educational platform to train a network of Agents of Change in youth sport will be described.
Finally, the moderator of a panel discussion will encourage trainers and trainees of the Psytool educational platform to share experiences and challenges for further implementation of this educational platform. *This symposium was funded by the Erasmus+ project (Nº567199-EPP-1-2015-2-ES-SPO-SCP) “PsyTool: Sport as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroots sports” Keywords: sportspersonship, agents of change, violence, discrimination 211Symposia Thursday July 13th Sport values: An European perspective Pedro Velázquez (ICSS) Even before sport became a competence of the EU in 2009, and with more intensity after that date, the European Commission has been working with EU Member States and sport organizations on sport issues of common EU interest and exchanging best practices in sport-related policies. The EU is also working with Member States and sport bodies to improve how sport is governed across Europe.
This means tackling the big threats to sports such as violence, match-fixing, anti-doping, corruption and racism as well as encouraging sport organizations – from local teams to multinational federations – to embrace the principles of democracy, transparency, inclusiveness and accountability among others (2015-EU-Sportsheet) Activities related to sports are a growing social and economic phenomenon, which makes an important contribution to the European Union's strategic objectives of solidarity and prosperity.The 2011 Commission Communication entitled “Developing the European Dimension in Sport” already put the accent on the need to prevent and fight against violence and intolerance (Chapter 2.3). More specifically, it recognised that racism, violence and other forms of intolerance continue to pose a problem in European sports, including at the grassroots level, and called for increased cooperation among relevant stakeholders.The European Union Work Plan for Sport for the period 2014-2017 is based on the following three themes: a) Integrity of sport; b) The economic dimension of sport and c) Sport and society. Europe has demonstrated a special sensitivity in tackling this problem by offering the opportunity to study this phenomenon through European Projects, and creating programs to confront it.
Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to create tools and educational programs to prevent and protect football practitioners, especially in grassroots football, from these harmful practices. Keywords: values, violence, intolerance, racism PsyTool design and teorethical background Jaume Cruz (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Alexandre Garcia-Mas (Universitat de les Illes Balears), Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University), Fabio Lucidi (University of La Sapienza), Sara Márquez (University of León), Santiago Reyes (ONECO), Sidónio Serpa (University of Lisbon), José Carlos Jaenes (University Pablo de Olavide) PsyTool is a European project, funded by Erasmus+ Sport Programme, led by the Universidad Pablo de Olavide (Sevilla, Spain). It brings together 13 partners from Spain, Portugal, Italy, United Kingdom and Sweden, running from January 2016 to December 2017.
PsyTool is based theoretically on the concept of youth development through the practice of sport in positive and safe environments. The central idea is that this type of practice leads to a psychological wellbeing in all areas of personal development of athletes. Through sport programs that are free of bullying; zero permissiveness towards substance use; low acceptance of gamemanship and cheating, and at the same time promoters of fair play and clean competition, young athletes are more likely to increase their psychological well-being while they practice the sport to their best level of capacity.
One of the most important assets of PsyTool is the formation of Agents of Change as inductors of this well-being promoter environment, according to their different responsibilities, from the politics to grassroot coaching. The AoCs’ selection, training and certification is one of the key points of this program. This so-called “targeted snowball” approach is expected to produce a spreading impact on the young athletes, which can be evaluated in the short and medium term, depending of the nature of the different AoCs.
Coming form this design and theoretical background, this program –once the results have been analyzed- has to lead to a more ambitious development both in its scope and on the educational methods involved with. Keywords: sportspersonship, agents of change, gamesmanship, positive youth development 212Symposia Thursday July 13th PsyTool Online Educational Platform–Using e-learning to develop a network of agents of change in youth sport Sergio Lara-Bercial (ICCE), Ricardo Porem (Sporting Club of Portugal), Juan Manuel Gamito (Sevilla Football Club), Pamela Lubowa (FARE), António Fernando Rosado (University of Lisbon) The majority of people involved in youth sport are volunteers. They already make sacrifices and cut corners in order to find time to dedicate to coaching, officiating or just ‘taxiing’ their children around to sessions and matches.
Time to dedicate to their own development and education within the sport environment is a luxury. PsyTool recognises that and thus has created an e-learning opportunity for Agents of Change designed to offer guided, yet self-paced learning. Over 10 lessons, the online educational platform provides theoretical and practical knowledge on key issues such as how to spot and prevent aggression and violent behaviour, discrimination, match-fixing, doping and many other topics which threaten the integrity and power to do good of youth sport.
It also contains information on tried and tested ways to make the youth sport experience a positive, memorable one for all children and young people. Each lesson contains a short theoretical background to the topic in question followed by case studies, suggested further reading and links to other online materials such as videos or presentations. Students on the platform have access to an ‘online teacher’ which will support their learning as well as to a community forum where they can raise questions and share their experiences with other students.
The platform is functional across all types of digital devices and its materials are downloadable and operate under an open licence. Please visit us at www.psytoolsport.eu Keywords: sportspersonship, e-learning platform, psychological intervention, Agents of Change, doping, match- fixing The PsyTool Educational Platform: Stakeholders’ Reflections on Experiences and Ideas for the Future Krister Hertting (Halmstad University), Francesc Xavier Ponseti (Universitat de les Illes Balears), Marta Borrueco (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Miguel Sampaio (Sporting Club of Portugal), Roberto Baiocco (University of La Sapienza), Abel Nogueira (University of León) This presentation will be organized as a panel discussion involving trainers and trainees with experiences of the PsyTool educational platform. A moderator will encourage the panelists to elaborate upon: (a) the implementation and development process of the PsyTool educational platform, (b) experiences and reflections on the role of Agents of Change in promotion of fair youth sport in Europe, and (c) challenges and opportunities for further development and implementation of the PsyTool educational platform after the project is completed (e.g., European Network of Agents of Change for Youth Sport).
The moderator will stimulate discussion between the panelists and also questions and feedback from the audience. Keywords: sportspersonship, e-learning platform, psychological intervention, agents of change Transnationalism, mobility, and acculturation in and through sport Chair: Tatiana V. Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) The recent ISSP Position Stand on transnationalism, mobility, and acculturation in and through sport (Ryba, Schinke, Stambulova, & Elbe, 2017) brings to spotlight the historically unprecedented pace of internationalising sport industry and transnational movement of people in the last 20 years.
Although academic literature in cultural sport psychology and praxis has been increasing, sport professionals and local organisations seem to give scant time and resources to stay abreast of complex social changes in global society and to the development of cultural competencies. This joint ISSP – FEPSAC symposium draws on the 213Symposia Thursday July 13th aforementioned position statement to facilitate intellectual mobility of sport and exercise professionals within rapidly changing sociocultural landscapes to produce knowledge that works for the benefit of destination/receiving communities, origins, and athletic migrants. In the first presentation, a transnational framework of migration will be introduced and an empirical model of cultural transition will be discussed.
In the second presentation, Berry’s acculturation model will be outlined followed by recent research of migrant- receiving environments in sports. The focus in the third presentation is on practical implications of critical acculturation research with immigrant athletes. In the final presentation, the key postulates of the 2017 ISSP Position Stand will be introduced and discussed.
Keywords: migrant athletes, transnational mobility, cultural transition, critical acculturation, integration Challenges and strategies to develop athletic migration research and practice Tatiana V. Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland), Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University, Sweden) Today’s sport is “on the move” in a sense that athletes, coaches, sport psychology practitioners and other sporting people are internationally highly mobile. In response, there is a growing interest and the need for sport psychology researchers and practitioners to understand athletic migration processes and develop strategies to effectively help both migrants and hosts to mutually adjust in the shared context.
The ISSP Position Stand on transnationalism, mobility, and acculturation in and through sport (Ryba et al., 2017) provides a set of aids to interested scholars. First, the authors clarify migration terminology (e.g., mobility and migration, cultural transition and acculturation, immigrant and transnational athletes) to facilitate international/intercultural collaboration that is inevitable when professionals want to study or help migrants. Second, cultural transition and acculturation frameworks with examples of high quality qualitative and quantitative research on migrants and hosts are introduced, and relevant methodological tips are provided.
Third, the authors analyze different forms of mobile practice and highlight strategies used by experienced mobile practitioners as materials for the readers’ cultural reflexivity. Finally, they outline major challenges and potential solutions to further develop athletic migration research and mobile practice. The authors suggest an idea of cultural praxis of athletic migration as an approach that blends analyses of migrants’ destination and home environmental contexts, studying adaptation process of both migrants and hosts, and identifying strategies facilitating mutual adjustment, athletes’ performance and well-being.
Among practical recommendations the authors promote shared acculturation approaches, sharing experiences between mobile practitioners from different countries, education of applied sport psychology students on mobile practices and education of coaches aimed at helping them to become cultural leaders in Keywords: migration terminology, acculturation research, mobile practice, cultural praxis of athletic migration Current research on acculturation through youth sport Anne-Marie Elbe (University of Copenhagen, Denmark), Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis (University of Thessaly, Greece), Eleftheria Morela (University of Copenhagen, Denmark; University of Thessaly, Greece), Xavier Sanchez (University of Cumbria, UK) Recent studies on the integrative role of sport for all have mainly utilized Berry's (1997) model which describes different acculturation strategies based on the interaction of individuals' (a) wish to maintain their cultural identity and (b) their desire to interact with other cultures. The studies indicate that youth participation in organized sport may be linked to behaviors favoring adaptive intercultural strategies for both migrant and host populations thereby promoting integration and multiculturalism. However, it becomes evident that the coach’s behavior and how s/he structures the sport environment is decisive for whether desirable outcomes towards the goal of integration can be achieved.
This presentation will briefly summarize recent quantitative studies investigating the topic of acculturation through youth sport in migrant and host 214Symposia Thursday July 13th populations. In a second part, a new study conducted with youth athletes in Greece will be presented. Participants were 338 (13.61±.95 years of age) Greek athletes (167 girls) competing in individual and team sports.
Participants completed measures of acculturation attitudes, motivational environment and prosocial skills. Analysis of structural models revealed that a motivational environment characterized by a mastery climate, supportive of the needs of autonomy, competence, and relatedness, could predict empathy and altruism, which in turn predicted acculturation attitudes favoring multiculturalism. The results of the present study provide useful evidence concerning the role of both a mastery-oriented, need supportive sport environment and prosocial skills such as empathy and altruism, in promoting intercultural relations and facilitating acculturation processes of migrants.
In sum, the recent studies provide evidence on to how create and promote sport environments that are conducive for facilitating positive acculturation outcomes which is relevant for sport coaches and policy makers. Keywords: sport for all, integration, motivational climate, prosocial skills Acculturation strategies for relocated elite athletes, their peers, and the integrated support team Robert J. Schinke, Odirin Oghene, Yang Ge, Thierry Middleton (Laurentian University, Canada) Elite athletes, be they national team or professional level performers, travel across international boarders to augment living and training standards (Kontos, 2009).
These athletes and those they train with undergo acculturation challenges, comprised of psychosocial adjustments in relation to one another. The people engaged in this process within the training environment would include newcomers, teammates, coaches, sport science providers, and administration; (see Schinke, Blodgett, McGannon, & Ge, 2016). Broader acculturation challenges are also encountered as newcomer athletes experience unfamiliar cultural norms in their receiving communities (Elbe, Hatzigeorgiadis, Morela, Ries, Kouli, & Sanchez, 2016) as they encounter peers, friends, and employers (Schinke, Blodgett, McGannon, Ge, Oghene, & Seanor, in press).
We focus on how to develop an integrated approach to acculturation, where newcomer athletes and those they come into contact with engage in shared cultural learning, fostering deeper social ties. These strategies have been adopted in select Major League Baseball and National Hockey League Teams (see Battochio, Schinke, McGannon, Tenenbaum, Yukelson, & Crowder, 2013). However, shared acculturation strategies are seldom used in high performance sport environments.
Our focus is on how to engage members from both training and living environments in acculturation, conducive of shared educational processes. We frame this presentation temporally to include (a) entry into a collaborative process from when each newcomer enters the training facility and seeks a new coach and community of friends, (b) onward to strategies that a culturally inclusive group might use to further shared understanding and belonging, such as the celebrating of cultural festivities, or learning an unfamiliar language and (c) cultural inclusiveness monitoring strategies for all concerned over several years to ensure diversity remains a central part of acclimation for all. Keywords: shared acculturation, criticality, holistic processes Transnational mobility and cultural transition Tatiana V.
Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland), Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University, Sweden), Noora J. Ronkainen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China; Liverpool John Moores University, UK) A growing number of sport participants migrate within and between nations for a variety of reasons, such as athletic career development, sport tourism, and international assignments. During 2013, the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) estimated that 214 million individuals were considered to be migrants, which is one in every 33 persons worldwide.
This presentation builds on the ISSP Position Stand on transnationalism, mobility, and acculturation in and through sport (Ryba et al., 2017) to introduce a transnational conceptual 215Symposia Thursday July 13th framework used in recent studies of athletic migrants’ career and life transitions. First, migration terminology will be reviewed to facilitate the attendees’ understanding of the experiential layers of athletes’ experiences discussed in the presentations comprising this symposium. Next, we focus on a study of transnational elite athletes’ careers to clarify the processes activated in cultural transition that produce psychosocial development through work, sport, and relationships in shifting cultural patterns of meaning.
Having positioned the migrants’ experiences in critical acculturation literature (Bhatia & Ram, 2009; Ryba et al., 2015; Schinke et al., 2016), we derived at a temporal model of the cultural transition process consisting of three phases: pre-transition, acute acculturation, and sociocultural adaptation. The empirical model and three underlying mechanisms of cultural transition that assisted athletic career adaptability of transnational migrants will be discussed. We conclude with practical implications of this research for professionals working in the fields of career counseling and migrant support.
Keywords: cultural transition model, acculturation, transnational athletes, migration Healthy behavior with quality sport Chair: Jeanette López-Walle (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, México) In Mexico, efforts have been made to allow professional and academic development in the sports psychology to increase. To this end, a REDDECA Thematic Network was created, financed by the National Council of Science and Technology of Mexico. Through different strategies, the increase in research has been observed in recent years, focusing on themes such as: the role of the teacher in the motivation and mental health of physical education students (Zamarripa, Castillo, Tomas , Tristán and Álvarez, 2016), interpersonal styles generated of the coach as predictors of the satisfaction of basic psychological needs and motivation in university athletes (Cantú-Berrueto, Castillo, López-Walle, Tristán and Balaguer, 2016), anxiety and moods (Alvarez, Cuevas, Lara and Gonzalez, 2015), as well as self-concept in physical activity (Álvarez, Cuevas, Lara and Gonzalez, 2015).
Last, to abstractly express the development and future of research in the psychology of physical activity and sport in México (Reynaga, Góngora, López-Walle and Jiménez, 2016). With all of this, we has evidenced, the search for knowledge to promote healthy forms through the practice of quality sport in Mexico. Keywords: REDDECA, quality sport, healthy behavior, Mexico Autonomy support, achievement goal orientations, psychological needs and satisfaction with life in Mexican athletes Dahiana Salazar-González, Lesly Castellanos (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, México), Abril Cantú- Berrueto (Federación Méxicana de Fútbol Asociación, A.C., México), José Tristán, Jeanette López-Walle (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, México) The self-determination theory (SDT, Deci y Ryan, 2000) postulates that coach behaviors have important consequences on psychological needs satisfaction and positive outcomes in athlete.
Likewise, achievement goal theory (AGT, Ames 1992; Duda 1992, 1993; Nicholls 1980, 1989; Roberts 1984, 1992) postulates that the motivational climates that propitiate the task orientation, facilitate adaptive behaviors. The purpose of the present study was to test a model between the autonomy support generated by the coach, achievement goal orientations, basic psychological need satisfaction and satisfaction with life in university athletes. Participed two thousand seven hundred two university athletes (1,389 males, 1,313 females) from 15 different sports took part in the study.
The participants were aged 16 - 28 years (Mage= 21.23, DT = 2.06), fulfilled the Spanish version of the Mexican context, Sport Climate Questionnaire, (SCQ); Task and Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire (TEOSQ); Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI); Perceived Autonomy in Sport Scale (NAS); 216Symposia Thursday July 13th Perceived Relatedness Scale Friends (NRSC); and Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS). The result of the model was satisfactory about index model fit, chi-square = 4666.70, gl = 1027, RMSEA = 0.4, NFI = 0.96, NNFI = 0.97, CFI = 0.97. The conclusion about this study is the importance of creating climates to support autonomy created by the coach as predictors of the orientation of the goals, satisfaction of needs and well-being in sport context for obtained the best psychology health mood in athletes.
Keywords: autonomy support, orientations goals, psychological needs, Mexican athletes Decisional balance and self-determination like predictors of exercise enjoyment in a Mexican population Jorge Zamarripa, María Marentes Castillo, Luis Rodenas, Maritza Delgado (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, México) Making an important decision (e.g., exercising) involves a careful comparison of the pros and cons of such behavior. In this process called decisional balance, people decide to commit themselves when the perceive better the advantages than the disadvantages of physical exercise. Self-determination, for its part, involves the experience of having choices and the ability to choose.
This last, has been related to desirable effects such as enjoyment and adherence to physical activity, therefore, decisional balance can be a variable that contributes to the prediction of greater enjoyment of physical activity and therefore of adherence. The purpose of the present study was to examine the predictive role of decisional balance and self-determination on exercise enjoyment in a sample of 530 people (48.2% males) between the ages of 11 and 76 (M = 33.22; SD = 15.27) from the metropolitan area of Monterrey (Mexico). The Decisional Balance Questionnaire, the BREQ-3 and the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale were (administered, administrated, applied).
We conducted a hierarchical regression analysis to predict enjoyment. The balance decisional was entered in step 1 and the self- determination in step 2. The results indicate that the decisional balance account for 27.3% of the variance (F=200.24, p <.00) of the enjoyment.
In the step 2, the results indicated that the decisional balance and self- determination accounted for 40.8% of the variance (F=180.55, p <.00) of the enjoyment. In conclusion, the self- determination is a variable that contributes significantly to the prediction of decisional balance over the enjoyment of exercise. Keywords: decisional balance, self-determination, enjoyment, Mexican, exercise Impact of motivational climate created by parents on hardiness of young athletes Rafael Peñaloza Gómez, María del Pilar Méndez Sánchez (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México), José Carlos Jaenes Sánchez (Universidad Pablo de Olvide, España), Nancy Ponce Carbajal (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, México) Hardiness is defined as a set of characteristics of the personality that is shown as an important resource of resistance against stressful situations, its conformed by three sub-dimensions: control, commitment and challenge; These components make it a construct of vital importance in the initiation and permanence of young people in sports practice.
In the same way around the young people are different significant figures that test the characteristics of the personality mentioned above, influencing positively or negatively the way they face the situations of the sport. Parents, coaches and peers are the people that different studies have found as significant influences on young athletes, which is why the objective of the present study was to determine if the motivational climate created by the parents influences in some way the design of hardiness of college athletes. Participants included 150 youth from Mexico City who answered the Hardiness Questionnaire and the Parental Initiated Motivational Climate Questionnaire.
Descriptive analyzes were performed for the sample and correlation and regression analyzes were performed to determine if there were influences on the motivational climate on hardiness, finally the findings are discussed and the results are interpreted. 217Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: hardiness, motivational climate, parents, commitment Psychological factors, chronic diseases and physical activity in elderly people of Mexico and Spain Pedro Reynaga Estrada, Alejandra Yazmin Landeros Rubio (Universidad de Guadalajara, México), María Luisa Zagalaz Sánchez (Universidad de Jaén, España), Jeanette López-Walle (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, México), Ivonne Michel Jiménez Ortega (Universidad de Guadalajara, México) The main objective of this research is to describe two groups of elderly people performing maintenance gymnastics in the city of Jaén, Spain (37 subjects) and Guadalajara, Mexico (18 subjects). The variables used for this research correspond to three dimensions.
The first dimension is related to psychosocial factors, such as socio-demographic data and family environment, the second dimension with the pathologies and / or diseases presented by the participants, the third dimension with aspects of the practice of physical activity. Active aging is considered a process that seeks to take advantages at maximal the opportunities for physical, psychological and social well-being to improve the quality and life expectancy of older adults. The study was applied in both cities because Mexico and Spain share importants characteristics among which the language is found, although with small variants and development of colloquialisms.
For this purpose, a descriptive cross-sectional study was carried out, consisting of the observation of active elderly people, aged 55 to 85 years, using a sociodemographic questionnaire. Adaptations were only made between one version and another of the instruments. Among the most important results are certain psychosocial, sociodemographic and physical activity similarities between the two populations, finding that the main motivation of the people in this study is to conserve health and be distracted.
Both groups resemble the marital status and sentimental situation (they have a partner). However, there were more differences in the prevalence of diseases, where diabetes is more frequent in the Mexican group (19.6%) than in Spain (5.6%), whereas hypertension has an inverse proportion of 11.8% And 44.4%, respectively. It is important to remark that neither group has suspended physical activity for more than 6 months.
Keywords: elderly adults, physical education and sport; psychosocial factors The role of self-efficacy as a promotive of a healthy behavior and the establishment of an active lifestyle in Mexican population Rossana de Fátima Cuevas Ferrera, Omar Benjamín Solís Briceño, Jesús Moo Estrella (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, México), Juan González Hernández (Universidad de Murcia, España) In Mexico, specifically in Yucatan, the self-efficacy has been investigated in the establishment of an active lifestyle and its relationship with other healthy behaviors. Participated 1,208 subjects with ages between 8 and 70 representing different age groups. In youth and adults was used and validated the Self-efficacy Scale for Physical Activity (Cabrera, et.al., 2011), and for children, the Self-Efficacy Scale for Physical Activity (Aedo and Avila, 2009) validated in Mexican child.
It was found that the dimension of overcoming barriers is inadequate by presenting means below the expected levels for the different age groups, with differences in the type of barriers. The behaviors related to an active lifestyle, especially the level of physical activity was found in the category of insufficient for the different age groups, aspect that confirms the results published by the state and the national censuses, as for the percentage of inactivity and Sedentary lifestyle (ENSANUT, 2012, SSY, 2013, SEGEY, 2013, INEGI, 2014). In the child population, the studies had a pre-post design with an intervention based on the strengthening of self-efficacy, in both studies there were significant differences before and after the intervention in order to overcome the dimension of barriers.
Regarding self-efficacy with other healthy behaviors in university students, we found a negative relation with the insomnia symptoms. Based on the results found and according to the literature and scientific documentation on the effect of self-efficacy on the 218Symposia Thursday July 13th behavior and adoption of healthy behaviors (Alagarez, 2008, Balaguer, Escartí and Villamarín, 1995, Bandura 1977, 1982, 1989, 2001; Schwarzer and Reinhard, 1999), it is concluded that intervening in the Self-efficacy of the Yucatecan population is effective in promoting active lifestyle and other healthy behaviors. Keywords: self-efficacy, healthy behavior, Yucatan population Profile of competencies and accreditation in the professionalization of sport psychology Chair: Enrique Cantón (Consejo General de la Psicología de España) From a conceptual point of view and its historical development, the Psychology of Sport has been and remains as a field of Applied Psychology.
In this sense, although it counts on specific research in the area, in some cases as the means to learn about other human psychological aspects rather than an objective in itself, its applied facet has been the most characteristic, which leads us necessarily to contemplate its professional aspect. This Symposium involves specialists who are currently responsible for managing this field in Spain, and gathers some of the key elements of the situation; from the challenges we are facing, such as the need for supervision or the development of sub-areas of work, to the definition of professional competences and its formal accreditation. Keywords: applied psychology, accreditation, proffesional competences Challenges of the professional practice in sport psychology Enrique Cantón (Consejo General de la Psicología de España) Although we can affirm that nowadays the Psychology of Sport is a differentiated and consolidated field of professional application of Psychology, it is also true that its development is not similar worldwide, founding huge differences among countries in terms of their own formative requirements, professional competences, degree of social establishment or professional regulation.
Achieving a greater degree of harmonization is undoubtedly one of the clearest current challenges. If we focus on the Spanish case, as collected in a recent work (Canton, 2016), finishing the formalization of the specialty in this field of application of Psychology is precisely a challenge. In this sense, important steps have been taken, beginning with the creation of the Division of Physical Activity and Sport Psychology (PACFD) in 2010 in the Council of Official Colleges of Psychology, and the approval of its professional accreditation in 2015.
This process is trying to harmonize with our closest professional environment. On one side, the European Federation of Psychologists Associations (EFPA) counts with the Task Force in Sport Psychology, which is working on setting up the accreditation of professional profile of the specialty, and also delimiting its competences. Similarly, although slightly incipient is the development of this issue in Latin America, which has been facilitated by the creation in 2016 of the Ibero- American Division of Sports Psychology within the Ibero-American Federation of Associations of Psychology (FIAP) framework.
Keywords: sport psychology in Spain, proffesional development, European and Iberoamerican sport psychology Professional experience in sport psychology Mª Dolores Gonzalez (Consejo General de la Psicología de España) This paper describes the situation of profesional experience in our country. Since the first contributions by sport psychologists, education and research has advanced considerably, not so much in the profesional field. In this sense, the Consejo General de Psicología has developed a professional profile of this area (COP, 1998) in 219Symposia Thursday July 13th which the functions of a sport psychologist are presented (evaluation, planning and counseling, intervention, education and research).
In that first document three professional areas were identified: performance sport, initiation sport and health and leisure sport. Two new areas were added later (COP, 2006): sports organizations and sport for special groups. New areas of professional intervention will open in the next few years.
In line with other associations, the competencies that define the professional profile of sport psychologist have also been defined. Finally, greater legal recognition, interdisciplinary work with other sports professionals and improvements in working and salary conditions are some of the challenges which sport psychologists wil have to face in the coming years. Keywords: proffesional intervention, education, porfessional functions Professional perspectives of supervision in sports psychology Alexandre Garcia-Mas (Consejo General de la Psicología de España) The concept of mentoring is as old as the history of civilization (Meriam, 1983).
Although there is no single or universal definition (Bloom, 2013) can be explained as “the relationship between an experienced (mentor) and less experiencied (supervised) person in a specific field with the expressed purpose of promoting professional development for the protégé” (Schempp, Elliot, McCullick, Laplaca y Berger, 2016, p. 2). In the field of psychology of physical activity and sport, supervision is far from being implemented.
In addition, although attempts have been made to structure it in undergraduate and postgraduate studies, it has been shown that their acceptance and level of utilization are much higher when referring to professional aspects of the sport psychologist (SP) (Allen, Eby, Poteet, Lentz and Lima, 2004; Foltz, Fisher, Denton, Campbell, Speight and Steinfeldt, 2014). Thus, as an example, the effectiveness of this supervision with coaches has been clearly demostrated (Schempp, Elliot, McCullick, Laplaca and Berger, 2016). The current need to guarantee theoretical and practical training through the certification and / or accreditation of SP has opened up the possibility of integrating supervision within the various certification programs (as it occurs in EFPA and AASP).
Therefore, it should be seriously considered in the accreditation in Sports Psychology by the CGE. This will involve the consideration of the professional profile and training of the supervisor, both for the active ones and with SP who have completed their active cycle and can extend their experience to their protégés in a recognized and regulated way (Barney, Andersen and Riggs, 1994). Finally, and according to the possible and desirable interconnection between different certifications worldwide, these mentors must be sensitive and trained in the cross-cultural consideration of both athletes and their psychosocial constraints (Schinke, Fisher, Kamphoff, Gould and Oglesby , 2016).
Keywords: proffesional supervision, mentoring, accreditation The accreditation of specialist in the area, and expert in sub-areas in sports psychology in Spain Alejo García-Naveira (Consejo General de la Psicología de España) In order to meet the growing demands of the society, nowadays a model of professional accreditation by areas of specialization, and sub-areas of work or intervention strategies, has been generated by the Official Association of Psychologists of Spain. To obtain the accreditation of specialist in one of the Professional Divisions of the General Council of Psychology in Spain (CGPE), such is the Sports Division, it is necessary to comply with several basic and indispensable requirements: to have a Bachelor's Degree in Psychology (or equivalent); to be registered in any of the existing areas; be up to date on the payment of the receipts, and not to be serving a deontological sanction. In addition, there are some specific requirements: to have a minimum of 400 hours of additional specialized training in each field of intervention (recognized by the CGPE), and to have at least four years of certified professional experience.
The renewal of the accreditation is established in 200 220Symposia Thursday July 13th training hours every four years. The professional experience indicates that the specific high level competences that a psychologist acquires in his work, may go beyond the ones established specialties. This fact is directly related to the changing demands of the labor market, due to the different areas of activity (high performance sports, sports organizations, etc.), and with the different psychological intervention strategies (psychoanalysis, cognitive-behavioral orientation, coaching, etc.).
Therefore, there could be a subspecialty within the specialty, under the term "expert". We may conclude that it is necessary to respect this structure of training / accreditation for the better development of the sport psychologists’ professional skills, as well as the need to establish what are the sub-specialties and their accreditation requirements (under the term “expert”). Keywords: accreditation, specialization, proffesional experience The psychologist of sport as a trainer (of psychological skills) Eugenio Pérez-Córdoba (Consejo General de la Psicología de España) There is a widespread belief that psychology is a profession, almost exclusively dedicated to performing psychological "therapies".
In this paper we pretend to show that the psychologist is a trainer of psychological behaviors or abilities. Thus, the psychotherapist's work is often reduced to performing treatments to "cure" sick people, when, in fact, the function of "treatment" is not to "cure" abnormal behaviors, but rather to "change" behaviors to improve them . Does a coach do not "change" behaviors?
In this sense, it can not only go from the "abnormal" to the "normal", but can go from "normal" to "better", sometimes "abnormal" because it is elite (concept to name people Who belong to a select minority group), for example, by optimizing their psychological skills. And, just as there is a specific "technical skills" coach for each sport, or there is a coach or coach, there must be a behavior coach (or psychological skills), since it is customary for coaches or coaches require their athletes these behaviors without being trained. Thus, if they are asked for a certain resistance or power, they are first physically trained, if they are asked for a certain technical gesture, they also prepare themselves beforehand, but if they are required to control their anxiety or concentrate, they must do so without Train (by magic or similar?
Or is it an innate ability) In this way the psychologist uses "treatments" whose objective is not to "cure" but to "change" certain forms of behavior in a way that optimizes the performance of athletes, either to reach the elite or simply to improve their abilities and Psychological skills. And all this through a training, for which you need a coach or psychologist. Keywords: proffesional strategies, psychological skills, mental training Promoting positive youth development through sport: research to practice initiatives Chair: Nicholas Holt (University of Alberta) Positive youth development (PYD) is a strength-based approach to development, whereby emphasis is placed on building young people’s assets for them to thrive as productive members of society.
Sport represents fertile grounds for youth to live experiences that lead to positive developmental outcomes. In recent years, a growing number of researchers have created research-to-practice partnerships with sport organizations to apply PYD research findings in the delivery of sport programs. The purpose of the current symposium is to provide examples of research to practice initiatives and how they have contributed to the promotion of PYD through sport.
In the first presentation, Prof. Nicholas Holt will discuss the creation of PYD SportNET, a network dedicated to sharing evidence-based youth sport and PYD information to the sport community. In the second presentation, Dr.
Martin Camiré will present his work on redesigning Golf Canada’s two national youth development programs to embed within them a life skills curriculum. In the third presentation, Dr. Dany MacDonald and Dr.
Leisha Strachan will share the initiatives developed as part of Project SCORE, an online 221Symposia Thursday July 13th platform intended for coaches, parents, and athletes interested in promoting positive growth through sport. In the fourth presentation, Dr. Katherine Tamminen will share lessons learned in developing partnerships to implement evidence-based research into youth sport from a top-down level and a bottom-up approach.
Prof. Chris Harwood will serve as the symposium speaker, given his considerable experience as an applied sport psychologist interested in fostering the psychosocial development of youth through sport. Keywords: youth, development, research-to-practice Bridging the research-to-practice gap in Canadian sport: The PYD SportNET Project Nicholas Holt (University of Alberta) There is a research-to-practice gap when it comes to applying knowledge from sport research to the delivery of sport in Canada (Holt, 2016).
To address this problem, we have conducted a three-phase research project. In the first phase, we conducted a systematic review of over 1,000 studies of positive youth development (PYD) through sport. A total of 62 articles were ultimately included in our analysis, and we presented a model of how to promote PYD through sport.
In the second phase, which will be the focus of this presentation, we examined factors associated with the use of research evidence in sport organizations. Data were collected via individual semi-structured interviews with 21 representatives from Canadian National Sport Organizations and 46 Provincial Sport Organizations. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and subjected to an inductive thematic analysis.
Facilitators of the use of research evidence were when organizations had a personal connection with a researcher or sport scientist and when research could be used to support policy or convince funders. Barriers to the use of research evidence were its perceived lack of relevance, along with a lack of capacity and awareness within organizations. Suggestions for communicating research more effectively were to write short summaries with a practical focus, use a range of digital and social media, and facilitate face- to-face interactions.
Overall, results suggest that researchers should develop communication plans for their research, using multiple forms of media with specific messages targeted to particular stakeholders emphasizing the applied implications of findings. In the third phase, we are developing a range of shareable content resources that can be used by stakeholders in the sport community. We have created the PYD Sport Network (positivesport.ca) and through Twitter (@PYD SportNET) we share research information through infographics, retweets, and links.
Keywords: sport, knowledge exchange, facilitators, barriers Integrating life skills into two youth development programs for golfers Martin Camiré (University of Ottawa) Recent research conducted by Bean and Forneris (2016) suggests that sport programs intentionally structured to teach life skills are better suited to foster positive youth development outcomes, when compared to non-intentionally structured sport programs. In 2014, Golf Canada, the governing body and national sport organization for golf in Canada, undertook the process of creating its own life skills curriculum to be integrated in its programming for young golfers. The current presentation is intended to offers insights into the successful research to practice partnership that was created between researchers from the University of Ottawa and Golf Canada’s Chief Sport Officer and his staff.
The two parties worked together over the span of two years to create and integrate a life skills curriculum within Golf Canada’s two national programs for young golfers: (a) Golf in Schools and (b) Future Links Learn to Play. Golf in Schools (http://golfinschools.golfcanada.ca/) was developed in 2009 to help school teachers plan and deliver physical education classes that facilitate the learning of golf-specific skills. Future Links (https://www.cnfuturelinks.com/), Canada’s national junior golf development program since 1996, provides youth with the opportunity to learn the game of golf via affordable and accessible programming at their local golf club.
The life skills curriculum integrated in both of these 222Symposia Thursday July 13th programs consists of evidence-informed practical strategies that practitioners can readily use into their coaching practice to intentionally teach life skills through the sport of golf. The presentation is divided into three sections: (a) description of how the partnership was created, (b) explanation of how the life skills curriculum was developed, and (c) presentation of the lessons learned from establishing a successful partnership with a national sport organization. Keywords: golf, programming, youth, curriculum Using parent feedback to improve an online PYD program Dany J.
MacDonald, Sydney Stavert (University of Prince Edward Island), Leisha Strachan (University of Manitoba) It has been suggested that organized sport is an ideal venue to promote and incorporate positive youth development (PYD; Fraser-Thomas et al., 2005; Holt, 2016). Concurrent to this, it has been shown that adults have difficulties translating PYD into practice (McCallister et al., 2000). Based on these findings, researchers have developed instruments to assist with implementation of positive development into the sport environment.
One such instrument is Project SCORE, which is an online program aimed at helping coaches implement the 4 Cs (confidence, competence, connection, and character) of PYD in sport. Recent research has shown that coaches who used Project SCORE reported success in incorporating aspects of PYD into their coaching and reported individual growth as coaches (Strachan et al., 2016). To expand the instrument, the site has developed a parent portal aimed at providing parents with information about maintaining a PYD-focused environment outside the immediate sport environment.
However, the design and impact of the parent portal has yet to be studied. Therefore, this study investigated the parent portal to better understand parental perceptions of the instrument. Ten parents of youth sport participants (athletes aged between 12 and 17 years) were recruited as participants.
Parents were asked to navigate the website and voice their thoughts about the information presented using a talk-aloud procedure (Yardley et al., 2010). Following this, participants were asked additional questions about the program. Preliminary analyses suggest that parents like the setup of the site, the information presented, and would welcome the instrument if it was made available through their local organization.
To maintain effectiveness, parents suggested that information be constantly added to the site to ensure relevance. The results will be discussed in light of the recommendations, and information will be provided on how to best include Project SCORE within organizations. Keywords: online, 4Cs, coach, development Developing partnerships to bridge the gap between research and practice in youth sport Katherine Tamminen (University of Toronto) There is a strong history of research on psychosocial development in youth sport, as well as a strong body of research focusing specifically on identifying ways to structure sport settings to promote positive developmental experiences for youth.
However, researchers, practitioners, and administrators often cite a ‘gap’ between research and practice due to a variety of structural, organizational, and logistical constraints. The purpose of this presentation is to identify gaps and challenges in linking research and practice, followed by a discussion of strategies to overcome these challenges. Drawing on three case examples of youth sport research projects, this presentation will focus on the process of partnership development for carrying out research and improving knowledge translation of research findings.
The first case example describes the development of partnerships with sport organizations and industry partners to conduct PYD research on the sport experiences of Canadian youth hockey athletes, parents, coaches, administrators, and referees. The second case example describes the development of partnerships with community sport organizations and highlights opportunities to deliver and assess the effectiveness of youth sport intervention programs. The third case highlights the 223Symposia Thursday July 13th development of partnerships with municipal organizations for program evaluation and changes to municipal policies to promote access to sport opportunities among individuals living in low income.
Drawing on these various forms of partnerships, this presentation will address (a) issues concerning funding, markers of achievement, and impact; (b) concerns about making cautious assertions versus bold claims regarding research findings; (c) issues of academic freedom and intellectual property; (d) timelines and time commitments; and (e) suggestions to capitalize on partnerships between researchers, industry, and community organizations to bridge the research-practice gap. Keywords: practice, challenges, sport, recreation Symposia Session 7. (14.30-16) The role of psychology in working with Olympic and Paralympic athletes Chair: Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel/Olympic Committee of the Netherlands (NOC*NSF)) The past decades have witnessed an increased involvement of psychology in the support provided to Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches.
While this involvement has generally been focussed on the psychological preparation of Olympic athletes, a growing need has been detected for interventions focussed on mental health and psychological disorders. In order to ensure a structured system of support covering the spectrum ‘performance enhancement to therapeutic treatment’ requires an interdisciplinary approach bringing together, among other, sport, health and clinical psychology. During this symposium, experts will reflect on three major topics, namely (1) the challenges experienced when starting and continuing to work with Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches; (2) the competences perceived to be required to work with Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches; and (3) the lessons-learned and/or best practices related to working with Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches.
The symposium will be concluded with reflections and recommendations on the education, professional involvement and continued professional development (CPD) of psychology-support providers in working with Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches, and on the role of psychology associations and Olympic organisations in ensuring a high quality of psychology-support. This symposium will include data relevant to the preparation and support before as well as during the 2016 Rio Olympic Games. During this symposium, the audience will be provided by the panel chair with an opportunity of interaction with the panellists (e.g., questions, remarks, feedback).
Keywords: olympic athletes, paralympic athletes, psychology support, sport psychology, health psychology, clinical psychology Is an onsite sport psychology service during the Olympic Games really necessary? Olle Anfelt (Sveriges Olympiska Kommitté, Sweden) During the 21st century we can see an increased number of Sport Psychologists onsite during the Olympic Games as well as during World Championships etc. During the 90´s the SP service was mostly connected to preparations, the work together with the SP was done before the championship.
Thus, it was up to the coach staff and the athletes to deal with the mental issues during the Championship, as self-confidence, motivation, focus, underperformance etc. At the same time we can see a general tendency that the number of persons around the athletes increases. The role of the headcoach has expanded.
Today the coach staff and the support team in number can be as big as the number of athletes or more. This means new challenges for the headcoach and for everyone involved. Communication becomes central to coordinate all people involved.
In Rio the number of athletes, in the Swedish Olympic Team, for the first time was fewer than the total number of 224Symposia Thursday July 13th leaders, coaches, medical staff, administrative personal, SP´s etc. In a more and more multidisciplinary context, what is the role of the Sport Psychologist and has the role changed the last ten to fifteen years? Is an onsite presence adding value or is there a risqué overstaffing the teams?
The presentation will cover experiences and lessons learned from a sport psychology view presenting Swedish data from the last five summer games (Sydney to Rio). Keywords: Olympic Games, role, multidisciplinary, overstaffing Relationship between the onsite collaboration with a performance psychologist and the occurrence of failure and success factors at the Olympics? Daniel Birrer (Swiss Federal Institute of Sports Magglingen / Department of Elite Performance, Switzerland) Competing successfully at the Olympics is an unrivalled challenge for athletes.
To support athletes in this endeavor the number of nations, who support their athletes with onsite sport psychological services, is growing. However, some NOCs question the need for and the effectiveness of onsite consultancy. We have been able to show the need for onsite sport psychological services for performance, organizational and personal issues (Birrer, Wetzel, Schmid, & Morgan, 2012).
Nevertheless, there is a lack of empiric evidence that onsite services are an added value. Therefore all Swiss participants of the Olympic Games 2016 were asked to complete a survey regarding their confrontation with different mental success and failure factors and its perceived effect on their performance. Athletes were grouped as to whether they worked onsite with a performance psychology specialist (onsite service users, OSU) or not (Non onsite service user, N-OSU).
28% stated to have consulted a sport psychology professional during the games. OSUs had a lower ratio of athletes with “confidence in the coach’s abilities”. However, this had a lower negative effect on their performance than in N-OSUs.
Furthermore, OSUs had a higher ratio of athletes, who had “difficulties in recovering at the OG”, had “sleep difficulties”, had prepared “for unexpected events”, were confronted with “high nervousness” and “safety worries”. Although OSUs had a higher confrontation rate with these factors the effect on their performance was perceived as more positive or less negative compared with N-OSUs. Finally, there was no difference in the ratios between OSUs and N-OSUs regarding other factors, e.g.
“confidence in a successful competition outcome”. OSU’s, however, perceived the impact of these factors generally as more performance facilitative than N-OSUs. To sum up athletes with an onsite collaboration with a performance psychology professional perceived success and failure factors as more facilitative.
Keywords: effects of onsite services, competitive fail and success factors, Olympic athletes, performance psychology The Canadian national boxing team’s emergence and relapse in an Olympic cycle Robert J. Schinke (Laurentian University, Canada) The Canadian National Boxing Team held four cycles of successive Olympic medal results from 1984-1996 (Schinke, Stambulova, Trepanier, & Oghene, 2014). Thereafter, other teams developed and augmented their Olympic success and Canada declined first to a strong Pan-American and Commonwealth Games team to one that was virtually unrecognized in the world rankings (Schinke, 2009).
From 2013-2016, with a new National Team staff, including the appointment of a mental performance consultant, the team returned to a strong international standard with medals in two consecutive world championships, three medals at the 2014 Commonwealth Games, and six medals and a second place team finish at the 2015 Pan-American Games, including three gold medals. Situated in a government funding context that was oriented toward Olympic success (Own the Podium), the team eventually underachieved at the 2016 Rio Olympics. Within this presentation, (a) the presenter engages reflexively in the reasons for this downturn in Olympic results (see Schinke, McGannon, Parham, & Lane, 2012; Terry, 2009), (b) what is being learned from the Rio Olympic 225Symposia Thursday July 13th experience, (c) how the information is being used to strengthen his own services, and (d) what his services in the next Olympic cycle will look like.
This knowledge is contrasted with what is known in the literature regarding competent Olympic mental performance consultant practices (see Gould & Maynard, 2009; Hodge & Hermansson, 2009; Wylleman, Reints, & Van Aken, 2012). Though Olympic teams are highly idiosyncratic, with unique national characteristics (see Si, Yu Li, & Chen, 2016), loose recommendations are considered for parallel national team contexts regarding how to develop a winning culture and staff accountability within the context of two successive Olympic cycles. Keywords: Olympic cycle, meta-transitions, boxing, major games competence The interdisciplinary support provided by sport, health and clinical psychologists to Olympic and Paralympic athletes and coaches of TeamNL Paul Wylleman (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) The past decades have witnessed an increased involvement of psychologists in the support provided to Olympic athletes and coaches (Wylleman & Johnson, 2012).
While generally focussed on the psychological preparation of Olympic athletes, a growing need has been detected for interventions focussed on mental health and psychological disorders (Gouttebarge, Jonkers, Moen, Verhagen, Wylleman, & Kerkhoffs, 2016). In order to ensure a structured system of support covering the spectrum ‘performance enhancement to therapeutic treatment’, the Netherlands Olympic Committee (NOC*NSF) has, since the end of 2013, ensured the support of sport, health and clinical psychologists. Flanked by lifestyle coaches and psychiatrists, these psychologists are part of an interdisciplinary team consisting of 30 experts.
This presentation will focus and provide data on the development and context of the provision of interdisciplinary psychology support provision to Dutch Olympic and Paralympic in the run up to the 2016 Rio Olympic Games. Recommendations will be formulated on the education and continued professional development (CPD) of psychologists and on the role of psychology associations (EFPA, FEPSAC) and Olympic organisations (EOC, NOC*NSF) (Wylleman, Harwood, Elbe, Reints, & de Caluwé, 2009; Wylleman, Reints, & Van Aken, 2012). Keywords: interdisciplinary team, sport psychologist, health psychologist, clinical psychologist, Olympic athlete, Paralympic athlete Working with Paralympic Athletes.
Hardy Menkehorst (Mental Training and Coaching Centre, the Netherlands) In the last 10 to 20 years, the growth of interest in the psychology of Paralympic athletes is significant. Research is starting to support the value of psychological skills training and delivering services on site. Even though it is questioned if sport psychology services on site at the Olympic or Paralympic Games at are a successful contribution to enhance performance, we still must find an answer regarding the best practices at the Games as a sport psychologist.
Little is known about these best practices at the Games as competition is going on. A lot of the Paralympic athletes, taking part in Paralympic competition, have suffered from a personal trauma, before the onset of their Paralympic career. Sport psychologist are not fully educated to deal with this group of athletes and often lack the experience of working with them under pressure.
As the competitiveness is growing fast at the Paralympic level, gaining experience as a sport psychologist on site at the level of international competition is very important. National Paralympic Committees should therefore create ample opportunities for sport psychologists to have this experience and offer them possibilities to enlarge and build on their existing competencies, so they are able to serve this group of athletes even better. The education of sport psychologist should be re-evaluated to meet the challenges of these athletes.
226Symposia Thursday July 13th Key words: Experience on site, Paralympic athletes, education of sport psychologist, best practices on site Save the Dream Symposium: Runway to save your dream Chair: Pedro Velazquez (ICSS - Save the Dream) Save the Dream is a global non-profit Movement of organisations, people and athletes who believe in the power of sport to build more fair and inclusive societies and are therefore committed to promote and protect its core values for the good of youth and future generations. The main objective of the Symposium is to inspire the audience of sport psychology academic and practitioners through the testimonial of outstanding athletes about how Sport Psychology can better promote and protect the core values of sport. The symposium will offer a chance to meet theory and practice.
It will offer the opportunity to the audience of sport psychology academics and practitioners to have an open debate with athletes with have been in contact with sport psychology through their sporting career or who are themselves (or in their way to become) sport psychologists. The panel will be composed of four outstanding athletes led by Ms. Josefa Idem.
As coordinator she will provide an insight about the members of the panel and will engage them to share their experiences and perspectives. The speakers, on the basis of their successful experience as athletes but also of their knowledge of the world of sport and bearing in mind how sport psychology could do more to help, will explore the following thematic blocks: obstacles to realize sport dreams (e.g.: politics, disability, economic hindrances, mainstream education, etc.), how to make the most of young athlete potential (e.g.: spotting will, spotting, promoting and safeguarding sport talent, and how to face sport threats such as doping, corruption, match fixing and abuses. The audience will be offered to interact with the athletes by asking questions and exchanging views Keywords: athletes, dreams, disability, obstacles, talent, threats, doping, corruption, abuseses Runway to save your dream Pedro Velazquez (ICSS - Save the Dream) Obstacles to become an elite successful athlete can be very diverse in nature and sport psychology can play a key role in overcoming them.
First hand personal stories of outstanding athletes inspire sport psychology academic and practitioners but also athletes including potential elite athletes. Josefa Idem, Giusy Versace, Honey Thaljieh and Alhambra Nievas’s testimonials and interaction with the audience will help to understand from her practical experience how Sport Psychology can better promote and protect the core values of sport. The symposium will offer a chance to meet theory and practice.
Eight Olympic participations Josefa Idem Josefa Idem (born 23 September 1964 in Germany) is an Olympic Champion Italian sprint canoer who won Olympic bronze medals at Los Angeles 1984 and at Atlanta 1996, Olympic silver medal in Athens 2004 and in Beijing 2008 and Olympic gold in Sydney 2000. She has competed in eight Olympic participations from 1984 to 2012 and a fifth place in London 2012 at the age of 48 years. Besides she won 5 World titles, 10 European titles and two World Cups.
Josefa is currently a member of the Italian Senate and is completing her bachelor in Psychology. Rich of her athletic and political outstanding experience she will provide the audience with a unique perspective about the obstacles young people face to make their sport dreams come true (e.g.: politics, disability, economic hindrances, mainstream education, etc.) 227Symposia Thursday July 13th The experience as a referee Alhambra Nievas Alhambra Nievas is a telecommunications engineer, rugby player and referee. She is the first Spanish woman to have refereed a Rugby World Cup and the first woman to be chosen as the best rugby referee in the world in 2016 at the World Rugby Awards.
When she was a kid Alhambra she used to play soccer, tennis, basketball, volleyball and karate. While studying Telecommunications and playing rugby, he began a parallel career in 2006 as a referee that in just one decade has led him to be number one. As rugby player she played 11 seasons at the national level and 3 of them was selected to play with the Spanish national team.
In 2013 she had to choose between continuing to compete or opting to become a referee. She is the only Spanish rugby referee with full dedication to this task. Alhambra will share with the audience her experience of becoming an agent of change promoting sport values from her unique position as international rugby referee.
If you fall down, don't be afraid. Smile and stand up! Giusy Versace Giusy Versace is a leading Italian para-athlete and former European record-holder.
The daughter of Alfredo Versace, cousin of Donatella Versace and Santo Versace, she worked in fashion, until she was involved in a serious accident in 2005. She is currently a rising athletics star in her native Italy, having won several national titles and broken a European record in the 100m (T43) in 2012. As well as an athlete, Giusy is President of ‘Disability no Limits’ - a national non-profit organisation that raises funds to secure high-tech aids for economically disadvantaged people with disabilities.
Giusy is a proud to be a Save the Dream ambassador, devoted to protect true values of sport in the world. Though it's quite common to think that her name has preserved her from suffering, as many people living with the same condition, she too felt pain and worked very hard to build a brand new life following her accident. She will inspire the audience about how young people in similar situations can overcome their obstacles- If you fall down, don't be afraid.
Smile and stand up! If you believe, you can go anywhere. How to overcome social restrictions and political barriers Honey Thaljieh Honey Thaljieh is the co-founder of women’s football in Palestine, the first captain of the Palestinian national team, and the first Arab woman to obtain a FIFA Master and work at FIFA.
Thaljieh defied all social restrictions and political barriers, and became a role model to women and girls throughout the Arab world. Today, Honey continues her efforts as ambassador and member of influential international organizations around the world to empower women and children through sports, and to promote equality and non-violence through football. As Corporate Communications Manager for FIFA, Honey designs and implements pro-social football programs around the world.
As a woman devoted to develop sport in an occupied land Honey will inspire the audience through her own experience about how to overcome gender, cultural and political obstacles. Values Symposium 2: Exploring youth sport values with sport-specific value questionnaires Chair: Jean Whitehead (University of Brighton, Eastbourne, UK) 228Symposia Thursday July 13th Martin Lee pioneered the study and measurement of values in youth sport. This symposium focuses on results obtained with the Youth Sport Values Questionnaire (YSVQ: Lee, Whitehead, & Balchin, 2000) which identifies hierarchical youth sport value systems, and the Youth Sport Values Questionnaire-2 (YSVQ-2: Lee, Whitehead, Ntoumanis, Hatzigeorgiadis, 2008) which measures higher order moral, competence, and status values.
Whitehead’s introductory paper, summarises the development of these instruments in the UK by a range of qualitative and quantitative methods, and clarifies how they differ and how they relate to measures of the Schwartz model of human values (1992). Guinto-Adviento presents YSVQ data from an Asian nation in a survey of Filipinos (n=492). She discusses similarities and differences with the UK and the elevation of team cohesion in a collectivist society.
Goggins demonstrates that 3 samples of youth sport participants show similar clusters on the basis of their YSVQ values, and that these clusters differ in their acceptance of cheating and gamesmanship and their attitude to keeping winning in proportion. Gürpinar outlines the development and testing of a Turkish version of the YSVQ-2, using the method of back translation, and evaluating content validity, linguistic equivalence in bi-lingual speakers, reliability, and factorial validity. Danioni & Barni adapted the YSVQ-2 to represent parents’ sport socialization values and employed it with a measure of perceived motivational climate to predict antisocial behaviour to teammates and opponents in Italian adolescent team players.
A new international youth sport value hierarchy, including data from 2 ISSP papers, will initiate discussion that will include consideration of further development and adaptation of these instruments for different populations, contexts, and research questions. Keywords: values, value systems, value structure, ethical attitudes, motivational climate, antisocial behaviour Developing youth sport value questionnaires in the UK Jean Whitehead (University of Brighton, Eastbourne, UK) This paper summarises initial development and findings with two of Lee's questionnaires used by subsequent presenters. The Youth Sport Values Questionnaire (YSVQ: Lee, Whitehead & Balchin, 2000) was developed to identify youth sport value systems.
For ecological validity, items were drawn directly from young football and tennis players who were interviewed in focus groups about moral dilemmas in their sport. Transcripts were analysed, 18 values were identified, and proxy items for each value were pilot tested. A survey of 500 competitors aged 12-15 years showed that enjoyment ranked highest in the youth sport value system, followed by personal achievement and a group of socio-moral values, with winning in the lowest position.
Ratings and rankings showed high correlations across age, gender, sport type, and participation level. Studies by other researchers have shown high correlations across two decades, and across the values of high school pupils and their PE teachers. A Canadian study confirmed the value set to be comprehensive.
Cross- cultural research across five nations showed consistency at the extremes of the hierarchy and cultural variations within. Youth sport rankings for achievement and winning were consistent with global rankings of adult life values but enjoyment ranks higher in youth sport than adult life. The Youth Sport Value Questionnaire–2 (YSVQ-2: Lee, Whitehead, Ntoumanis, & Hatzigeorgiadis, 2008) was developed to create multi-item scales for 3 selected higher order value types: moral, competence, and status values.
Existing items were analysed, new ones were added, pilot-tested and analysed with CFA to determine the fit of each factor, and of the 3-factor model, and establish invariance across gender. These sport-specific values have been provisionally located within the Schwartz (1992) circumplex model of human values. There is a need to determine these relations empirically and develop measures of other higher order value types in sport.
Keywords: values, value systems, value types, moral dilemmas An examination of sport values among Filipino youth Maria Luisa Guinto-Adviento (University of the Philippines) 229Symposia Thursday July 13th This century has seen growing interest in the values of youth sport competitors. The Youth Sport Values Questionnaire (YSVQ: Lee, Whitehead & Balchin, 2000) was constructed to identify the value systems (value priorities) of young athletes. The UK value system showed enjoyment, personal achievement and some moral values ranked at the top of the hierarchy, with winning at the bottom.
Consistency across subgroups was high, implying that the common experience of competitive sport would show consistent sport value systems across nations. The present study examined the YSVQ value hierarchies of 492 Filipino athletes aged 12 to 17 years. Participants were recruited on the basis of their involvement in competitive (varsity sport team or membership) or recreational (intramural participation or sport club membership) high school sport.
The overall data had a high correlation with the UK youth value system (r=.73, rs =.75). In both nations, the values of achievement, sportsmanship and enjoyment were within the top 4 values, while winning and conformity were among the bottom 2. Key differences in Filipinos were the promotion of team cohesion to a top-4 value and a demotion of tolerance to the bottom 3.
Subgroup analyses showed high correlations (gender r=.85, rs=.82; individual/team sport r=.86, rs=.89; Christian/Muslim r=.87, rs=.89). As a collectivist society, Filipinos emphasise communal rather than individual action or identity, hence the high ranking of team cohesion is expected. The low ranking of tolerance is discussed in relation to the item wording and to potential undermining of the efforts of individual players to achieve team goals.
This study affirms the merit of the YSVQ for cross-cultural use. Filipinos understood the sport specific items in the original English version with minimal changes. The basic sport value system was shared, and the key differences appropriately featured Filipino culture.
Keywords: values, value systems, youth sport, collectivist society, Filipinos Value clusters and moral decision-making in youth sport Luke Goggins, Craig Williams (University of Exeter, UK), Paul Freeman (University of Essex, Colchester, UK) This study had three distinct aims. Firstly, to examine whether young athletes could be grouped based on differences in their sport values; secondly, to examine the composition of these different cluster profiles; and finally, to explore how these clusters differed in attitudes to moral decision making. Cluster analyses were conducted on three existing independent data sets (First sample, n = 1309, age M/SD = 14.24/1.60; second sample, n = 491, age M/SD = 13.11/1.09; third sample, n = 411, age M/SD = 14.02/1.63).
In each sample, participants completed the Youth Sport Values Questionnaire (YSVQ; Lee et al., 2000), with participants in the second and third sample also completing the Attitudes to Moral Decision Making Questionnaire (AMDYSQ; Lee et al., 2007). The purpose of the three analyses was to examine consistency in the cluster profiles. Chi-squared tests examined composition differences between clusters, with MANCOVAs testing differences between clusters on attitudes to moral decision making in the final two samples.
The analyses found youth sport participants could be clustered based on sport value differences and these profiles were consistent across the three samples. There was always one cluster that placed more importance on sport values and generally comprised a higher proportion of males and individuals participating in a higher level of sport. Another cluster placed least importance on sport values and had the higher proportion of participants at the lower level of sport with the third cluster placing moderate importance on sport values.
The clusters that placed more importance on sport values overall were less accepting of cheating and gamesmanship and more likely to keep winning in proportion than those participating in sport at a lower level. The findings provide some empirical support for the often-held view that sport participation can have a positive influence on a young person’s moral character development. Keywords: values, value clusters, ethical attitudes, youth sport 230Symposia Thursday July 13th Youth Sport Values Questionnaire-2 (YSVQ-2): A validity and reliability study in a Turkish sample Bahri Gürpinar, Serkan Toprak, Merve Ayvalli (Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey), Jean Whitehead (University of Brighton, Eastbourne, UK) The purpose of this study was to develop a Turkish Version of the Youth Sport Values Questionnaire-2 (YSVQ-2: Lee, Whitehead, Ntoumanis and Hatzigeorgiadis, 2008) and test its validity and reliability.
The questionnaire has 13 items and measures moral, competence and status value types. Responses are on a 7 point scale, on which participants rate the importance of each item to them when competing. The Turkish version was developed with the back-translation method and the content validity was assessed by experts.
For linguistic equivalence, people who spoke both English and Turkish completed both versions (rs = .86). It was administered to 292 athletes (101 girls, 191 boys) from 4 different type of sports (football, basketball, volleyball, tennis). The athletes were aged between 11-18 (mean 14.05±1.92 years).
The mean sport experience was 4.26±2.31 years. Results showed good test-retest reliability (rs = .89). The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was .64 for the moral values subscale, .66 for the competence values subscale, and .79 for the status values subscale.
The factorial validity of the YSVQ-2 was analyzed with confirmatory factor analysis. All T values exceeded 2.56 (p<0.01) and no item had an error variance greater than .90. Fit indices showed a good or excellent fit (x2/df = 1.79; RMSEA = .05; GFI = .94; AGFI = .92; SRMR = .06; CFI = .97; NNFI = .93).
Mean scores of the subscales were as follows: competence values = 4.30±0.71; moral values = 4.10±0.72; status values = 2.59±1.49. These data reflect the priorities found in some other nations. The findings confirm the three-factor structure of the Turkish version of the YSVQ-2.
Overall, the results indicate that this is a reliable and valid instrument that can be used to assess the Turkish athletes’ value types. Keywords: youth sport, values, value types, factorial validity, reliability, Turkey Parents’ sport socialization values and sport motivational climate as predictors of adolescents’ antisocial behaviours during competitions Francesca Danioni (Catholic Univeristy, Milan, Italy), Daniela Barni (LUMSA University, Rome, Italy) Parents and coaches are important agents of socialization and play a key role in young athletes’ sport experience (Weigand, Carr, Petherick, & Taylor, 2001). In particular, parents’ and coaches’ sport goals for children may influence young athletes’ sport behaviour, such as prosocial and antisocial behaviours.
This study, involving adolescent team sport players, aims to analyse whether and the extent to which perceived parents’ sport socialization values, which are more abstract goals, and perceived motivational climate in sport, which are situational goals mainly fostered by coaches, influence young athletes’ antisocial behaviour towards teammates and opponents during competitions. While parents’ socialization values refer to those sport values (i.e., moral, competence, status) adolescents perceive their parents want them to endorse, the motivational climate is the situational goal structure of the sport environment fostered by significant others, mainly the coach, which is deemed task and/or ego involving. Italian adolescents team sport competitors (n=172, male=83, female=89; age m=15.41, sd=1.73) completed the Youth Sport Values Questionnaire-2 (Lee, Whitehead, Ntoumanis, & Hatzigeorgiadis, 2008) adapted to measure perceived parental socialization sport values, whereas the Perceived Motivational Climate in Sport Questionnaire-2 (Bortoli & Robazza, 2004) was used to assess adolescents’ perceptions of the prominent motivational climate within their team.
The Prosocial and Antisocial Behavior in Sport Scale (Kavussanu & Boardley, 2009) was used to assess adolescents’ antisocial behaviour towards teammates and opponents. Multiple linear regression and relative weight analysis showed that a task-involving motivational climate negatively predicted antisocial behaviour towards teammates. Antisocial behaviours towards opponents were instead predicted by parents’ socialization sport values, particularly mothers’ status values.
Expansions of the study will be discussed. 231Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: youth sport, values, motivational climate, prosocial behaviour, antisocial behaviour, Italy Multiple identities of self-talk: From window into thought to performance-oriented mental training Chair: Alexander T. Latinjak (Euses - School of Sport and Health Sciences) In this symposium, we seek to outline the two major lines of research within the field of sport self-talk: research on athletes’ automatic self-talk and research on self-talk interventions.
Automatic self-talk are self- statements generated by the individual, either consciously or unconsciously, but without previous planning or training, while strategic self-talk refers to rational-proactive statements in interpersonally-designed and planned-in-advance interventions. This distinction will be exemplified in five studies that tackle state of the art research questions in each line of research. Study 1 focused on the distinction between spontaneous and goal- directed automatic self-talk, and their effect on outward emotional reactions (Fritsch, Hatzigeorgiadis, Latinjak, & Elbe).
Study 2 focused solely on automatic goal-directed self-talk. The purpose of this study was to explore the goal-directed self-talk used by basketball players to cope with diverse competitive situations (Latinjak, Torregrossa, Cargol-Pugés, & Ramis). Studies three to five focused on self-talk interventions.
Study 3 examined grammatical forms of strategic self-statements. Specifically, the effects of first- and non-first person self-talk on performance in endurance tasks were compared (Hardy & Thomas). Study 4 and Study 5 consisted of experiments on self-talk interventions in specific performance contexts.
Study 4 examined the effects of self- talk on endurance performance in hot conditions (Comoutos, Bartura, Hatzigeorgiadis, Argiropoulos, & Flouris), whereas Study 5 focused on the effects of self-talk on task performance under conditions of external distraction in both laboratory and field settings (Hatzigeorgiadis, Galanis, Charachousi, Sanchez, & Comoutos). The discussion of the symposium will focus on the differences and overlaps between both types of self-talk, automatic and strategic, as well as on the unique and shared challenges both lines of research have to face in the close future. Keywords: cognitive processes, thoughts, emotions, attention, endurance exercise The relationship between self-talk and outward emotional reactions Julian Fritsch (University of Thessaly & University of Copenhagen), Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis (University of Thessaly), Alexander T.
Latinjak (EUSES - School of Sport and Health Sciences), Anne-Marie Elbe (University of Copenhagen) In the sport context, a recently introduced framework classifies athlete’s automatic self-talk into goal- directed and spontaneous self-talk (Latinjak, Zourbanos, López-Ros, & Hatzigeorgiadis, 2014). While spontaneous self-talk was found to often involve emotionally charged statements such as the evaluation of a performance or the prediction of outcomes, a main identified function of goal-directed self-talk is to control emotional states. Recent studies (e.g., Furley, Moll, Memmert, 2015) highlight the impact of the behavioral component of an emotion (such as gestures, verbalizations, or facial expressions) on sport performance.
Consequently, the main purpose of this study is to assess whether the self-talk framework can be used to distinguish between different forms of outward emotional reactions, which, in turn, influence sport performance. In a naturalistic video-assisted design, initial competitive tennis matches have been taped. Using the footage including the provision of context information (e.g., current score, previous points), the players have been asked to recall and write down their self-talk as accurately as possible in multiple situations.
Those situations include lost points where (a) a negative outward emotional reaction or (b) no outward emotional reaction can be observed and, respectively, won points where (c) a positive outward emotional reaction or (d) no outward emotional reaction can be observed. All statements have been transcribed and recoded into single text units which will be deductively and independently categorized into the goal-directed/ undirected self-talk 232Symposia Thursday July 13th framework by two raters with experience in the research field. Finally, quantitative analyses will be conducted to assess the relationship between outward emotional reactions and the type of self-talk.
Keywords: emotions, goal-directed/ spontaneous thoughts, naturalistic design Goal-directed self-talk in competitive situations in male basketball Alexander T. Latinjak (EUSES - School Of Sport And Health Sciences), Miquel Torregrossa, Manu Cargol-Pugés, Yago Ramis (Universitat Autònoma De Barcelona) In this study, we focused on goal-directed self-talk, a strategy that affects performance by the means of self-regulation, contrarily to strategic self-talk interventions, which aim at an externally driven change in athlete’s thoughts. Goal-directed self-talk represents a controlled mental process deliberately employed towards solving a problem or making progress on a task.
We specifically explored goal-directed self-talk used by basketball players to cope with diverse competitive situations: seconds before a game expected to be close, while clearly winning or clearly losing a game, and at the close of a tight game. Thirty-four male basketball players (Mage = 19.74, SD = 2.93) wrote up to three self-instructions they had used in these situations to self- regulate, solve a problem or make progress on a task. Content analyses indicated that athletes’ goal-directed self-talk was predominantly future-oriented (I will win), creating activated states (Come on!) and regulating cognition and behaviour (Focus on the game).
Exploring differences among situations, cross tabulation with Cramer’s V statistic exposed a significant situation by self-talk function interaction (Cramer's V = .259, p < .001). Specifically, for seconds before the proportion of goal-directed self-talk aimed at controlling cognitive reactions and creating deactivated states (Calm down) was significantly high (sei = 2.7 and sei = 2.3, respectively), whereas the proportion of goal-directed self-talk aimed at controlling deactivated states (Don’t give up) was significantly low (sei = -2.4). Additionally, the proportion of goal-directed self-talk aimed at controlling deactivated states was significantly high for while winning (sei = 4.0).
Overall, the results of this study underline the need for research on athletes’ autonomous attempts to control themselves by be means of goal-directed self-talk, and inquire into the effects of these self-statements in a wide variety of situations. Keywords: cognitive processes, self-regulation, thoughts, sports The effect of first-person versus non-first person self-talk on endurance performance James Hardy, Aled Thomas (Institute for the Psychology of Elite Performance (IPEP), Bangor University, Wales, UK) Despite self-talk being an effective intervention for a variety of motor tasks, research has mostly focused on the function and content of self-talk, rather than how it is said. Recent research has documented a positive effect of self-talk on endurance performance, offering support for the central role of perceived effort (cf., the psychobiological model of endurance performance).
Some contemporary non-sport research has examined grammatical features of self-talk, identifying some aspects that aid self-regulation. In this study, we examined the effect of first-person (i.e., ‘I’) versus non-first person (i.e., ‘You’) self-talk on endurance performance, power output, and perceptions of effort in a 10km cycle time-trial (TT). Twelve healthy and active males (M = 22.20 years, SD = 2.55) carried out a 10km cycle TT on three separate visits; the first visit was a familiarisation trial followed by randomly counterbalanced ‘I’ or ‘You’ self-talk trials.
Paired t-test revealed the endurance performance was significant faster in the non-first person versus the first-person condition (p < .05). Two-factor (2 x 10) ANOVA results indicated that power output per km was also significantly higher in the non-first person condition (p < .05) and despite working harder in the non-first person condition, there was no difference for perceived effort between the two self-talk conditions. Further research into the effects of both first-person and non-first person self-talk on sports tasks is needed.
While these data are encouraging, they also flag the need to better understand how this performance effects materializes. 233Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: athletic performance, endurance exercises, thoughts Performance in the heat: A psychobiological approach to the effectiveness of self-talk Nikos Comoutos, Khelifa Bartura, Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis, Christos Argiropoulos, Andreas Flouris (University of Thessaly) The use of self-talk has proven effective for enhancing endurance performance and the psychobiological model of endurance performance posits that these effects can be explained through a perceptual interpretation; in particular, suggesting that self-talk can reduce perceptions of exertions. Performing endurance tasks under conditions of heat enhance physiological and psychological stress, thus also perceived exertion.
The purpose of this study was to test the predictions of the psychobiological model of endurance performance in hot condition through a self-talk intervention. Participants were 16 physically active adult males (mean age 22.5±4.9 years) who were randomly assigned into intervention and control groups. After a baseline VO2 peak assessment, participants trained in two consecutive days on a cycling task, with participants of the intervention group using self-talk.
Following a day of rest, participants were asked to complete a 30min cycling trial in a hot environment (35ºC, 45% relative humidity), while maintaining a steady rate of moderate perceived exertion. Psychological and physiological measures were obtained during the trial. Participants of the intervention group produced greater power output during the final third of the trial.
Respective results were recorded for oxygen consumption, whereas no significant differences were found for respiratory quotient, core, skin and muscle temperature, and thermal sensation and comfort. Overall, the findings suggest that the self-talk strategy seems to have compromised the aversive effects of the demanding environmental conditions, and provide support for the tenets of the psychobiological model of endurance performance. Keywords: cognition, extreme conditions, heat, oxygen consumption Self-talk can help countering the effects of distraction.
Lab and field evidence Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis, Evangelos Galanis, Fedra Charachousi (University of Thessaly), Xavier Sanchez (University of Cumbria), Nikos Comoutos (University of Thessaly) The effectiveness of self-talk strategies for performance enhancement in sport has received considerable support. A potential mechanism explaining the facilitating effects of self-talk is its attentional effects. The ability of athlete to focus attention to appropriate stimuli and remain focused in the face of distractions is an important asset for optimal sport performance.
The purpose of this study was to explore the effectiveness of self-talk strategies on task performance under conditions of external distraction. To that end two experiments were conducted, one in the lab and one in the field. For the lab experiment participants were 28 sport science students (17 males, 11 females; mean age, 21.33±1.44) who were tested on a computer game requiring attention and fine execution, following a baseline assessment and a short training.
For the field experiment participants were 28 female basketball players (mean age, 20.96±4.51) who were tested on free throw shooting, following a baseline assessment and a six-week intervention. In both experiments the final assessment took place under conditions of external distraction (non-continuous, sudden, loud noise). Analyses of covariance showed that in both experiments participants of the self-talk group performed better than participants of the control group.
The results suggest that self-talk can counter the effects of distraction on performance, and provide indications that the attentional effects of self-talk is a viable mechanism explaining the facilitating effects of self-talk on performance. Keywords: cognition, self-instructions, athletes, attentional focus 234Symposia Thursday July 13th Sport psychology for and with coaches Chair: Gloria Balague (UIC) The central figure in sport is the coach. Sport psychology skills, such as focusing, intensity regulation, and confidence are most highly impacted by the coach’s behavior, who is in fact the main teacher.
Sport psychology is most effective when implemented via the coach. That does not mean that sport psychology needs to tell coaches how to do their job. This symposium will explore several areas regarding the benefits of cooperating with coaches: 1) Learning what makes a great coach, how do great coaches reach and maintain high levels ofsuccess will allow us to clarify the information we should present to coaches’ education programs.
2) Understanding the complexity of coaching in today’s world, with the overabundance of information that bombards the athletes and must be filtered by the coach: What are the pressures felt by the these coaches and how do they cope with them?. 3) Youth coaches working in elite academies must coach human development of their players as well as athletic development. How can we in sport psychology facilitate their work?.
4) Listening to the coaches’ needs as the main assessment tool. What do coaches at different levels report as their main needs? If we listen to the information we will have the guide for our interventions.
The presenters will describe specific situations and interventions, making recommendations for working for and with coaches. Keywords: performance enhancement, coaching, collaboration The Philosophical and Psychological Development of a Coach: A Case Study Daniel Gould (Institute for the Study of Youth Sports, Michigan State University) Coaches play an important role in the psychological development and performance of their athletes (Gilbert & Cote, 2013). Sport psychology researchers have not examined the psychological, philosophical and philosophical-psychological development link in great coaches.
This presentation reports on a case study of an outstanding wrestling coach, J Robinson, one of the most respected and successful NCAA wrestling coaches in the United States. Robinson’s camps have been shown to foster short and long term psychological development in its youth participants (Driska, Gould, Pierce & Cowburn, in press; Pierce, Gould, Cowburn, & Driska, 2016). In-depth interviews at several points in time with Robinson were conducted, including one that took place 30 years before the time of the study.
These were supplemented with interviews with camp staff and observations of the camp and Robinson’s coaching at the camp. Results revealed that Robinson had a clearly defined philosophy, was very intentional in terms of developing mental skills, had a well-developed system for fostering mental skills development and had clear rationales that guided his coaching actions. His philosophy and approach to developing psychological skills in youth evolved over 35 years of implementing these camps and from Robinson’s own life experiences.
These included his family’s work ethic, own sport participation including a devastating 4th place finish in the 1972 Olympics, his and other coaches, Army special forces training, significant others, reading about history and leadership and participation in psychological seminars. His ability to reflect on and grow from his experiences and his emotional intelligence seemed to be critical to his success. Implications for studying coach development and the psychology of coaching are provided.
Keywords: expert coaches, coaching philosophy, psychological skill development 235Symposia Thursday July 13th Integrating the 5C’s within coach-player relationship and performance-improvement plans in team sports Chris Harwood (Loughborough University, UK), Karl Steptoe (University of Greenwich, UK) Early to mid-adolescence represent important phases in the development of a young athlete’s ability to understand both the psychological demands of their sport and the relationship qualities that will help them to cope with transitions in competitive levels. In the context of academy youth soccer, for example, several psychosocial attributes and skills (e.g., Holt & Dunn, 2004; Toering et al., 2009) are proposed as enablers for players to successfully transition towards professional level employment. This development process, however, depends not only on players’ actions but also on the players’ support and relational systems.
This element of the symposium will present an ongoing case example of integrating psychosocial concepts in a Premiership youth soccer academy, with a focus on how players and coaches are challenged to develop attributes that enable both performance and relational improvements. The underpinning principles of the 5C’s model of practice (commitment, communication, concentration, control, confidence; Harwood, 2008; Harwood et al., 2015) will be shared prior to illustrating various systematic, developmental strategies that sport psychologists can apply to facilitate the psychosocial progress of players in tandem with coaching staff. Such work aims to enhance the quality and authenticity of coach-player relationships such that both parties are better able together within the environment of ‘uncertainty’ that often perpetuates such academies.
Keywords: youth athlete development, coaching psychosocial development, coaches’ education The unique role of coaches and their current evolution Guillermo Perez Recio (Jefe de la Unidad de Deportes Centro de Alto Rendimiento Deportivo, Sant Cugat, Barcelona) The development of athletes is a phenomenon that occurs in a very specific social environment, which is also changing continuously. The coach is the one managing concrete stimuli, modulating much of the message that the environment emits towards the athletes. For many years now, the role of the coach has required increased knowledge, which includes not only the sporting aspects (technique, tactics, physiology, but also others, such as the personal development of athletes.
The coach’s role has increasingly become one of managing other supporting professionals. He/she has gone from being the sole-executor to being an integrated team manager. At the same time the difficulty of the coaches’ job is rarely recognized, except in some professional sports, and this only occasionally.
The lack of recognition occurs at the media level, but also in the economic or talent retention programs of clubs and federations. Despite both factors: hard work and low recognition, there are coaches who are systematically able to help their athletes achieve the greatest sporting success, or to get the young children in charge to enjoy and develop personally. Some coaches are motivated by the challenge: They are enthusiastic and committed, engaged in the challenge of training, enjoying doing it and achieving their goals, whatever they may be.
Of course these are not the only ones. We will explore different types of coaches, and how this theme relates to the change in the role discussed above. This presentation will describe the above mentioned issues and emphasize the multiple areas of collaboration between sport psychology and coaching.
Keywords: social pressures on coaches and athletes, successful coaches’ strategies, sport psychology as support to coaches What can we learn from coaches? The most useful skill when working with coaches: listening Cristina Fink (Philadelphia Union, HP Sports) 236Symposia Thursday July 13th This discussion will focus on the impact coaches have on athletes and the important role that psychologists can play while learning from coaches and supporting their role. Great coaches have a wealth of knowledge not only about their sport, but about the athletes they coach.
There is a tendency in our field to inundate coaches with information. They already possess a great deal of knowledge and they need to be heard. We need to ask what they need and listen more before we offer what we can bring to the table.
Coaches are examples of dedication, flexibility, adaptability and strength. At the highest level, they must be resilient and be able to withstand criticism by media, fans and owners. At the youth level, they need to understand and communicate effectively with parents and club directors.
In the highest level of competition, coaches report having trouble sleeping and managing emotions (Fink et al 2003). Sport psychologists have a great opportunity to support the coach by listening and understanding their needs. The presentation will highlight the different needs of coaches at different levels and describe collaborative interventions between sport psychologists and coaches that match these needs.
Keywords: coaches’ needs, listening as an intervention, sport psychology and coaching Expatriation in sports: the experience of Brazil, Chile & Portugal Chair: Regina Brandao (Sao Judas Tadeu University) Abstract: Due to the intense sport globalization the number of expatriate in sport is enormous. Despite this, little empirical research in the Sport Psychology field has focused on expatriation process of athletes and coaches. So, the aim of this symposium is to present international perspectives on the expatriation process.
The development of national studies on expatriation demonstrates that research and observation of this fact in different cultures can shows us the influence of the singularities, ways of thinking and acting of each people on the perception and adaptation to the expatriation process. Four papers will be presented. The symposium organizer will briefly outline the meaning of expatriation, challenges and opportunities, success and failures, facilities or difficulties to adaptation to a new culture, psychological consequences, critical factors they might face to, and the cultural distance between countries that challenges the expatriation process.
Then, the researches will explore, through in-depth interviews, how athletes and coaches from different countries dealt with the transition to play or work in another country. The first presentation will explore Brazilian top-level soccer players’ extensive experiences on the expatriation process. Case studies and personal stories will illustrate this.
The second presentation will focus, on a perspective of a Brazilian basketball player, the experiences he had when he went abroad to play. The third presenter will provide insights into expatriation process for athletes from Chile. Finally, the forth presentation will show what are the factors that Portuguese coaches perceive as the key aspects of their success on expatriation process as Portugal has approximately 400 soccer coaches on the 5 continents and is a country with about 11 million citizens.
Keywords: expatriation, adjustment experience, elite athletes, transitions, culture, psychology Expatriation in sports: the experience of Brazilian soccer players Regina Brandao (Sao Judas Tadeu University) Globalization and expatriation mark the contemporary soccer. On-going movement and mobility of players across continental, national, and regional boundaries are now an everyday experience. But unfortunately, there are very few empirical studies about the psychological consequences of the expatriation process and the reasons for maladjusted experiences.
So, the purpose of this study was to explore Brazilian top-level soccer players’ extensive experiences on the expatriation process. For those, 23 soccer players from the Brazilian National Team were evaluated. A qualitative research was proposed with a descriptive design using in-depth interviews as information collection technique and content analysis to data interpretation.
Nine 237Symposia Thursday July 13th themes emerged from these analysis, including: unreal expectations about the new country and/or club, need to adapt quickly to the new country, language and/or climate, play for a team of unknown players and coach, difficulties of adaptation in countries in wars and/or religious culture, appetite and sleep disorders, physical and emotional problems, problems in the target country that generate stress, racial and social discrimination, and coping with loneliness. Through these results was possible to conclude that the Brazilian’s expatriate players face so many duels as the foreigners language domain was a weakness pointed by all; emotional problems such as sadness and depression dominated the feelings experienced by the players; they were not prepared for the expatriation process, and a great socio-cultural impact occurs in the elite Brazilian players at the time of the expatriation. Keywords: expatriation, adjustment experience, soccer players, transitions, culture, psychology Expatriation in Sports: a case study of a Brazilian basketball player Marcelo Zanetti (Sao Judas Tadeu University) The expatriation of an athlete can represent reconnaissance for the work developed and the chance for professional and financial growth.
However, such transition can also means a decrease in performance due to the difficulty of adapting to a new culture and customs. In this sense, the objective of this study was to analyze the expatriation process of a Brazilian male basketball player. As a research method, a structured questionnaire was sent to the athlete, consisting of 14 questions that dealt with different phases of the expatriation process.
The data were treated through content analysis, following the assumptions of qualitative research. As a result, the athlete pointed out that the dream and the search for a better life situation were the drivers for his choice, which was facilitated by the support of an athlete from the destination country, a teammate in his last club in Brazil. Already, upon arriving in the country of destination, it was essential the support of the technical committee and countless Brazilians who played in their new club.
Problems related to communication, meals, cultural differences, a hard routine of training and studies, laws and family distance were mentioned, which was mitigated by the presence of the girlfriend. As facilitators were mentioned: to have a good level in the language of the country, besides the obligation to take an intensive course of that language upon arrival, support from athletes from different parts of the world, participation in a program created by the university, local families “adopted” athletes during weekends and commemorative dates. In relation to its success abroad, the same attributed to the motivation to grow as a human being and athlete.
Athlete expatriation programs may take such findings into account as a way to minimize the deleterious effects of this process on the athletic career. Keywords: expatriation, adjustment experience, elite athletes, transitions, culture, psychology The expatriation in sport: the experience of Chilean athletes Regina Brandao, Marcelo Zanetti (Sao Judas Tadeu University), Alexi Ponce (High Performance Center, (CAR) Santiago, Chile) The globalization of the sport has allowed Chilean athletes to perform their activities in other countries. The present research investigated different aspects of the experience as expatriate athletes, specially their motivations to go and to live in a foreign country, the expectations they had to this respect, the type of support they had received, main difficulties they faced and who helped them in the process of adaptation.
Athletes from hockey skate, handball, and field hockey were evaluated through in-depth interviews. The results showed that in general the main motivation to go abroad was to practice a sport at the professional level in professional leagues, where they could develop their performance in a better way, and thus they could contribute to the national teams of their respective sports. The support they had received comes first of all from their families who assumed the economic costs for the journey, and secondly for national teams that 238Symposia Thursday July 13th assumed some costs.
The main obstacles for adaptation were the loneliness and the concern if the family was in, but they do recognize that the clubs to which they arrived were concerned of generating appropriate environments to facilitate their adaptation. Another important theme emerged was the language, many of them choose Spain for play in other to avoid the necessity of an adaptation, but they said that if they had to go to a country of different language they will normally be prepared beforehand, learning English at least. In short they valued their experience as an expatriate athlete successfully.
Keywords: expatriation, experience of adjustment, hockey skate, handball, field hockey Expatriation in sports: Keys of Portuguese soccer coaches’ success Regina Brandao, Marcelo Zanetti (Sao Judas Tadeu University), Alexi Ponce (High Performance Center, (CAR) Santiago, Chile), Pedro Almeida (ISPA, S.L. BENFICA, Lisbon, Portugal) Globalization in soccer has been a phenomenon for some decades now. However, in recent years the phenomenon has spread to Portuguese coaches, probably due to some initial successful cases and/or the skills showed by these coaches around the world.
In fact at the moment Portugal has about 400 soccer coaches on the 5 continents and is a country with about 11 million citizens. This research project aims to analyze what are the factors that Portuguese coaches perceive as the key aspects of their success. To that end, a research project is under way that uses qualitative research with a descriptive design using in-depth interviews as information collection technique and content analysis to data interpretation.
Until now, seven themes emerged from these analyzes, including: quick adaptation to the new country / club, teamwork (including easy adaptation in technical teams already formed), ease of learning the language of context or English, ability to cope with loneliness, ability to dialogue, soccer passion and technical knowledge of soccer coaching. With the preliminary results of this project we can foresee the importance of these in the preparation of Portuguese coaches (and who knows from other countries) to obtain their passport of success in the world of soccer. Keywords: sport, expatriation, adjustment experience, soccer coaches, psychology Supporting youth athletes’ development in a dual career context Chair: Tatiana V.
Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) There is an increasing expectation that athletes successfully integrate their athletic careers with education, which will consequently promote their transition from sport into the labor market. Previous research findings suggest that committed participation in both athletic and academic domains is highly demanding and success in one pursuit often comes at the expense of the other (Christensen & Sorensen, 2009; O’Neill, Allen, & Calder, 2013; Ryba, Ronkainen, Selänne, 2015). Increased pressure associated with transitioning to elite sport and high school, moreover, may render adolescents vulnerable to anxiety, role confusion, and decreased wellbeing during this important transitional stage of development.
The presentations comprising this symposium focus on various risk and resilience factors for youth athletes’ successful integration of athletic and academic pursuits in Finland. First presentation is based on a follow-up mixed methods study of student-athletes’ sport and school burnout during their first year in sport high school. Second presentation will examine the athletic and student identity profiles of the adolescent athletes at the beginning of their freshman year in high school.
Third presentation will analyze one ice hockey club’s culture to glean insights into the role of athletic environment in dual career support. Fourth presentation will discuss the impact of mothers’ and fathers’ parenting styles on youth athletes’ psychological wellbeing in dual career contexts. By drawing on diverse methodological approaches, the above listed presentations elucidate the inter-contextual dynamics of youth athletes’ development in sport, school and family.
The studies’ novel findings are expected to inspire timely interventions and career assistance for athletes in dual career environments. 239Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: dual career, student athletes, talent development, resilience Development of sport and school burnout in elite student-athletes: a longitudinal mixed methods study Matilda Sorkkila, Tatiana V. Ryba, Harri Selänne, Kaisa Aunola (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) Adolescent elite athletes who pursue a sport career simultaneously with education might be at risk for sport and school burnout due to increasing pressure from two life domains (Sorkkila, Aunola, & Ryba, 2017; Ryba et al., 2016).
However, no studies so far have investigated concurrent development of sport and school burnout using longitudinal data, and examined the predictors of burnout by using qualitative methods. The aim of the study was to investigate the development of sport and school burnout in talented and elite adolescent athletes by using an embedded mixed methods design and thus provide a more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon. The participants were student athletes (NT1= 391; 51 % F; NT2 = 373; 52 % F) from six different sport high schools in Finland with an average age of 16 (SD = 0.17) who played on at least regional level and had been competing, on average, for 7 years (SD = 2.41).
The participants filled in a set of questionnaires including the School Burnout Inventory (Salmela-Aro & Näätänen, 2005) and Sport Burnout Inventory (Sorkkila, Ryba, Aunola, Selänne, & Salmela-Aro, 2017) in the beginning of high school and six months later. Growth mixture modeling was conducted to investigate different burnout profiles based on the level and change of sport and school burnout symptoms, after which the profiles evident for 16 elite level athletes (10 females) were identified and their interviews were analyzed by using a thematic analysis. The results showed that four distinct burnout profiles of student-athletes existed.
Seven interviewed elite athletes showed a non- risk profile, and nine showed a burnout risk profile. The two profiles were mainly differentiated by the level of social support and factors related to athlete adaptability and motivation. The results are useful for planning sustainable dual careers for adolescent elite athletes.
Keywords: dual career, sport burnout, school burnout, mixed methods Identity profiles of Finnish adolescent dual-career athletes Irina Watkins (Springfield College, USA), Laura Koivusalo (University of Turku, Finland), Kaisa Aunola (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland), Raymond Bertram (University of Turku, Finland), Tatiana V. Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) The purpose of this study was to examine the student and athletic identity profiles of the student-athletes at the beginning of their high school career (Brewer, Van Raalte, & Linder, 1993; Lally & Kerr, 2005). Finnish student-athletes (N = 391; 51% female, 49% male, average age 16 years) who had recently started their studies at a sports academy completed the Athletic Identity Measurement Scale (AIMS; Brewer et al., 1993) and the Student Identity Measurement Scale (SIMS; Stambulova et al., 2015).
Usable responses were received from 384 participants. Cluster analyses performed on the AIMS and SIMS revealed three groups: (a) a balanced identity group (n = 129, 34%), in which both athletic identity and student identity were high; (b) an unstructured identity group (n = 142, 37%), in which athletic and student identities were both low; and (c) athlete-focused identity group, (n = 113, 29%), in which athletic identity was high and student identity was low. Multinomial logistic regression analyses indicated several differences in the composition of the three groups in terms of gender, χ2 (2) = 7.61, p < .05, sport, χ2 (4) = 20.71, p < .001, and sport career goals, χ2 (2) = 14.73, p < .01.
Females were represented to a greater extent than males in the balanced identity group, whereas the opposite was the case in the athlete-focused identity group. Winter sport athletes were represented to a significantly greater extent in the athlete-focused identity group than in the balanced identity group. Participants with aspirations of being a professional athlete were represented to a greater extent in the athlete-focused identity group than in the balanced identity group.
Implications of the different identity profiles for sport and academic 240Symposia Thursday July 13th outcomes of dual-career athletes are discussed as well as possible interventions to prevent a too one-sided focus on athletic careers. Keywords: student athletes, athletic identity, student identity, person-centered approach Officially, school is first and hockey second: a Finnish ice hockey club’s philosophy and coaching practices Noora J. Ronkainen (Liverpool John Moores University, United Kingdom), Tatiana V.
Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland), Martin Littlewood (Liverpool John Moores University, United Kingdom), Harri Selänne (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) Coaches are key socialising agents in youth athletes’ lives. Previous studies have explored their influence on sporting experiences, motivation, and life skills development (Bean & Forneris, 2016; Erickson & Côté, 2016; Keegan et al., 2009), but few studies have examined their views and practices surrounding athletes’ dual career development. Research into organisational culture in football academies has suggested that clubs often have an official policy where education is encouraged, but the actual practices construct education as a potential hindrance to elite player development.
Therefore, athletes may receive conflicting messages and experience a conflict in responding to different expectations from coaches, parents, and teachers. The present study explored an ice hockey club’s culture in Finland to discern how this organisation engaged with dual career in policy and actual practices. The data collection included scrutinising documents (website and coaching materials) and semi-structured interviews with 10 male coaches aged 28-52.
Eight participants were coaching junior teams aged 10-17, one was coaching a men’s team, and one was the head of coaching in youth teams. Two interviewees were professional coaches, two were semi-professional, and six were amateur. The data were analysed with narrative analysis of content and form (Lieblich et al, 1998), where interviews and documents were first analysed as separate entities and then compared for their overall messages.
Our findings suggest that supporting dual careers was a shared mission in the club which was manifest in official documents, organisational structure, and coaches’ accounts. However, there were no clear strategies how coaches should bring this value into their work, and there were diverse practices surrounding dual career support. We conclude that coaches need more support in developing practice that includes consideration of dual careers, and it is vital to increase communication between sports clubs a Keywords: youth sport, ice hockey coaches, coaching philosophy, dual career environments The role of parenting styles in adolescent athletes’ psychological well-being during the transition to upper secondary school Kaisa Aunola, Matilda Sorkkila, Jaana Viljaranta (University of Eastern Finland, Finland), Tatiana V.
Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) The aim of the study was to examine the role of mothers’ and fathers’ parenting styles regarding affection and psychological control in adolescent athletes’ psychological well-being during the critical transition from compulsory school to upper secondary school. While the role of parenting styles in adolescents’ well-being has been widely researched in psychology (Harter et al., 2003), little attention has been given to a subsample of adolescent athletes who are expected to successfully integrate their athletic careers with education. The participants of the present study were 391 student athletes (51% females; average age 16, SD = 0.17) from six different sport high schools in Finland who played on at least regional level and had been competing, on average, for 7 years (SD = 2.41).The symptoms of burnout of athletes were measured via the School Burnout (Salmela-Aro & Näätänen, 2005) and Sport Burnout (Sorkkila et al., 2017) Inventories at the beginning and at the end of the first grade of upper secondary school.
Parenting styles were measured via the Finnish version (Aunola & Nurmi, 2004) of the Block’s Child Rearing Practices Report (CRPR; Roberts, Block, & Block, 1984) 241Symposia Thursday July 13th filled in by mothers (n = 258; response rate 66%) and fathers (n = 191; response rate 49%), separately, at the beginning of the school year. The results of latent change model demonstrated that maternal affection buffered against the increase of school burnout among athletes but only when not combined with simultaneous psychologically controlling mothering. Moreover, fathers’ high level of affection was associated with a low level of sport burnout but only when not combined with psychologically controlling fathering.
Because transition to upper secondary school is a challenging period for athletes, it is important to understand the role of parents as possible environmental resilience or risk factor in athletes’ well-being during this period. Keywords: dual career transitions, adolescent athletes, parenting styles, burnout Holistic and ecological approaches in talent development: The role of the environment in athletes’ careers and acquisition of expertise Chair: Kristoffer Henriksen (University of Southern Denmark) Research on athletic talent has evolved from talent detection to talent development with both perspectives focusing on an individual athlete. This individual focus has been mirrored in the applied work of the sport psychology practitioner in youth competitive sport who has primarily focused on equipping individual athletes with the psychosocial skills required in a sport career.
In contrast, the holistic ecological approach (HEA) to talent development in sport (Henriksen, Stambulova & Roessler, 2010) acknowledges the role of the overall environment in athletes’ development. The HEA integrates the somewhat opposing talent discovery and development approaches by focusing on how an environment manages the balance between these two, and how this balance becomes a part of the environment’s identity. Ecological perspectives on talent development hold rich insights for developing theories, research and applied practices that mirror the complexity of talent development in the real world.
In terms of research, the HEA proposes a shift in research attention from the individual athletes to the broader developmental context in which they develop with a particular focus on successful athletic talent development environments. In terms of applied sport psychology, the HEA will stimulate practitioners to look beyond individual athletes and aim to include and optimize athletes’ environment to support their development. In the present symposium, we will include a research and an applied focus.
The first oral will introduce the HEA and give examples of research findings and applied cases. The second oral will present a specific successful environment in badminton. The third oral will introduce a dual career environment (golf and study) in Sweden.
The fourth oral discusses the role of practice environments in the acquisition of expertise using Brazilian football as an example. The final oral looks the role of the sociocultural environment in athletes’ career transitions. Keywords: talent development environment, expertise, contextually driven sport psychology, athletic careers Creating optimal environments for talent development Kristoffer Henriksen, Louise Kamuk Storm, Carsten Hvid Larsen (University of Southern Denmark), Natalia Stambulova (University of Halmstad) The holistic ecological approach (HEA) to talent development in sport shifts researchers’ attention from the individual athletes to the broader environment in which they develop.
The HEA provides a theoretical grounding, ecologically inferred definitions of talent development, two working models, and methodological guidelines. The HEA highlights two interconnected ways of analyzing athletic talent development environments (ATDE). First, there is a focus on the structure of the environment, particularly the roles and cooperation of key persons.
Second, there is a focus on the organizational culture of the team. A number of in-depth case studies of successful talent development environments in Scandinavia have shown that while each environment is unique, they also share a number of features. They are characterized by proximal role modeling; an integration 242Symposia Thursday July 13th of efforts among the different agents (family, coaches, management etc.); inclusive training groups rather than early selection; a focus on long-term developmental rather than on early success, and a “strong and coherent” organizational culture.
Moving from ecological research to ecologically informed practice, we add applied principles and provide an example of how these principles were used in developing a culture for goal directedness in a group of under-17 players in a football academy in Denmark. The case example demonstrates two main ideas: (1) a team’s organizational culture influences the athletes, or in popular terms the characteristics of culture become the character of the athletes; and (2) the coach plays a vital part in creating and maintaining a team culture. Together, the eight common features of successful ATDEs, the case examples, and the applied HEA principles can serve as a guide for practitioners aiming to improve talent development environments in sport.
Keywords: contextually driven sport psychology, football, sport psychology practitioner, holistic ecological approach The Danish National Badminton Center: A successful talent development environment Carsten Hvid Larsen, Louise Kamuk Storm, Kristoffer Henriksen (University of Southern Denmark) A specific shared feature of the successful environments is a strong and coherent organizational culture characterized by a close coherence between espoused and enacted values. Organizational culture of elite and talent development environments and sporting organizations exerts an important impact on athlete development and performance. Limited research attention has been paid to factors associated with optimal organizational functioning or excellence in sport (Wagstaff, Fletcher, & Hanton, 2012).
This is problematic since factors such as organizational climate and culture have an impact on performance all the way to the Olympic level (Gould & Greenleaf, 2002; Gould & Quinan 2002) and Fletcher and Wagstaff (2009) asserts that a “twilight zone” exists regarding how individuals and the team interact with the broader organization. This study was organized as an explorative integrative and qualitatively oriented case study. Methods of data collection included interviewing coaches, young players, professional players, management, and also observations of daily life in the center to obtain systematic and detailed knowledge of the environment as it occurs in the real world.
The environment was characterized by a strong relationship between players and a community of coaches and the performance director. A learning environment focused on developing intelligent, self aware and dedicated players. The environment had a strong organizational culture that was based on proximal role models, openness, collaboration despite being competitors and a learning community between players and coaches.
These characteristics were perceived as essential for success in the environment and related to performance of the athletes. Keywords: elite sport, training environment, case study Holistic approach to understanding a dual career environment at a Swedish university Lukas Linnér, Natalia Stambulova (University of Halmstad, Sweden), Kristoffer Henriksen (University of Southern Denmark) Dual career (DC; combination of sport and studies) research is traditionally focused on student-athletes’ developmental demands and coping resources. To support athletes’ talent development in combination with education, sport federations and universities (and others) co-create high performance centers or DC hubs.
Research into these environments is limited. Inspired by the holistic ecological approach, and particularly by the athletic talent development environment model (Henriksen, 2010), we created the dual career development environment (DCDE) working model and then used this model to explore a ‘golf and study’ environment at a Swedish university. The DCDE model is structured into three levels (micro, meso, and macro) and three domains (study, sport, and private) taking into account societal institutions, sport and education systems.
Data were collected through semi-structured interviews with nine university elite golf-students about 243Symposia Thursday July 13th perceived support during their transition to, and first year within the environment, and with four stakeholders (e.g., coach, study director) to discover their perspective on the environment and the support they provided. Observations and documents collected from the environment web-page also supported the analysis. Key features of the investigated DCDE related mainly to the micro and meso levels and included: collaborative arrangements between sport and academic stakeholders aimed at facilitating the student-athletes’ DCs, high quality coaching and facilities, stakeholders’ shared focus on a ‘whole person’ including, for example, student- athletes’ physical and psychological well-being.
It was also found that the daily life of the student-athletes was concentrated around the campus gym as a place to meet and discuss various sport, study and personal life issues with each other and with their physical coach (also a university teacher). Further study is planned to target the macro level of the environment to advance these findings. Keywords: dual career, dual career development environment, holistic development, student-athlete, support The micro-macro link in the study of sport expertise: An ecological dynamics approach Duarte Araújo (Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal) Individual, task and environmental constraints impinge on performance and learning during athlete development at different, concatenated, timescales (Davids, Gullich, Shuttleworth, Araújo, 2017).
However, these timescales tend to proceed along distinct investigatory strands in sport sciences. These focus separately on: (i) the macro-structure of developmental participation histories (e.g., estimating time spent in deliberate practice or unstructured play during prolonged periods of development); and (ii), the contexts of the micro- structure of practice (e.g., analysis over shorter timescales on the constraints of the tasks undertaken and the performance goals achieved in each session). Here we consider how the development of an athlete, through sporting activity in practice and competitive performance, has both a macro- and a contextual micro-structure that needs to be analysed at these shorter and longer timescales.
We exemplify this argument by profiling the role of practice environments using association football in Brazilian society as a task vehicle (Araújo et al., 2010). We also refer to a project that is about to start which follows the study of Gullich (2016) in Germany. This project aims to assess developmental participation of Portuguese elite athletes that participated in the Olympic games.
Our focus is on the communalities and contrasts between those who achieved a medal or an Olympic diploma, and those who did not. We match athletes by sport, age and gender, and analyse the volume of organized (coach-led) practice/training in their respective main sport and in other sports through childhood, adolescence and adulthood and also involvement in non-organised (peer-led) sport activity. An ecological dynamics approach has the potential to integrate these different timescales of analysis (differing in granularity and time) for expertise development in sport.
Keywords: expertise acquisition, football, brazil, practice, play Understanding the role of the sociocultural environment during the transition from talent development to performance environment Christopher Wagstaff (University of Portsmouth, UK), Phoebe Sanders (St Mary’s University Twickenham, UK) Much of the research on talent development has focused on the promotion of individual’s competencies, with comparatively less attention being devoted to the environments in which talent develops. This presentation will provide an overview of a study that explored the role of the sociocultural environment during athletes’ transition between the academy and senior team within a professional sport organization. Six first- year senior athletes who had transitioned from the club’s talent development academy and five coaches (all male) were recruited from an elite rugby union organization.
Data were collected using semi-structured interviews over the course of a season, with each participant providing multiple interviews. The findings highlighted salient sociocultural themes aligned with athletes’ challenges navigating entry into the senior team 244Symposia Thursday July 13th culture and managing coaches’ impressions. That is, the athletes’ perceptions of the senior team’s implicit emotion rules and their collective role as newcomers prompted the use of short-term emotion management and covert information-seeking strategies that appeared to compromise their long-term relationship-building and performance development.
The findings have potential to inform talent development theory and practice. Specifically, it would appear that successful transition from academy to senior teams is dependent on meeting the demands posed by successfully navigating a new - and at times unwelcoming - sociocultural environment whilst demonstrating satisfactory personal development. Keywords: career transition, sport organization, emotion regulation, socialization, impression management, rugby Coping, resilience and personal growth following a sport injury Chair: Victor Rubio (Universidad Autónoma Madrid) Severe sport injury is probably the most challenging issue an athlete has to face.
It not only imperils the sport career but may also have consequences in health, educational, occupational, and financial facets of athlete’s and stakeholder’s lifes even resulting in long-term effects. Research from clinical, health and trauma fields have emphasized the role of coping, resilience and personal growth in tackling with severe conditions but only recently the sport psychology field included the analysis of such factors, considering whether the way an athlete copes with such situation buffer negative consequences, promote personal adjustment and even improve health and recovery outcomes. The current symposium reviews these aspects from several points of view.
Firstly, Prof. Wiese-Bjornstal and her colleagues analyze the role of religiosity and spirituality of athletes and other physically active individuals in coping with the health challenges of sport injuries and how such believes are related to some other psychological variables. Secondly, Prof.
Johnson and Dr. Ivarsson review the role of resilience in promoting the key aspects of a successful rehab process, namely goal setting for the rehabilitation, beliefs in treatment efficacy and quality of social support, as well as how resilient behavior can be trigger. Thirdly, Prof.
Rubio and his colleagues present a new comprehensive model of perceived benefits and personal growth following a sport injury to be used as framework for studying the role of positive aspects facing severe adversities. Fourthly, Prof. Podlog and his colleagues examine the relevance of the key components of the Organismic Valuing Theory of Growth through Adversity in understanding posttraumatic growth and how parasport experiences were reported to be a mechanism through which growth was facilitated.
Finally, Dr. Appaneal gives an example of the work with athletes sustaining severe injuries that psychologist can carry out in a multidisciplinary team. Keywords: sport injury, coping, resilience, personal growth Exploring religiosity and spirituality in coping with sport injuries Diane M.
Wiese-Bjornstal, Kristin N. Wood, Andrew C. White, Amanda J.
Wambach (University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, USA), Victor Rubio (Universidad Autonoma Madrid, Spain) An extensive body of literature in psychology and medicine supports that religiosity/spirituality (R/S) contributes to effective coping with health challenges via cognitive, emotional, and behavioral mechanisms such as hope and optimism, stress management, social ties, and healthy lifestyles (Koenig, 2013). The purpose of this study was to explore the roles of R/S among athletes and other physically active individuals coping with the health challenges of sport injuries. A concurrent mixed methods research design using an online retrospective survey methodology incorporated quantitative measures of R/S, locus of health control for sport injury, and coping with sport injury as well as qualitative open-ended questions about the ways in which R/S affected and was affected by coping with sport injury challenges.
Participants included 49 physically active 245Symposia Thursday July 13th adults who reported experiencing sport injuries, among whom 37 self-identified an R/S affiliation (e.g., Christian, Muslim), and 12 indicated no R/S affiliation (e.g., atheist, agnostic). Quantitative results among R/S respondents showed a significant correlation between religious commitment and God locus of health control for sport injury (GLHC-SI). GLHC-SI was significantly correlated with two adaptive ways of coping: positive religious coping with sport injuries and active coping with sport injuries (AC-SI).
Analyses of variance results examining differences between R/S and no R/S individuals showed that no R/S individuals rated themselves significantly higher on internal locus of health control for sport injuries, while R/S individuals rated themselves significantly higher on GLHC-SI and AC-SI. A thematic analysis of the open-ended responses regarding how R/S affected coping with sport injuries found six themes: prayer, others’ prayer, God’s plan, faith promoted positivity, negative spiritual coping, and no effect. Thematic analysis of responses regarding how sport injuries affected R/S resulted in five theme Keywords: sport injury, coping, religiosity Loving the challenge: Resilience in sport injury rehabilitation Urban Johnson, Andreas Ivarsson (Halmstad University, Sweden) Individuals who experience a sport injury often face challenges to adapting to this situation.
Factors associated with more successful rehabilitation after injury, in sports such as football and rugby are formulation of a goal setting plan for the rehabilitation, belief in the efficacy of treatment, and high quality social support. A central concept, characterizing those who adopt successfully during injury rehabilitation is resilience, which is a dynamic capability that helps people strive to reach their goals. The purpose of this presentation is to discuss different dimensions of resilience recognized as qualities that are important for positive experiences and that, together with adaptive behaviors during rehabilitation.
A second purpose is to highlight practical implications to facilitate resilient behavior. In a systematic review of the psychological factors associated with returning to sport following injury (Wierike et al 2013) positive psychological responses, including high levels of motivation and confidence, were associated with a greater likelihood of returning to the athletes’ pre-injury levels of participation. In a study by Johnson et al (2016), three core themes were identified, representing psychosocial factors that female elite-soccer players perceived helped them to cope successfully with rehabilitation after a knee-injury.
These were: (I) constructive communication and rich interaction with significant others; (II) strong belief in the importance and efficacy of one’s own actions; and (III) the ability to set reasonable goals. The medical team has an important mission to maintain constructive communication and rich interaction throughout the entire rehabilitation period in order to enhance self-cultivation and meaning among injured athlete. Also, the medical team should aim to help the players increase their self-efficacy by acknowledging and reinforcing progress in the rehabilitation process.
This will ultimately support athlete to love the chal Keywords: resilience, sport injury, rehabilitation, practical recommendations Developing a model of perceived benefits and personal growth following a sport injury Victor Rubio (Universidad Autonoma Madrid), Alessandro Quartiroli (University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, Usa), José Manuel Hernández (Universidad Autonoma Madrid, Spain), María Oliva Marquez (Universidad Autonoma Madrid, Spain), Aurelio Olmedilla (Universidad de Murcia, Spain) Injury is a wide negative consequence of practicing sport, affecting athletes regardless categories, modalities, gender... Sport injury is a situation that might threat sport career but also which has an economic, occupational or academic, and physical and mental health impact. In fact, negative emotional responses are common responses athletes present.
Emotional responses facing a sport injury are crucial in the rehab process in so far such responses would affect on treatment compliance, would provoke early sport retirement as well as might affect people’s quality of life. Nonetheless, there are people able to absorb the shock, to find positive 246Symposia Thursday July 13th aspects from the experiences they have lived, becoming stronger. Last years, several pieces of work tried to describe such perceived benefits.
However, each one made its own proposal of categorization and there is a lack of a comprehensive model. The purpose of this study is to establish a model of perceived benefits and personal growth following a sport injury which could lay at the basis of future research on the field. Initially a DELPHI method (Dalkey & Helmer, 1963) with a group of 25 worldwide experts, either from and applied or research perspective, was used.
After three rounds, DELPHI produced a list of 49 statements panelists agreed on their relevance regarding what a severe injured athlete might appraise as positive aspects following a sport injury. Afterwards, a thematic analysis (Boyatzis, 1998) over the final list of 49 statements was carried out by 4 raters who produced a set of five themes: Improving athlete’s social life, Personal growth, Sport-related benefits, Getting social support and recognition, and Health-related benefits. The model has been qualitatively tested with a group of athletes and former athletes who were interviewed.
Future research will develop a questionnaire for assessing perceived benefits and personal growth following a sport injury. Keywords: sport injury, perceived benefits, personal growth Understanding posttraumatic growth among para sport athletes with an acquired disability Chris Hammer, Leslie Podlog (University Of Utah, USA), Ross Wadey (St. Mary’s University, UK), Nick Galli (University Of Utah, USA), Anjali Forber-Pratt (Vanderbilt University, USA), Maria Newton (University Of Utah, USA) Despite the deleterious consequences often associated with acquiring a physical disability, some individuals report positive experiences, such as greater appreciation for life, strengthened social relationships, and enhanced life meanings (Chun & Lee, 2008; Crawford et al., 2014).
Such findings indicate the potential for growth in spite of the traumatic event. The purpose of the present study was to examine the relevance of key components of Organismic Valuing Theory of Growth through Adversity (OVT) in understanding posttraumatic growth (PTG) amongst para sport athletes who acquired a disability. Semi-structured interviews informed by OVT tenets were conducted with 14 elite paratriathletes (8 male, 6 female).
In order to increase the likelihood that participants had experienced PTG, a short form of the Posttraumatic Growth Inventory was completed prior to interview participation. Interview data were analyzed using directed content analysis. Although the initial response to disability was largely negative, para sport experiences were reported to be a mechanism through which growth was facilitated.
In particular, participants suggested that social, competence, empowerment, and identity development processes were instrumental in facilitating PTG. Individual differences in growth experiences were also identified. Analysis revealed themes largely consistent with the main tenets of OVT, supporting its utility in understanding response to a traumatic event and subsequent growth.
These findings also suggest that para sport may be an efficacious means for promoting PTG, especially for individuals with severe initial reactions to their disability. Lastly, findings suggest that fostering perceptions of competence, autonomy, and social connection may promote PTG. Keywords: acquired disability, organismic valuing theory, physical activity, trauma My dream job: Sport psychology as part of a multidisciplinary injury rehabilitation support team Renee N.
Appaneal (Australian Institute of Sport, Australia) A collaborative and aligned rehabilitation support team is essential in identifying and responding to the complex issues that come into play throughout an athlete’s recovery from injury. Through case examples, this presentation illustrates the integration of psychology within a multidisciplinary rehabilitation team at a national sport institute. The Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) Athlete Rehabilitation Centre (ARC) was established to 247Symposia Thursday July 13th ensure that Australia’s top athletes facing significant injury/illness challenges have access to best practice, providing intensive and integrated rehabilitation services to expedite return to competition.
Two athlete cases will be shared that illustrate the varied roles and approaches to psychology support within the ARC. The first case involved an athlete who was referred 3 months post ACL reconstruction and had not achieved expected milestones. Presenting concerns included the athlete’s high anxiety and poor quality of life.
Psychology intervention included education of injury anxiety and development of adaptive coping responses through direct contact with the athlete, and regular consultation with their ARC support team. The second case involved an athlete referred immediately following a severe injury that occurred during an international competition. Presenting concerns included progressing a highly-motivated and driven athlete through increasingly complex and unpredictable sport-specific and competition-related challenges that involved high-risk situations (high speeds, unpredictable environments, etc.).
For each case, psychology intervention goals and observed outcomes will be presented as they evolved over time and recovery phases. Themes evident in both cases highlight the varied role and flexible approach to service delivery required when working in high performance sport, and the need to balance what is best for the person against individual and organizational pressure to return to sport. Keywords: multidisciplinary sport science teams, sport injury, rehabilitation, return to sport Antecedents and mechanisms of self-control in athletic contexts Chair: Ian Taylor (Loughborough University) Self-control refers to the purposeful inhibition of an instantly gratifying action or impulse (Milyavskaya & Inzlicht, 2016).
Models of self-control have been used to demonstrate the importance of self-control for many sport-related phenomena, however, less attention has been paid to potential causes of self-control failure or success and explanations why self-control influences athletic performance. This symposium comprises five studies with these research questions as two complementary themes. The first three presentations explore the role of basic psychological needs satisfaction and frustration, as defined by self-determination theory (Ryan & Deci, 2017), in determining self-control.
In the first presentation, lack of self-control is examined as a potential psychological need substitute which may explain associations between autonomy frustration and disordered eating in athletes. The second presentation adds new insight by investigating whether typical ‘ego depletion’ effects (i.e., reductions in self-regulatory performance following initial exertion; Maranges & Baumeister, 2016) are exacerbated in psychologically controlling contexts. Presentation three describes the effects of priming autonomy need frustration and satisfaction, rather than a contextual manipulation, on persistence and physical activity intentions.
The final two studies explore mechanisms that may explain effects of self-control exertion. The fourth presentation describes a study investigating the effect of manipulating controlled versus autonomous motivation during a typical sequential self-control task experiment. In addition, physiological stress responses during the experiment are examined.
The final presentation explains why initial acts of self- control can be detrimental to subsequent physical performance by exploring perceptions of pain. Taken together, novel evidence of self-control mechanisms is presented which may challenge dominant models of self-control within sport psychology. Keywords: self-control, ego-depletion, self-determination Self-control and fear of negative evaluation as contradictory mechanisms explaining the relationship between autonomy frustration and disordered eating Ian Taylor (Loughborough University) 248Symposia Thursday July 13th Diminished autonomy has been recognised as a driving force behind many maladaptive processes and suboptimal human functioning.
We investigated two contradictory mechanisms which may elaborate on this motivational process in the context of disordered eating. We speculated that autonomy frustration would be associated with lower controlled eating, and this would be explained by a lack of self-control. Paradoxically, autonomy frustration would also be associated with greater controlled eating and this relationship would be explained by elevated fear of negative evaluation.
Employing a prospective design, 145 competitive athletes (mean age 20; 99 females) reported their autonomy frustration, fear of negative evaluation, and lack of self- control. One week later they completed measures of controlled eating. Structural equation modelling demonstrated that the hypothesised model fit the data: SRMR = .08; CFI = .94; RMSEA = .07 (90% CI = .05-.09).
Autonomy frustration was associated with a lack of self-control (β = .27, p = .003) which subsequently predicted lower controlled eating (β = -.47 p < .001). Contrastingly, autonomy frustration was associated with greater fear of negative evaluation (β = .40 p < .001) which subsequently predicted greater controlled eating (β = .25 p = .015). Bootstrapped indirect effects confirmed our hypothesised processes (b = .04, 95% CI = .01 – .10 and b = -.05, 95% CI = -.15 – -.01, respectively).
The results provide initial evidence for a dual process model that describes the complexities of dysfunctional eating behaviour. Frustration of athletes’ autonomy may lead to inadequate self-control and low control during eating. On the other hand autonomy frustration may also lead to fear of negative evaluations and high control during eating.
Motivational antecedents and physiological responses during sequential self-control tasks Richard Steel, Nicolette Bishop, Ian Taylor (Loughborough University) Considerable evidence suggests that self-control wanes over consecutive tasks (i.e., the ‘ego-depletion’ effect). Utilising a self-determination theory perspective, this study examined whether manipulating participants’ motivation would influence the extent of ego-depletion and acute stress responses (i.e., cortisol) during the process. A single blind, randomised experimental design incorporating two motivational conditions (autonomous/controlled regulation) was employed.
Participants (N=39) performed two sequential self-control challenges under these manipulated conditions; an incongruent Stroop task followed by a physical endurance task (a wall sit). Cortisol was measured using saliva samples taken at baseline and after the wall sit. Controlling for motivational orientation and baseline cortisol where appropriate, analyses of covariance tests revealed that participants in the controlled regulation condition persisted longer during the physical task (159.68 vs.
122.34s, p=.06), but experienced a greater cortisol response (7.09 vs. 5.44nmol/L, p=.03), relative to the autonomous regulation condition. Results suggest motivational effects on self-control exertion, although the effect was contrary to the expected direction.
However, increased performance also coincided with increased cortisol response, suggesting participants may have paid an increased psycho-physiological cost for their increased performance. The effects of priming autonomy frustration and satisfaction on self-control and subsequent physical activity intentions Stephen Murphy, Ian Taylor (Loughborough University) The ability to effectively use self-control is considered essential for good physical and psychological health. While some evidence suggests experiencing autonomy may elicit improvements in self-control ability, more recent findings conflict with this view.
This study investigated the association further by employing a novel approach, whereby autonomy satisfaction and autonomy frustration were primed, and their effects on self-control and physical activity intentions assessed. A double-blind, between-subject experimental design was employed. Fifty-eight participants were randomised to either Autonomy satisfaction (n=20), Autonomy frustration (n=19), or Neutral (n=19) prime conditions using a scrambled-sentence test.
Participants then 249Symposia Thursday July 13th attempted an impossible geometric tracing task that requires self-control and stated their physical activity intentions. One-way ANOVA revealed differences in time taken to give up on the impossible task across the three groups (p=0.079, η²=0.09). Post-hoc analysis revealed the Neutral condition spent more time on the tracing task than participants in the Autonomy satisfaction (28.6 vs.
21.6min, p=0.046, d=0.63) and Autonomy frustration (28.6 vs. 21.8min, p=0.055, d=0.70) conditions. No differences were found for physical activity intentions (p=0.58, η²=0.02).
Priming participants to feel autonomy satisfaction or frustration may elicit reductions in self-control. Potentially different processes may explain these somewhat unexpected findings. The implications for the lack of effect of self-control failures on subsequent intentions towards physical activity will also be explored.
Emotion regulation, motivation and performance: The impact of a controlling intervention on a cycling time trial in ego depleted individuals Christopher Wagstaff, Rebecca Larner, Samantha Meredith (University of Portsmouth) This presentation will provide an overview of a study that examined the impact of a controlling motivation intervention on a maximal 10km cycling time trial in ego-depleted individuals. Using a randomized, blinded, counterbalanced, repeated measures design, twenty competitive cyclists completed a control condition, depletion-only condition (i.e., no motivational intervention), and a depletion-controlling condition (i.e., participants received a controlling motivation intervention). The findings indicated that emotion-related ego depletion led to significant decrements in cycling time trial performance in the two experimental conditions when compared to a control condition.
Moreover, these performance decrements were greater when participants were exposed to the controlling-motivation intervention, indicating that such behaviors might exacerbate the debilitating effect of self-regulatory efforts during sport performance. The results will be discussed in line with theoretical and applied implications for sport. In particular, the potential of integrating self-determination theory and models of self-control will be described.
Prior self-control exertion and perceptions of pain during a physically demanding task Ruth Boat (Coventry University), Ian Taylor (Loughborough University) Exertion of self-control has been associated with impaired performance on subsequent physical tasks also requiring self-control. However, it remains unknown why this occurs. This study explored whether prior self- control exertion reduces subsequent persistence on a physically demanding task that requires self-regulation.
Furthermore, the study examined whether any observed performance decrements could be explained by changes in perceptions of pain. In a within-subject design, sixty-three individuals completed an easy (congruent) Stroop task or a difficult (incongruent) Stroop task that required self-control. Participants were then required to remain in a physically demanding posture (i.e., a ‘wall-sit’) until voluntary exhaustion.
Throughout the physical task, participants’ perception of pain was recorded as well as time to exhaustion. Results revealed that participants quit the wall-sit sooner in the self-control experimental condition (M = 130.16, SE = 8.90), compared to the non-self-control condition (M = 147.31, SE = 9.27), t(61) = -2.79, p = .01, r = .30. Furthermore, when participants completed the difficult Stroop task, they perceived greater pain (M = 6.68, SE = .32) relative to when they completed the easy Stroop task (M = 6.19, SE = .36), F(1,44) = 8.38, p = .01, η2 = .16.
Initial exertion of self-control can significantly reduce subsequent performance in a physical task. Perceptions of pain may be an important attentional mechanism explaining why self-control use interferes with subsequent persistence during physically effortful tasks. 250Symposia Thursday July 13th Development and validation of the physical activity and leisure motivation scale for youth (PALMS-Y) Chair: Liang Hu (Zhejiang University) Recognition of the key role physical activity (PA) plays in physical health and psychological wellbeing has continued to grow.
Although people around the world are encouraged and advised to undertake regular PA,many individuals of all ages find it difficult to initiate or maintain participation in organized sport and recreational PA. Motivation appears to play a key role in long-term PA involvement. Thus, reliably and validly measuring motives for participating in PA is critical to understanding how motivation relates to PA participation, so that effective intervention strategies can be adopted to increase population participation rates.
Morris and Rogers (2004) developed the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS) for this purpose and from it Hu et al. (2015) initiated development of a youth version, PALMS-Y. In this symposium, four presentations reflect current work on PALMS-Y.
First, Liang Hu and colleagues elaborate on their earlier report of the development and validation of PALMS-Y among Chinese adolescents, with greater emphasis on relationships of PALMS-Y to other aspects of motivation and behaviour. Next, Yee Cheng Kueh and colleaguesdiscuss their study examining invariance of the Malay version ofPALMS-Y across gender, addressing the important question of whether the scale measures the same motives in different groups. Then, Emine Çağlar and colleagues describe their research on the construct validity and reliability of the Turkish version ofPALMS-Y, extending application of the new measure into another culture.
Finally, Abdullah Nurzulaikha and colleaguesreport on a study of the relationship between motives for participation in PA and the actual amount of PA undertakenby Malaysian Chinese secondary students. Interestingly, this study uses the Mandarin version of PALMS-Y developed in China with a Malaysian sample. Presentations in this symposium illuminate the potential global use of PALMS-Y as a tool to promote PA among adolescents.
Keywords: PALMS-Y, motives for participating in PA, reliability, validity, invariance Development and validation of a youth version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS-Y) Liang Hu (Zhejiang University), Tony Morris, Jiaying Lu The aim of this study was to examine the psychometric properties of a youth version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS). The 40-item adult version of the PALMS comprises eight 5-item sub-scales each reflecting a motive for participation in physical activity. Based on pilot studies in multiple countries, we excluded one of the eight motive sub-scales of the PALMS, namely others’ expectations, which mainly comprises items referring to adult behaviours.
The 35-item Chinese version was then examined for its psychometric properties in two study phases. In Study 1, participants were 232 7th grade students (age=13.33+0.52 yrs) recruited through schools in Hangzhou, China. Internal consistency of the seven PALMS sub-scales(αs=0.79-0.92) and total scale (α=0.96) was good.
In exploratory factor analysis (EFA), we identified seven factors with an eigenvalue greater than 1. These factors corresponded to the seven PALMS sub-scales. By examining item-factor correlations and deleted-item alpha coefficients, we identified the weakest item in each factor.
We removed these items, producing seven 4-item sub-scales for the 28-item final version of the PALMS for youth, termed the PALMS-Y. In Study2, The 28-item PALMS-Y was tested in434Chinese youth(age=15.12+1.74 yrs), and we found that the 7-factor model represented a parsimonious interpretation of the data (χ2/df=3.06, p<.001;CFI=.98, RMSEA=.07,SRMR=.05). In addition, the PALMS-Y demonstrated goodinternal consistencies for sub-scales (αs=0.82-0.93) and total scale (α=0.95), as well assatisfactory convergent and discriminant validity, reliability, and factor structure.
We encourage researchers to examine the PALMS-Y in different countries and languages. 251Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: motives for participation in physical activity, Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale, Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale for Youth, reliability, validity Measuring the motives for physical activity of adolescents: invariance of the Malay version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale for Youth across Gender Yee Cheng Kueh (Universiti Sains Malaysia), Abdullah Nurzulaikha, Garry Kuan, Tony Morris Measurement equivalence is often assumed across comparison groups, a pervasive problem related to many self-report instruments. The aim of this study was to examine gender invariance on the Malay version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale for Youth (PALMS-Y-M; Abdullah, Kueh, Kuan, Morris, & Naing, 2016).
The PALMS-Y-M was previously validated using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA; Abdullah et al., 2016). The results confirmed the validity of PALMS-Y-M with acceptable fit indices. Seven-hundred-and-eighty- three secondary school students (female = 57.3%, male = 42.7%) with mean age 14 years (SD=0.9) from Kota Bharu, Malaysia, volunteered to participate in this study and completed the PALMS-Y-M, consisting of 28 items with seven subscales.
The measurement invariance test was carried out through Mplus 7.3. Measurement invariance was tested for three different levels. The configural invariance model (CIM) was established first, then the metric invariance model (MIM; factor loading) and the scalar invariance model (SIM; item intercept) were compared with CIM.
Evidence of invariance between the models was based on change in CFI<.01 and RMSEA<.015. The measurement models for CIM (CFI=.918, TLI=.906, RMSEA=.049, SRMR=.052), MIM (CFI=.917, TLI=.907, RMSEA=.049, SRMR=.056) and SIM (CFI=.907, TLI=.900, RMSEA=.051, SRMR=.063) fit the data well. Change in RMSEA did not exceed the recommended value.
CFI change did exceed the recommended cut off by the minimal value of .001 when comparing SIM with CIM. When invariance of both factor loadings and item intercepts holds in PALMS-Y-M, underlying factors consisting of different motives for participating in PA can be meaningfully compared across gender. Motives for participating in PA are important in maintaining PA participation among adolescents.
Accurate and valid measurement across comparison groups is crucial for research integrity. Keywords: PALMS-Y-M, physical activity, motivation Construct validity and reliability of the Turkish version of Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale-Youth Emine Çağlar (Hacettepe University), Murat Uygurtas, Tony Morris The purpose of this study was to test the validity and reliability of the Turkish version of the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale-Youth (PALMS-Y) developed by Hu et al. (2015).
Participants were 288 adolescents (Mage = 14.35, SD = 1.35 years), 144 females and 144 males. We administered a Personal Information Form and the Turkish version of PALMS-Y to all participants in a classroom setting. PALMS-Y consists of seven subscales with 28 items.
These subscales are Enjoyment, Mastery, Psychological Condition, Physical Condition, Appearance, Affiliation, and Competition/Ego. We conducted confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to test construct validity of the Turkish version of PALMS-Y and calculated Cronbach alpha coefficients to determine reliabilities of the sub-scales. The hypothesized model consisted of 28 observed variables and seven 0.06, NFI = 0.92, NNFI = 0.95 and CFI = 0.96).
But CFA indicated that the error variance of Item 1 was 0.94 and its factor loading was 0.24 (R2 = 0.05, t = 3.90). We reconducted CFA after removing Item 1 from the model. .95, RMSEA = 0.058, SRMR = 0.06, NFI = 0.93, NNFI = 0.96 and CFI = 0.96).
These findings showed that the Turkish version of PALMS-Y had similar factor structure to the original scale’s 7-factor structure. Internal consistency coefficients of the Turkish version of PALMS-Y subscales ranged from .62 (Mastery) to .85 (Appearance). It can be concluded that the Turkish version of 252Symposia Thursday July 13th PALMS-Y is a valid and reliable instrument to measure motives for participation in physical activity among Turkish adolescents.
Keywords: physical activity and leisure motivation, PALMS, validity, reliability The relationship between motives of participation in physical activity and the amount of physical activity among Malaysian Chinese secondary students Abdullah Nurzulaikha (Universiti Sains Malaysia), Garry Kuan, Yee Cheng Kueh, Tony Morris Engaging in regular physical activity (PA) has become a worldwide issue in the prevention of many major chronic diseases. PA is associated with reduced risk of premature death. It is important to increase students’ chance to engage in PA by triggering their motivation.
The purpose of the study was to examine the relationship between motives for participating in PA and the amount of PA that students undertake. Participants were 303 Chinese, secondary school students (female=44.9%, male=54.1%) with mean age of 13.55 (SD=0.57) from Kota Bharu, Kelantan. The students, aged 13-17 years old, volunteered and completed three measures, consisting of a demographic information form, the Godin Leisure-Time Exercise Questionnaire (Godin & Shephard, 1997) and the Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale for Youth Chinese version (PALMS-Y-C; Hu, Morris, Lu, Zhu, Zhang, & Chen, 2015).
The Godin is a self-reported assessment on leisure-time PA, expressed in weekly frequencies of strenuous, moderate, and mild activities. The PALMS-Y-C consists of seven subscales each measuring a motive for participating in PA. We used SPSS to calculate Pearson Correlation Coefficients (r) to examine whether there were relationships between motives for participation in PA and amount of PA students undertook.
Results showed that there were significant positive correlations between motives of enjoyment, mastery, competition/ego, and physiological condition and amount of PA, ranging from, r=.16 to r=.28. Findings from the present study showed some insight on how to promote PA to Malaysian Chinese secondary age students by enhancing their motives to participate in PA. The results also provided information that could help teachers, health educators, health policy makers, and parents in promoting exercise and PA among secondary school students.
By demonstrating a link between motives for participating in PA, measured by PALMS-Y-C, this study also supports the construct validity of that measure. Keywords: physical activity, motivation, Godin, PALMS-Y-C Mindfulness, mental training and sports excellence Chair: Jitendra Mohan (Panjab University, Chandigarh India) Sports performance has been promoted, propagated and rewarded since time immemorial for its excellence. It has occupied the core themes of the Olympics.
Excellence is not only about winning, but also making progress against personal goals, as reflected in the Olympic motto, "Citius — Altius — Fortius," which means "faster — higher — stronger." It is also a state of mind and a behavior that results from a healthy combination of a strong body, mind and will (Soltis, 2012). It is one of the most vibrant and visible field of human excellence in terms of open techniques and hidden strategies. The spirit of Olympics and Internationalism has heightened the role of the Sport Psychologists and Mental Trainers in delivering the ultimate performance of an athlete.
The coach, the physiotherapist, diet expert, sport scientists and parents work in consonance to prepare the ‘performer’ to excel---himself and others. The world and Olympic records are created by ‘raising the bar’. Many believe it is a remarkable laboratory -the individual or the team- to produce verifiable, measurable and visible evidence.
The interaction and exchange of ideas and findings of the experts leads to enhancement and reinforcement of the basic and applied psychological strategies assisting the athletes to reach their optimum. The emerging theme seems to establish excellence as a way of life and not as a mere strategy. The present symposium involving experts like Lars-Eric Unestahl, Meena Sehgal, Anuradha 253Symposia Thursday July 13th Solanki and Zahra Jafari aims to create a platform for sharing of research and training.
The performance of Olympic champions highlights managing stress, crisis and endless pursuit of excellence. The main objectives are: 1. Sharing principles and recent applications in the field of mental training, yoga, mindfulness and strategic interventions.
2. Developing network among sports psychologists from different countries. 3.
Extending research horizons in sport specific situations. Keywords: mindfulness, mental toughness, mental training, excellence, peak performance Managing stress through physical exercise: Indigenous methods Meena Sehgal (Professor of Psychology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India) Health is one of the major concerns today. Statistics have revealed that spending on health care in India had been an estimated five percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2013 and remained at that level through 2016.
However, total health care spending in local-currency terms has been projected to rise at an annual rate of over 12 percent, from an estimated $96.3 billion in 2013 to $195.7 billion in 2018 (Deloitte, 2015). This rapid growth rate reflects high inflation and has been driven by increasing public and private expenditures on health. The major cause, however, being the changing face of death.
Chronic diseases are the main causes of mortality and morbidity. Their prevalence has multiplied because of sedentary, inactive, stressful life style of people. Efforts to control and reduce the incidence of these diseases bring one to focus on modifying sedentary life style and reduce stress.
Research has moreover shown that indigenous methods like yoga, transcendental meditation and mindfulness based stress reduction have been pertinent in promoting health. These techniques use traditional insights and teachings, but incorporate them into a more eclectic presentation rather than actually directly teaching meditation or other practices and in this way are seen to promote self efficacy alongside self awareness and extending human potential in the sport setting. Keywords: stress, yoga, life style, meditation Mindfulness, mental training and sports excellence Jitendra Mohan (Panjab University, Chandigarh, India) Sports performance has been promoted, propagated and rewarded since time immemorial for its excellence.
It has occupied the core themes of the Olympics. Excellence is not only about winning, but also making progress against personal goals, as reflected in the Olympic motto, "Citius — Altius — Fortius," which means "faster — higher — stronger." It is also a state of mind and a behavior that results from a healthy combination of a strong body, mind and will (Soltis, 2012). It is one of the most vibrant and visible field of human excellence in terms of open techniques and hidden strategies.
The spirit of Olympics and Internationalism has heightened the role of the Sport Psychologists and Mental Trainers in delivering the ultimate performance of an athlete. The coach, the physiotherapist, diet expert, sport scientists and parents work in consonance to prepare the ‘performer’ to excel---himself and others. The world and Olympic records are created by ‘raising the bar’.
Many believe it is a remarkable laboratory -the individual or the team- to produce verifiable, measurable and visible evidence. The interaction and exchange of ideas and findings of the experts leads to enhancement and reinforcement of the basic and applied psychological strategies assisting the athletes to reach their optimum. The emerging theme seems to establish excellence as a way of life and not as a mere strategy.
The present symposium involving experts like Lars-Eric Unestahl, Meena Sehgal, Anuradha Solanki and Zahra Jafari aims to create a platform for sharing of research and training. The performance of Olympic champions highlights managing stress, crisis and endless pursuit of excellence. The main objectives are: 1.
Sharing principles and recent applications in the field of mental training, yoga, mindfulness and strategic interventions. 2. Developing network among sports psychologists from different countries.
3. Extending research horizons in sport specific situations. 254Symposia Thursday July 13th Keywords: mindfulness, mental toughness, mental training, excellence, peak performance Performance failure appraisal, optimism and coping among athletes Zahra Jafari (Research Scholar, Department of Psychology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India) The improvement in sports performance is linked with using failure as a tool.
The present study examined Performance Failure Appraisal, Optimism and coping among athletes. The sample included 200 players in the age range of 20-35 years (50 individual female, 50 individual male, 50 team sports female and 50 team sports male athletes). The tests used were the Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory, The Life Orientation Test - Revised and Coping strategies inventory.
F- ratio for Performance failure appraisal on group was found to be significant and for gender and interaction effect was found insignificant. Optimism on gender was found to be significant and for group and interaction effect was found to be insignificant. F-ratios for engagement coping on gender and interaction effect were found to be significant and for group was found insignificant.
F-ratio for disengagement coping was also found to be insignificant for group and gender and interaction effect emerged significant. The results have implications for specificity in training. F- ratio for optimism on gender were found to be significant and for interaction effect was found to be insignificant.
F-ratios for engagement coping on gender and interaction effect were found to be significant. F-ratio for disengagement coping was also found to be significant. The results have implications for specificity in training.
Keywords: performance failure appraisal, optimism, coping, athletes, gender differences Sports psychology in performance enhancement of elite sportspersons Anuradha Solanky (Psychologist, Sports Authority of India, New Delhi, India) Every top sportsperson knows that best performance comes from their mind as much their body. As Sport Psychologists, we are involved in monitoring the psychological parameters (Profiling), handle competitive pressure, provide counseling, mental training and Biofeedback training. Psycho – education sessions help athletes to understand the importance and relevance of psychological skills in arousal management, concentration training and communication skills.
Mental skills training aims at helping athletes overcome pressure, improving confidence and focus, mentally prepare for competition, and develop game routines and strategies for effective performance. Athletes with the requisite “Mental toughness “are more likely to be successful. Sports psychologists assess, manage and teach athletes, teams, coaches and families how to develop strategies and skills to cope with the variety of mind – related areas of sport.
The excellence training model excellence in sport and life Lars-Eric Uneståhl (Örebro University and Scandinavian International University, Sweden) Excellence: The term”Excellence” stands for Greatness, superiority, outstanding, something extraordinary, the very best and is related both to the training goal and to the training quality. Excellence Training: Excellence Training is related both to the training goal and to the training quality. The term is often used as a substitute for”Mental Training”, e.g.: The International Society for Mental Training & Excellence (ISMTE) or World Congress- Mental Training & Excellence The practical programs for Mental Training for Excellence are based on research about Mind-Body relations, Alternative States of Consciousness and the effects of long-term and systematic Training of Mental processes, Attitudes and Skills.
Applications of the Excellence Training: The first area of application was Sport, where practical training programs were designed, developed and evaluated in cooperation with Swedish National and Olympic teams during the 1970´s. From the Sport area Mental Training spread to most areas of Society (School, Work, Business, Leadership, Health, etc.) during the rest of the 20th century and up till today it has been used by around 2.5 million Swedish. Among other countries can be 255Symposia Thursday July 13th mention Iraq, where the government in North Iraq has initiated a project called: “Mental Training for Peace – from Inner- to Outer Peace”.
Keywords: excellence, mental training, attitudes, skills 256Symposia Friday July 14th Friday July 14th Symposia Session 8. (8-9.30) Brain and cognition - New tools to improve performance Chair: Cornelia Frank (Neurocognition and Action/CITEC, Bielefeld University) Human motor performance, rooted in the profoundness of biological evolution, has matured to a point where it can profit from technical systems. Recent research on brain activity, neurofeedback or cognitive representation not only helps to understand the cognitive background of action and interaction in sport.
It also provides a basis for building artificial cognitive systems being able to interact with humans in an intuitive way and to acquire new skills by learning from the user. In this context, it is clearly advantageous for intelligent technical system such as glasses or a virtual coach to know how cognitive representation or brain activity patterns are formed, stabilized and adapted in daily actions. This knowledge enables a technical system to address the individual’s current level of learning and performance, and to shape instructions in order to optimize learning processes and maximize performance.
In this symposium, we describe techniques that enrich the physical environment of athletes, such as virtual and augmented realities. Frank et al. present the Intelligent Coaching Space, a system in which the motor learning process is augmented by a virtual mirror and coach providing individualized instructions and feedback.
Tsung-Min Hung et al. discuss brain-related, EEG based technologies in sport for psychophysiological monitoring helping to improve the cognitive and psychophysiological processes of athletes, and serving as diagnostic and training tools. Essig et al.
introduce new developments in the area of cognitive glasses being able to provide an individualized and user-centered feedback in the context of work, sport and rehabilitation. Vogel et al. present a system that combines computer-based feedback systems with cognitive methods to improve communication and education in rehabilitation settings.
The symposium concludes with a discussion of the ethical and practical implications of technological advancements for sport and sport psychologists. Keywords: brain, cognition, augmented reality, brain-computer-interfaces, neurofeedback, cognitive interaction technology Intelligent coaching space – Motor learning and coaching in virtual reality Cornelia Frank (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Felix Huelsmann (Computer Graphics/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Iwan de Kok (Social Cognitive Systems/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Stefan Kopp (Social Cognitive Systems/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Mario Botsch (Computer Graphics/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Thomas Schack (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University) Effective motor skill learning requires sensorimotor learning based on appropriate multimodal feedback. The Intelligent Coaching Space (ICSPACE) is a virtual coaching environment, developed to augment the learning process with different kinds of coaching strategies for different types of sport tasks.
Virtual reality (VR) is highly controllable and therefore allows to systematically manipulate variables and to create new types of interactions as compared to a real-world setting. Here, we provide insights into the current status of the ICSPACE and details on a line of feedback experiments conducted on this platform. The ICSPACE platform as an immersive, closed loop virtual reality environment allows for multilevel analysis of motor action and individualized, adaptive, and expertise-dependent coaching.
In a first (nonverbal) feedback study, we were interested in the impact of different types of augmented visual feedback during observational practice of the squat. Novices were assigned to one of three groups, an ‘own avatar’ group, and two ‘own avatar plus ghost’ 257Symposia Friday July 14th groups. Whilst executing the squat, participants in the ‘own avatar’ group observed their own avatar performing in a virtual mirror.
Participants in the ‘own avatar plus ghost’ groups observed also the avatar of a skilled person, superimposed on their own avatar, performing a correct squat (front or side). Participants were tested prior to and after the acquisition phase as well as after a retention interval of one day. Results showed a trend for the ‘own avatar plus ghost’ groups to outperform the ‘own avatar’ group in several biomechanical and cognitive parameters.
In a second (verbal) feedback study, we introduced a conversational virtual coach, providing verbal, adaptive feedback in addition, and compared this to verbal, non-adaptive feedback provided during the learning process. Based on these results, potential benefits of VR environments for future research in coaching science will be discussed. Keywords: virtual coaching, multimodal feedback, observational learning, cognitive interaction technology The effects of SMR/theta ratio neurofeedback training on golf putting performance Tsung-Ming Hung (National Taiwan Normal University), Yi-Ting Chang (National Taiwan Normal University), Ming-Yang Cheng (Neurocognition and Action, Bielefeld University/ CITEC), Chung-Ju Huang (University of Taipei) The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of sensorimotor rhythm (SMR)/theta ratio training on putting performance in golf experts.
Previous studies have suggested that neurofeedback training (NFT) has a facilitative effect on sports performance. However, whether SMR/theta ratio is an effective training target for improving sports performance, the retention effect of NFT training, and NFT results in corresponding brain oscillation remain to be determined. Seven expert golfers were recruited and randomly assigned to either a NFT or a pseudo-training group.
Participants from both groups received 10 sessions of either NFT aimed at increasing the SMR while decreasing the theta power at the vertex electrode, or pseudo trainings after the golf putting pre-test. Retention tests were administered seven days after the post-test. Putting score and SMR/theta ratio were the dependent measures.
The results showed that the NFT improved putting performance (pre-test 33.3, post-test 44, retention 40.6). Moreover, SMR/theta ratios were increased after 10 sessions of SMR/theta NFT (pre-test 0.37, post-test 0.75, retention 0.67) while the pseudo training didn’t alter the putting performance and SMR/theta ratios. Further analysis of the SMR/theta ratio showed that the change of SMR/theta ratio mainly come from the increased SMR power than reduced theta.
Higher SMR power has been associated with lower activation of the sensorimotor cortex and thus leads to less interference from somatosensory processing, which is conducive to golf putting performance for expert golfers. Future studies may look into the different roles of the SMR and theta in the understanding of brain electrical oscillation and optimal performance in elite athletes. Keywords: neurofeedback training, precision sports, sensory motor rhythm The superglasses - cognitive technologies as task assisting devices for sport and rehabilitation Kai Essig (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Benjamin Strenge (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Thomas Schack (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University) Recently, new technologies have significantly altered the progression of sporting achievements.
Sport technology is particularly suitable for recording, analyzing and optimizing athletic performances. In this talk we will first introduce our intelligent ADAMAAS (Adaptive and Mobile Action Assistance System) glasses and then show how it can be applied to sport psychology, coaching, education and rehabilitation. ADAMAAS combines techniques from memory research, eye tracking and vital parameter measurement (such as pulse or heart rate), object and action recognition (Computer Vision), as well as Augmented Reality (AR) with modern diagnostics and corrective intervention techniques.
The system is able to identify problems in actual action 258Symposia Friday July 14th processes, to react when mistakes are made, as well as to display situation and context dependent assistance in textual, visual or avatar based format superimposed on a transparent virtual plane in users’ field of view. It captures mental representation structures using a special splitting procedure and subsequent hierarchical clustering of actions (structural dimensional analysis motoric method (SDA-M; Schack, 2012)). The ADAMAAS system is then able to identify user-specific problems in task execution by comparing their mental representation structures to predefined feasible sequences of action steps.
If action steps which must be executed consecutively (according to the feasible workflow or action sequences) are unassociated in users’ long-term memory, the transition between those steps is expected to be error-prone. Based on this information, the current visual focus, and task-related objects detected in the environment, the system provides adequate feedback, i.e. by displaying helpful hints and illustrations regarding the pending action via AR.
Finally, we will discuss examples for situation specific action assistance in sport, rehabilitation and personal training (such as golf, basketball, and assembling a bird house). Keywords: assistive systems, individualized feedback, mental representation structures, diagnostic and rehabilitation Adaptive cognitive training – a smart terminal to enhance performance Ludwig Vogel (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University), Thomas Schack (Neurocognition and Action/ CITEC, Bielefeld University) Technical systems that monitor analyze cognitive skills were developed to improve performance in sport. To enhance technical training in sport, we used state of the art cognitive diagnostic created a smart terminal that is able to support motor learning on an individual level in sport as well as in rehabilitation.
To fulfill skills with a specific purpose, cognitive representations should be organized task-depended in a goal oriented manner (Schack & Mechsner, 2006). However, when it comes to technical training, athletes work at specific movement problems. Occasionally, they fail consistently, not because of their physical skills, but due to their defective representation of the movement.
With the smart terminal we detect the cognitive representation problems with the structure dimensional analysis of mental representation (Schack, 2012). Based on this diagnostic the terminal provides individual feedback for technical training. The systems gives instructions to optimize learning processes in written form and prospective in form of a virtual agent.
Keeping in line with the dynamic assessment approach, the representation can be analyzed again after the intervention to adjust the training. In this way the smart terminal can also be used as an evaluation tool of the training process that supports the communication and between coaches and athletes. Finally, we will discuss the application of the smart terminal in sport and rehabilitation and will deduce practical implications.
Keywords: mental representation, technical training, diagnostic and rehabilitation The Use of high-technologies in research and for performance enhancement Chair: Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) Five presentations, which explore the research and applications of high technologies in sport and police, comprise this symposium. The first presentation explores the central and peripheral psychophysiological mechanisms underlying the notion of team mental models (TMM). The aim is to capture the underlying mechanisms of actions which are shared by team members for the use of team performance enhancement.
The second study is devoted to the use of video technologies aimed at enhancing the perceptual-cognitive skills (PCS), which precede response-selection and action execution. An overview of approaches designed for developing meaningful video methods to track and train players’ PCS is presented. Similarly, in the third presentation, the authors introduce research on the use of stroboscopic visual technology along with 259Symposia Friday July 14th Dynavision attention enhancement technologies and their use for performance enhancement practices.
In this vein, the forth presentation pertains to studying and enhancing gaze behaviors using eye-tracking devices installed on wearable glasses with at least two mounted cameras. The technology allows measuring the quiet- eye and post-quiet eye behaviors in situ. These are later contrasted with performance to determine the individual zone of optimal functioning.
The last presentation is devoted to simulation technologies incorporating special attention video software (Neurotracker® system) used to enhance law-enforcement officers’ anticipation to better decide on the line of action and minimize error (actions) occurrence. New prospects are explored to increase the usefulness and trustfulness of these technologies in emulating real-life situations. Together, the five presentations shade light on the recent technologies used in sport and safety domains for research and training purposes.
Keywords: technology, vision, simulations, decision-making Neuro-psychophysiological monitoring of team processes Edson Filho (University of Central Lancashire), Jean Rettig (Florida State University), Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) The purpose of this presentation is to review and discuss a plethora of research findings on how bio- and neuro-feedback technology can be used to monitor central (i.e., brain) and peripheral physiological markers (e.g., heart rate, skin conductance, respiration rate) of team processes, particularly team coordination and team mental models. To this extent, recent research on applied psychology has used bio-neurofeedback technology to examine neuro-psychophysiological markers underlying the notion of team coordination and team mental models (Filho, Bertollo, Robazza, & Comani, 2015). Accordingly, we present experimental evidence that optimal coordination and performance in interactive tasks depends on shared (integrative) and complementary (segregative) neural networks (Filho et al., 2016).
In addition to discussing central markers of team coordination and team mental models, we present evidence that peripheral physiological responses (i.e., heart rate and respiration rate) are also markers of shared and complementary mental models. More specifically, we present research findings suggesting that intra-team physiological rhythms are linked to team processes and predictive of performance in myriad interactive motor tasks, including cooperative juggling, duet music playing, and group singing. We conclude by discussing how bio- and neurofeedback technology can be used to advance neuro-psychophysiological frameworks in performance, sport and exercise psychology.
Keywords: psychophysiology, team processes Using video based technology to enhance perceptual-cognitive skills across sports Itay Basevitch (Anglia Ruskin University), Claire Rossato (Middlesex University), Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) Extant research examining Perceptual-Cognitive Skills (PCS) used video based technology (Mann et al, 2007). Most of the research has focused on exploring skill level differences in the ability to anticipate, generate options and make a decision during scenarios of developing plays (Ward et al., 2008). Furthermore, studies have also investigated the underlying mechanisms (e.g., gaze behavior, memory/knowledge base) that provide experts the ability to perform consistently and successfully (Davids, Renshaw & Glazier, 2005).
However, the transfer of knowledge gained from the research domain to the applied domain has been limited. Thus, there is a need to develop reliable and valid perceptual-cognitive measurement tools and training methods. We provide an overview of approaches for developing meaningful methods to use video-based technology to track and train players’ PCS.
The approach is based on a longitudinal two-stage series of projects in which video based measurement and training methods are assessed across a series of sports (e.g., cricket, football, soccer, judo). In the first stage various measurement methods (e.g., varying the video content – spatial and temporal 260Symposia Friday July 14th occlusion, and the response method – pen and paper, full body movement) are explored for identifying the most reliable and valid tool. The second stage is based on findings from the first stage.
The most reliable measurement tool is used to track improvement over time and to identify the best PCS training method (e.g., implicit and explicit). Additionally, the use of (a) a real-world performance task, (b) coaches’ evaluation of development, and (d) self-evaluation of development, are explored. The overall aim is to develop video-based technology to improve PCS and subsequently performance.
Keywords: perception, cognition Eye-tracking technology for the study and applications of expert athletic performance Camilo Sáenz-Moncaleano (Florida State University), Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) Eye-tracking devices consist of wearable glasses with at least two mounted cameras. One camera records pupil movement, while the other camera records the performance environment. Hence, by integrating information from the two cameras, quantitative data relating to gaze behaviors can be collected and processed.
A third camera is often added and simultaneously measures the physical movements of the performer; allowing analysis of eye movements during specific phases of the sport task (Vickers, 2007). With the use of this technology, gaze behaviors have been studied throughout numerous sports such as tennis, football, and golf (Mann et al., 2007). Eye-tracking technology has been used to measure gaze behavior using both visual search of sport videos (e.g., Williams, Davids & Williams, 1999), and in situ, as the athlete physically performs the task in a natural environment (e.g., Vickers, 1992, 1996, Vine & Wilson, 2011).
This technology was used studies which revealed the advantage experts enjoy in attending to and processing of relevant environmental cues (Mann et al., 2007). Specifically, the technology allowed to explore the visual search behaviors which result in more efficient, quicker, and accurate anticipatory decision-making and response execution (Goulet, Bard & Fleury, 1989; Mann et al., 2007; Tenenbaum,20103). In this presentation I demonstrate how to use gaze technology in practice, and how to further advance skill proficiency by tailoring gaze behaviors to optimal performance.
Keywords: eye-tracking, performance Visual perception technology for improving decision making and anticipation Nataniel Boiangin (Florida State University), Heather Gatten (Florida State University), Jean-Charles Lebeau (Florida State University), Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) Being able to “read the game” is a crucial component of skilled performance in sports (Mann, Williams, Ward, & Janelle, 2007). The ability to gaze and attend to relevant cues in the playing environment is the initial process which determines the accuracy and swiftness of a decision, and consequently, the final action (Tenenbaum, 2013; Williams et al., 1999). Specifically, visual attention plays a central role in anticipating upcoming events, particularly under high-speed and uncertain conditions.
As such, visual skills are perceived as a key component in the decision-making process (Savelsbergh, Williams, Van der Kamp, & Ward, 2002; Williams & Ward, 2003). In this presentation, we describe two technologies to enhance visual attention, and in turn, improve the athlete’s sport related decision-making: (1) Nike Vapor Strobe Glasses, and (2) DynavisionD2. The first study aimed at exploring the effects of a single stroboscopic (i.e., intermittent glimpses of the environment) training session on anticipating tennis serve return direction.
Results revealed that stroboscopic training significantly improved response accuracy but not reaction time. The second study implemented a similar design protocol with intermediate college athletes, however, the DynavisionD2 was used to train and enhance peripheral vision and reaction time. The Dynavision D2 is a visuomotor training apparatus used to enhance visual attention, peripheral vision, reaction time, and executive function skills (Klavora, Gaskovski, & Forsyth, 1994).
Participants were randomly assigned to either the Dynavision or control group. The study’s 261Symposia Friday July 14th results will be reported upon data completion. Results from these studies are discussed in relation to the current literature in the domain.
We provide our experiences with the aforementioned technologies in our private consultation sessions with athletes. Keywords: visual technologies, anticipation, DM Technology for improving decision making during critical law enforcement incidents Roy Bedard (Florida State University), Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) The effect of law enforcement training with video scenario plus special attention software (e.g., Neurotracker® system) on anticipation and decision-making is discussed in this presentation. For well over two decade advances in technology have been used to determine the most effective method to improve a learner’s perceptual-cognitive skills and to provide an empirical basis for training human performance.
For instance, it has been shown that high level athletes demonstrate greater performance in game play after being trained for several weeks in 3-dimensional multiple object tracking (3D-MOT) (Romeas, Guldner & Faubert, 2012). Our interest is in special-operations law enforcement officers who, like athletes, depend upon rapid processing of multiple bits of information in a changing environment to anticipate future actions that influence performance. Like athletes, they must be skilled in modulating attention to relevant environmental cues in order to decipher threats in the environment and plan for counter-measures.
At present, a favored methodology used for training perceptual-cognitive skills in high-risk police work is scenario-based training; a technique that applies actual representations of real-world events that unfold in real time. This training method can be done in live or video presentation. Human performance increases when participants recognize visual cues, monitor them closely, anticipate upcoming events, and act upon those expectations by selectively choosing the best decision among several competing alternatives (Tenenbaum &Bar-Eli, 1993).
The presentation focuses on the ascendant values of visual control, namely anticipation and decision-making, when incorporating scenarios with NeuroTracker® System. Keywords: simulated environment, neurotracker Sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not: How can we make the exercise experience more pleasant? Chair: Costas Karageorghis (Brunel University London) It is arguable that popular cognitivist theories have proven largely ineffectual in addressing the tide of sedentariness, obesity, and type 2 diabetes that has afflicted people in the developed world.
The health-related problems associated with physical inactivity are currently a source of grave concern to national governments. Is there anything meaningful that exercise psychology can offer to stem the tide? On the whole, Joe and Josephine Public have some cursory knowledge of the health benefits of physical activity, how to set personal goals, and even how to structure a basic exercise routine.
There is, however, a non-rational aspect to people’s physical activity behaviours. Despite the overwhelmingly positive evidence concerning physical activity participation that people routinely deliberate, the majority remain insufficiently active. What if exercise psychologists were to focus on making the exercise experience more pleasant?
Would that begin to address the “public health time bomb” that is often mentioned by senior health professionals? This symposium will provide four complementary papers that serve to question the continued propagation of cognitivism as a dominant paradigm. The first paper, presented by Panteleimon Ekkekakis, will detail the paradigmatic shift and salient underlying mechanisms.
The second paper, delivered by Florence Kinnafick, will examine how the physical environment—manipulated by use of video images—can influence the experience of high-intensity exercise among insufficiently active adults. The third paper, presented by Leighton Jones, will expound the 262Symposia Friday July 14th efficacy of virtual reality; a technique that promotes greater attentional dissociation than in commonly used forms of distraction during exercise (e.g., music-video). The fourth paper, delivered by Costas Karageorghis, will illustrate how exercise and health practitioners might adopt a theory-based approach in the use of music- related interventions to enhance the exercise experience.
Keywords: affect, environmental factors, dissociation, hedonism, pleasure, virtual reality Preparing exercise psychology for its post-cognitivist future: Re-establishing the role of affect within dual-process models of human behaviour Panteleimon Ekkekakis (Iowa State University) Since its emergence in the late 1960s, research in exercise psychology has been conducted in accordance with the dominant paradigm in psychology, namely cognitivism. Consequently, exercise and physical activity have been approached through information-processing theories. Such theories postulate that behaviour change occurs when the computational system within the human mind is provided with adequate, correct, comprehensible, and compellingly presented data (e.g., regarding capabilities, autonomy, sources of social support).
The theories rest on the assumptions that (a) humans consistently act to maximise benefits to their self-interests (e.g., lengthen their lifespan, enhance their wellbeing) and (b) process data rationally (e.g., reliably do what is beneficial and avoid what is harmful). The relevant literature was searched through computerised databases and extensive cross-referencing. The search revealed that neither the theories themselves nor their underlying assumptions have been questioned.
Likewise, there have been no efforts to develop theories focusing specifically on exercise and physical activity as phenomena that are distinct from other types of health or social behaviour. At this point, exercise psychology is approaching a Kuhnian "crisis." Cognitivist theories have been found to account for limited portions of behavioural variance and most theory- based interventions have proven ineffective in changing behaviour. New, dual-process theoretical frameworks must recognise that behaviour often results from non-rational, non-deliberative processes.
In particular, the influential role of past affective experiences in human behaviour should be acknowledged. Accordingly, researchers must redirect their energies and resources towards developing and testing methods that can improve the affective experience of exercise and physical activity for individuals across the lifespan and all levels of physical ability. Keywords: affect, cognitivism, exercise, hedonism, paradigm shift Can the physical environment influence affect during high-intensity exercise?
A multistudy investigation Florence Kinnafick (Loughborough University) Immersion in the natural environment can enhance feelings of pleasure for physically inactive adults who exercise at a moderate intensity (Kinnafick & Thøgersen-Ntoumani, 2014). Negative changes in affect occur at high or supra-threshold exercise intensities (Dual-Mode Theory: Ekkekakis, 2003). It is currently unknown whether the physical environment can ameliorate the deleterious effects of high-intensity exercise on affect.
Study 1 aimed to examine the influence of the physical environment during a high-intensity interval training (HIIT) intervention. Eighteen insufficiently active participants (male = 12, female = 9; Mage = 40.3 years, SD = 4.5 years) were interviewed and perceptions of barriers to and facilitators of intervention adherence were explored. Using a within-subjects design, Study 2 investigated the effects of natural vs.
urban environments and high-intensity exercise on affect. Twenty-one insufficiently active adults (Mage = 22.5 years, SD = 4.5 years) were exposed to six conditions. Participants cycled for either 4 min of continuous exercise (> 80% HRmax), 8 x 30-s sprints (> 90% HRmax), or sat for 4 min while watching video clips of a natural or urban environment.
Measures of affect (PANAS) were administered pre-exercise, immediately post-exercise, and following a 10-min 263Symposia Friday July 14th recovery. In Study 1, inductive thematic analysis indicated that temperature and the physical condition of the exercise studio negatively influenced participants’ comfort and motivation to engage in exercise. The Study 2 analysis (RM ANOVA) indicated that high-intensity exercise increased negative affect (p = 0.008), and reduced positive affect (p = 0.002).
Engaging in HIIT resulted in lower levels of negative affect when participants were exposed to the natural environment (p = .036). When insufficiently active adults choose to engage in high- intensity exercise, it is important to consider their physical environment with a view to ameliorating affective decline. Keywords: affect, exercise, HIIT, inactivity, physical activity, physical environment Is deeper better?
Psychological effects of immersive technology during exercise Leighton Jones (Sheffield Hallam University) The acute affective responses to exercise play a seminal role in determining exercise adherence (Rhodes & Kates, 2015). Accordingly, there is a need for easily implementable, evidence-based strategies that can enhance the exercise experience. Technology is now ubiquitous in health facilities and used to distract, motivate and entertain exercisers (e.g., mp3 players and activity trackers).
Emerging technologies such as virtual reality (VR) offer additional applications during exercise. In particular, examination of novel affect- enhancing strategies are warranted with overweight individuals who report more negative responses to exercise than their normal-weight counterparts (Ekkekakis et al., 2016). The present study sought to examine the effects of immersive technology (VR headset) during a 15-min bout of recumbent cycling.
Eighteen participants (Mage = 34.9 years, SD = 10.3 years; MBMI = 27.5 kg/m2, SD = 3.5 kg/m2) comprising 14 women and 4 men engaged in three bouts of exercise at an intensity proximal to ventilatory threshold. Each participant was administered a control (no music-videos) and two experimental conditions (low immersion: music videos on TV and heard via wall-mounted speakers; high immersion: music videos on a VR headset and heard via headphones). Participants responded to the Feeling Scale, Felt Arousal Scale, a state attention item, and Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale.
Results indicate that the experimental conditions elicited greater pleasure (p < .001), a more dissociative attentional focus (p < .001), and higher enjoyment (p < .001) when compared to control, but did not differ from each other. The results support previous research examining the role of music- videos in enhancing the exercise experience (e.g., Hutchinson et al., 2017) and indicate that highly immersive technologies such as VR headsets might not confer additional benefits during exercise when used to deliver music-videos. Keywords: affect, cycling, dissociation, enjoyment, overweight, virtual reality Enhancing the exercise experience through music-related interventions: A heuristic theory- based approach Costas Karageorghis (Brunel University London) From the very dawn of human civilization, ancient cultures sought to combine sounds in such a way that they influenced the human psyche.
Given the recent advances in digital technologies, music applications have rapidly become de rigueur in the exercise and health domain. Ergonomically-designed personal listening devices are considered by exercisers to be as essential as their running shoes, and music programmes are routinely streamed into public gymnasia by use of complex algorithms. The purpose of this applied presentation will be to explore the structured and systematic use of music as a means by which to improve the exercise experience and thus, ultimately, to promote greater adherence.
A new theoretical model (Karageorghis, 2016) that is heuristic in nature will serve as the lodestar for a series of music-related applications. The applications will be illustrated by examples from the presenter’s applied work with the music and exercise industry. In terms of underlying structure, music-related interventions can be applied in three 264Symposia Friday July 14th main ways: pre-task, in-task, and post-task.
Music can be used pre-task as a tool with which to manipulate psychological state; most often as a mild stimulant. It can be used in-task, either synchronously or asynchronously, with the synchronous application holding particular benefits in terms of prolonging endurance-type performance. The post-task application of music is still at a nascent stage in research terms; nonetheless, initial evidence shows some positive signs in terms of how music can expedite recovery processes following highly demanding workouts.
The presentation will be of interest to exercise and health practitioners searching for innovative and evidence-based ways with which to exploit the power of sound in their professional endeavours. The content will serve to underscore the central thrust of the symposium concerning a proposed paradigmatic shift in exercise psychology from cognitivism to hedonism. Keywords: affect, entrainment, exercise, perceived exertion, pleasure, rhythmicity Phychological intervention in football: from initiation to elite Chair: Joaquín Dosil (University of Vigo) In this Symposium, different models of intervention with players, trainers and teams will be presented from the different categories in the Spanish Football League.
We will begin with the work performed in the Brave League Cup, addressed to football players from initiation categories, in which aspects such as fair play and football as an educational weapon in collaboration with parents will be considered positively; we will continue with the psychological intervention carried out in the UD Llagostera's initiation categories, to end up with the work developed with the Celta de Vigo Football Club, both in initiation and elite categories. Strategies to train psychological game situations in football and the specific role of the physical trainer in the specific pitch task will be also presented. In conclusion, the symposium will show the educational values provided by football, the participation of the sports psychologist in two professional teams and the specific strategies that are offered from psychology in training and competition.
Keywords: football, initiation, elite, league, sports psychologist The consistent construction of the sporting context. Opportunities to facilitate personality development of young athletes Juan González Hernández (University of Murcia) When speaking of the values transmitted by the sport, it is understood that contribute to growth as a person and which are elements of teaching and learning easily and are accepted by all those responsible for this transmission. Values that are perfectly instructives and present in a sporting context, and would be able to allow through the enormous social influence generated by the sport.
The reality sometimes shows that this situation occurs in very few cases, the need to generate responsibility to try that sport contexts be places of learning and growth for people living in them, thus becoming opportunities for healthy growth for the people. The experience of the "Brave League", with the collaboration of teams in the Vega Baja del Segura (Alicante), in which it is intended that, through competition in sporting values, sports behaviors develop in athletes, parents and clubs soccer. For this, the collaboration and participation of family and clubs as models of behavior that are to their children where reference to the fulfillment of simple rules, will have their impact on the "Fair Play ranking", parallel to the sport, which involves achieving awards and trophies at the end of the season.
With the objectives of learn through experience, gradual adaptation proposals through workshops, seminars, workshops and training in the field of psychosocial skills, information campaigns pursued in three phases: - awareness; children / participants as, acquire much more important things to win football games, that surely will accompany them for the rest of their lives; -learning and establishment; children become examples of civility, 265Symposia Friday July 14th respect and sportsmanship, and consolidation; maintenance of sports development behaviors and values that affect psychological well-being and basic aspects of personality in the young football player. Keywords: young, sport context, values Creation of the sports psychology department in the football academia of a Spanish club Anna Viñolas, Ruben Bravo (Libredon UPCD-Cataluña) It presents the phases followed in the creation of the Sports Psychology Department in the football academia of 3th Spanish Football Club Division (Unió Esportiva Llagostera Costa Brava) by the UPCD (Psychology and Sports Coaching Group) during the 2016-17 season. The project was carried out by two sports psychologists, with internship students of University of Girona.
The Department pursues two main goals. On the one hand, increase team sports performance as well as the development of personal skills and club values. The integration of different psychological techniques such as sports coaching was the method, combining punctual and regular actions throughout the season.
The methodology includes the following main activities: monthly trainings for coaches, divided in 2 groups (7-soccer and 11-soccer); biweekly monitoring of 11-soccer (10 teams); weekly supervision of 2nd team; 2 hours of weekly attention of players; and a coaching process with each 11-soccer coach (6 sessions, every two months). The trainings had been about topics like team building, goal setting, communication and management of training, coaching techniques and individualized player’s feedback, etc. The field follow-up started with an observation of all the teams, focusing in communication style.
Later the teams were assigned to a psychologist who was the responsible of this supervision. We had worked in aspects leaded in the trainings and player’s communication, team personality definition (values, strengths and improvement areas), etc. At the level of individual attention, the demand was mainly focused on the management of pressure and demotivation for lack of minutes.
The coaching sessions with coaches have addressed aspects detected in the observations made in the training sessions related with leadership. Globally, the season was highly valorized because of the great acceptance of the new Department by all the members of the club, as well as the contribution made in both objectives pursued. Strategies to train psychological game situations in football Santiago Rivera Matiz (Centro Excelentia), Juan Martín Tassi (Club Estudiantes de la Plata), Miguel Morilla (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) This paper intends to propose strategies to teach football players how to deal with psychological situations in football.
These situations consist of a set of variables that occur before and during a game where the thoughts and emotions that players experience affect the skills required in order to be able to manage the demands of the game; whose goal is to increase tactical efficiency (Rivera, 2016). This are trained through group talk sessions in the changing room or training activities in the field. In the second case, a transversal methodology is followed with a greater accentuation on the mental variables, integrating in the same task specific objectives for the performance components: technical, tactical, conditional and psychological (Morilla, Rivera & Tassi, 2017).
The design of training tasks arises from the specific demands that players face in each game situation (Morilla & Rivera, 2014). These needs are conditioned by their mental workload (DiDomenico & Nussbaum, 2008), and is both cognitive and emotional (Cárdenas, Conde-González & Perales, 2015). Once these factors are taken into account, the training of psychological game situations is carried out through the manipulation of specific parameters (Morilla & Rivera, 2014, Morilla et al., 2017): 1) motivation type; 2) type of attention focus, according to stimuli quantity and quality; 3) the amount of uncertainty as a stress factor; 4) the number of possible decisions and their complexity; 4) the adjustment of the activation level; and 5) the opening or closing of communication channels.
All these factors have to be approached from the psychology of football, 266Symposia Friday July 14th whose objective is none other than to facilitate the players` adaptation to technical-tactical goals or the game model (Rivera, 2016). Keywords: game situations, psychology of football, game model, psychological skills, methodology Training methodology in football accentuated in psychological variables: the role of the physical trainer in the specific pitch tasks Juan Martín Tassi (Club Estudiantes de la Plata), Santiago Rivera Matiz (Centro Excelentia), Miguel Morilla (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) What strategies do sports coaches use to develop footballers´ psychological skills in a systematic and planned way? Based on the question raised, this work attempts to expand some action guidelines for coaches, physical trainers and sports psychologists do in the pitch to improve individual and collective behaviour associated with performance; all from the psychical trainer's role.
In order to integrate the psychological contents to the specific pitch work planning; identification of players´ mental resources and principles of the game are taken into account, besides the other main performance components (i.e. tactical, technical, and conditional). All these are linked to three main aspects needed to develop training activities: the pedagogical, psychological, and methodological tasks´ principles.
Furthermore, based on specific situations that developed through training sessions and competitions, the search for developing psychological variables associated with the principles or the game model is explored (García Calvo, Candela, González, Ponce & Pulido, 2015). Thus, modified situations are favoured (García López, Sánchez & Serra Olivares, 2011) through provocation rules that figure or benefit emergence of individual and collective behaviours in order to improve performance. Moreover, psychological and social-affective needs are identified thought observation, all which, together with the goals and integrated work contents, figure the possibility to accentuate the mental contents present in the different game situations faced during the season (Morilla, Rivera & Tassi, 2017).
Keywords: methodology, game model, behaviour, psychological skills, performance, football Flow in sport: Relationships and measurement Chair: Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, England, UK) Developed more than 40 years ago by Csikzhentmihalyi (1975) in the context of challenging and highly skilled behaviours, the concept of flow has attracted a growing interest in the context of sport and exercise. Flow is a subjective experience that occurs in situations where the challenge is high and individuals have the skills to meet it. Flow involves total immersion in the activity, associated with clear goals and a sense of confidence and control.
Flow is a highly enjoyable state, so individuals are keen to experience it again. Thus, they develop high intrinsic motivation for the activity. Although individuals in flow are so absorbed in the task that they are not concerned about their performance, they often produce outstanding performance.
The promotion of intrinsic motivation to train and compete and the peak performance often associated with flow make it a desirable experience to nurture among athletes, as well as exercisers. To enhance the experience of flow it is important to understand its relationship to a range of personal, social, and contextual variables. In this symposium, presenters describe research conducted to understand these relationships.
Stefan Koehn and colleagues consider the impact of coaching behaviours on flow experiences in competitive sports. Then, Ali Yıldız, and colleagues describe a study examining the relationship between self-presentation and flow among exercise participants. Next, Nektarios Stavrou and colleagues report on research examining the relationship between psychological needs, motivation, and flow in sport.
Calmeiro and colleages assess appraisals, emotions and reinvestment as antecedents of flow, and, finally, Erez Mosek and colleagues discuss their research on whether a concept of team flow state exists independent of the well-established construct of 267Symposia Friday July 14th individual flow state, resulting in the presentation of a measure of team flow state in sport. Tony Morris will lead audience discussion. Keywords: flow state, coaching behaviour, self-presentation, psychological needs, team flow The impact of coaching behaviours on flow experiences in competitive sports Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, England, UK), Nektarios Stavrou (Faculty of Physical Education and Sport Science, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece & National Sport Research Institute, Olympic Athletic Center of Athens, Athens, Greece), Janet Young (Institute of Sport, Exercise & Active Living, Victoria University, Melbourne) At an elite level coaches work very closely with athletes to improve competition performance.
Kimiecik and Stein (1992) proposed a flow model, suggesting that coach behaviour is one of the main situational variables affecting flow. Recently, Koehn and Diaz-Ocejo (2016) showed that an individualised imagery intervention, based on coaches’ and athletes’ information, substantially increased athletes’ flow states. The aim of this study was the examination of the impact of coaching behaviour on athletes’ flow experience in competition.
This study, based on cross-sectional design, included 234 participants (149 male, 85 female; mean age = 21.66 years, SD = 4.90; mean competition experience = 9.25 years, SD = 4.43; working with current coach on average 31.73 months, SD = 33.72). Participants completed scales on perceived autonomy support, the Coach Athlete Relationship Questionnaire (CART-Q meta perspective; Jowett, 2009), the Controlling Coach Behavior Scale (CCBS; Bartholomew, Ntoumanis, & Thøgersen-Ntouman, 2010), the Coaching Behavior Scale for Sport (CBS-S; Côté, Yardley, Hay, Sedgwick, & Baker, 1999), and the Dispositional Flow Scale-2 (DFS-2; Jackson & Eklund, 2002). Correlation coefficients showed no significant associations between the CCBS and flow.
Multiple regression analysis with three variables showed that the CART-Q (beta = .27; p < .01) and the CBS-S (beta = .23; p < .10) significantly predicted flow in competition. The results indicate that the coach- athlete relationship facilitates flow through specific behaviors reflecting closeness, commitment, and complimentarity. Developing competition strategies, using goal setting or mental preparation have also been found to facilitate flow in competition.
The assessment of flow experiences and coaching behavior provide some helpful information for coaches working with competitive athletes, as well as practitioners, for instance sport psychologist whose daily work involves interactions with coaches and athletes. Keywords: coaching, competition, flow experience The relationship between self-presentation and flow among exercise participants Ali Yildiz, Hülya Asçi (Marmara University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey), Emine Çağlar (Hacettepe University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Ankara, Turkey) In this study, we focused on goal-directed self-talk, a strategy that affects performance by the means of self-regulation, contrarily to strategic self-talk interventions, which aim at an externally driven change in athlete’s thoughts. Goal-directed self-talk represents a controlled mental process deliberately employed towards solving a problem or making progress on a task.
We specifically explored goal-directed self-talk used by basketball players to cope with diverse competitive situations: seconds before a game expected to be close, while clearly winning or clearly losing a game, and at the close of a tight game. Thirty-four male basketball players (Mage = 19.74, SD = 2.93) wrote up to three self-instructions they had used in these situations to self- regulate, solve a problem or make progress on a task. Content analyses indicated that athletes’ goal-directed self-talk was predominantly future-oriented (I will win), creating activated states (Come on!) and regulating cognition and behaviour (Focus on the game).
Exploring differences among situations, cross tabulation with Cramer’s V statistic exposed a significant situation by self-talk function interaction (Cramer's V = .259, p < .001). Specifically, for seconds before the proportion of goal-directed self-talk aimed at controlling cognitive reactions 268Symposia Friday July 14th and creating deactivated states (Calm down) was significantly high (sei = 2.7 and sei = 2.3, respectively), whereas the proportion of goal-directed self-talk aimed at controlling deactivated states (Don’t give up) was significantly low (sei = -2.4). Additionally, the proportion of goal-directed self-talk aimed at controlling deactivated states was significantly high for while winning (sei = 4.0).
Overall, the results of this study underline the need for research on athletes’ autonomous attempts to control themselves by be means of goal-directed self-talk, and inquire into the effects of these self-statements in a wide variety of situations. Keywords: self-presentation, flow, exercise Examining the relationship between psychological needs, motivation and flow experience in sport Nektarios Stavrou (Faculty of Physical Education and Sport Science, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece & National Sport Research Institute, Olympic Athletic Center of Athens, Athens, Greece), Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, England, UK), Maria Psychountaki (Faculty of Physical Education and Sport Science, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece) The concept of flow refers to a positive subjective mental state that athletes experience when they are totally involved in an activity. Self-determination theory supports the existence of three psychological needs (competence, autonomy, relatedness) the fulfilment of which leads to positive motivational outcomes and performance.
The purpose of this study was to examine the link between flow experience and athletes’ basic psychological needs and motivation. Three-hundred-and-forty-two athletes (211 males, 131 females), from 12 to 39 years old, volunteered to participate in the study. The athletes completed the Flow State Scale-2, the Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise Scale, the Sport Motivation Scale-2, and two 11-point scales measuring challenge and skills of the athletes, based on how they usually felt during competition.
The instruments revealed acceptable reliability and validity values. Positive correlations appeared between basic psychological needs factors and flow experience, with the competence factor indicating higher values. In addition, intrinsic types of motivation showed positive correlations with flow experience, whereas extrinsic motivation and amotivation revealed null and negative correlations, respectively.
Regarding the flow orthogonal model (low vs high challenge–skills), athletes in the flow and relaxation quadrants indicated higher intrinsic motivation and psychological needs satisfaction, compared to athletes in the anxiety and apathy quadrants. Results indicated that intrinsically-motivated athletes experienced more positive characteristics than extrinsically or non- motivated ones, whereas basic psychological needs satisfaction (mainly competence) was important in the quality of their sport experience. The combined examination of flow and motivation regarding athletes’ emotional experience during competition can provide useful information that might be beneficial for coaches, sport psychology practitioners, and athletes’ performance.
Keywords: Psychological needs, motivation, amotivation, flow experience Cognitive appraisals, emotions and reinvestment as antecedents of flow states in athletes Luis Calmeiro (Abertay University, Dundee, UK), Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, England, UK), Mariana Kaiseler (Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UK) Competitive stress can either hamper athletes’ ability to perform or enhance their performance by energising them in face of optimal challenges. Appraising situations as challenges is critical for the development of the conditions favourable to the occurrence of flow. The purpose of this paper is to test a model that predicts athletes’ flow states based on the interaction between cognition and emotions.
In classroom settings, 178 student-athletes (M age = 19.61 years, SD = 1.73; 31% females) completed a battery of tests to measure threat and challenge cognitive appraisals, emotions, decision-reinvestment and decision-rumination, and dispositional flow. Path analysis indicated that all variables explained 23% of flow’s variance, with challenge 269Symposia Friday July 14th (beta = .24), threat (beta = -.16), positive emotions (beat = .16) and rumination (beta = -.19) as significant predictors of flow. Indirect paths to flow were also found mainly from challenge and threat through positive emotions (beta = .37 and beta = -.17, respectively), and decision-rumination (beta = -.16 and beta = .32, respectively); hence, positive emotions (beta = .16) and decision rumination (beta = -.19) also predicted flow.
Results illustrate how flow is associated with a combination of emotional states and cognitive processes. Flow is the product of how athletes appraise the competitive situations, which will influence their emotional states and the way they process information during competition. It is suggested that developing challenge and positive emotions, and not merely the reduction of threat and negative emotions, is vital for the experience of flow.
Moreover, rumination suggests a workload of cognitive resources that undermines flow. Decision- reinvestment was associated with negative emotions but did not predict flow. Reinvestment might have been interpreted as a resource for athletes to correct some aspect of the decision making process.
Keywords: appraisals, emotions, flow, path analysis Is Team Flow State Equivalent to Individual Flow State? Erez Mosek, Tony Morris, Anthony Watt (Institute of Sport, Exercise & Active Living, Victoria University, Melbourne & College of Education, Victoria University, Melbourne) Interest in flow has grown substantially in sport psychology, alongside the mainstream development of positive psychology. Flow is considered to be a subjective experience of individuals, but some researchers have proposed that individuals can perceive a state of flow within teams.
Early studies in team flow employed the individual Flow State Scale (FSS; Jackson & Marsh, 1996) modified to refer to individuals’ experience of teams’ flow state. We argue this begs the question whether team flow should be based on the individual flow model. To examine this, we interviewed high-level, team-sport athletes, coaches, and sport psychologists, who reported seven themes corresponding to individual flow dimensions, but also reported seven team flow specific themes.
We developed a 56-item measure, the Team Flow State Inventory (TFSI; Mosek et al., 2013) comprising four items per theme. Face validity of the inventory was examined by five experts in the flow field. To improve factor structure and the receptiveness of the measure one item was deleted from each subscale.
We tested reliability of the 14 subscales, finding that all subscales had acceptable reliability between α=.69 and α=.87. Using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), we found a good fit, following minor modifications of the model (χ2/df=2.31; CFI=.92; TLI=.90; RMSEA=.06). We examined discriminant criterion validity by correlating the 14 subscales of TFSI with the nine subscales of FSS-2 and found that TFSI subscales were independent of individual flow state dimensions.
We found TFSI subscales were independent of subscales of similar group concepts in the Group Environment Questionnaire (GEQ; Carron et al., 1985) and the Collective Efficacy Questionnaire for Sports (CEQS; Short et al., 2005). Preliminary validation suggests that the TFSI measures elements of team flow state that are distinguishable from individual flow. Given the potential of team flow, the TFSI warrants further validation in diverse team contexts.
Keywords: flow state, individual flow, team flow, reliability, validity Phenomenology, social psychology and psychobiology: contributions and emotional aspects from different areas to researches in sport psychology Chair: Thabata Castelo Branco Telles (FFCLRP (University of São Paulo)/ ABRAPESP) This symposium aims to discuss contributions from different areas to researches in sport psychology, specially those from phenomenology, social psychology and psychobiology. The first one is a branch of philosophy and has been increasingly used in sport psychology in order to comprehend the lived experience of the athletes, understanding the phenomena in exercise and sports fields from their essential aspects. In 270Symposia Friday July 14th addition, the second - social psychology - is known by its concerns related to the social aspects in psychological processes, which also includes work conditions and the environment where the practitioners are.
Finally, the contributions of psychobiology highlight the role of emotions and mood states as a predispositional condition to the athlete’s behavior and performance. The emotion is comprehended here not only in psychobiological studies but also in the other researches, once aspects such as violence and motricity are intertwined with emotional aspects. Yet, social psychology contributions remind the difficulty for the sport psychology to help managing emotions when the environment seems hostile to the athletes.
Showing these different discussions, this symposium enhances the issues related to an inter-disciplinary research in sport and exercise. Possible relations with philosophy, psychology, sociology and biology fields are presented in this symposium and we hope this could motivate and continue other inter-disciplinary approaches in sport and exercise studies. Keywords: phenomenology, social psychology, psychobiology, sport psychology Are combat sport and MMA violently experienced?
A phenomenological analysis of fighting and Extreme Combat Experiences Cristiano Roque Antunes Barreira (University of Sao Paulo) So far, there is not a phenomenological conceptualization of fighting at the core of martial arts and combat sports. Although not essential, fighting is described as a derivation, simulacra, or metaphor of violent conflicts. This description gap makes fighting a phenomenon of secondary relevance, without its proper dignity.
The first goal of this research is to discover the fighting dignity in its pureness. Once Mixed Martial Art (MMA) has been pointed out as a violent combat Sport modality, the second goal is to explore how practitioners live the so-called Extreme Combat Experiences (ECE), an aim that includes looking for understanding if violence is inherent to fighters` perception. Methodologically, classical phenomenology is applied to grasp the essence of fighting.
Interviews in depth, using suspensive listening, were performed with ten Brazilian men and women, MMA professional fighters, with different general backgrounds, searching for their ECE. Results show distinctions among physical combat forms, which include not only fighting, but also struggles (street fighting or brawls), duels, self-defence, and some forms of play. Fighting was mostly understood by its correlative ethical aspect, namely, the mutual availability of the fighters involved, as well as the motivation of physically overcoming the opponent, while avoiding being overcome.
Whether fighting is dominated by a different motivation, like hostility, for example, it becomes another phenomenon, such as struggle or duel. ECE of MMA's practitioners, however, can be emotionally dominated by the loss of self-control, humiliation, willing of punishing, shame, peaks of hostility, victimization, disrespect, sorrows, angry. Practitioners battle against such experiences, although pushing themselves to their limits, where the boundaries between self-control maintenance and loss are ambiguous.
The interviewed MMA practitioners experience violence in its career: to avoid it they search for self-control. Keywords: combat sports, phenomenology, violence How the body moves: understanding movement in sport and exercise through a phenomenological perspective Thabata Castelo Branco Telles (FFCLRP (University of São Paulo)/ ABRAPESP), Cristiano Roque Antunes Barreira (EEFERP-FFCLRP (University of São Paulo)/ ABRAPESP) This work consists in a phenomenological study, based on the concept of body. Through this perspective, it aims to understand how the body moves.
This presents a possible contribution to human motricity studies, specially in exercise and sport psychology. The phenomenological tradition is consisted by the notion of intentionality, which means that each act is organized by a relation between the consciousness and the object. However, this cannot be understood only as a mental process, but also a corporeal one.
Then, each body act is 271Symposia Friday July 14th related to an object. Aside from the concept of body, it is also important to develop the perspectives of (1) movement, always in relation to time and space, and (2) intercorporeality, regarding to the role of otherness in human motricity processes. Which means, an athlete, for example, does not make a random movement; it is always related to something (or someone) in an established time and space.
The body moves motivated by some perceived contours in the environment. It perceives and it reacts towards them. This brief description includes the mood states which influence the general sense of the movement.
It is important to highlight that using a phenomenological perspective in sports requires an understanding based on pre-reflexive acts. It consists in a reflection about the unreflecting, once in sports and exercise the body is moving almost all the time, with a few time to think. Keywords: corporeality, phenomenology, motricity, intercorporeality Invisibility and precariousness in the work of MMA athletes Juliana Camilo (PUC-SP/ABRAPESP), Rodrigo de Vasconcellos Pieri The performance of mixed martial arts fighters (MMA) points to an invisibility of their work and a precariousness of daily life confronted by them, hiding the innumerable risks of their function.
For this reason, the objective of this research was to investigate how are the working conditions to which these athletes are submitted. They all live in Brazil, enacting in national and international leagues. The research was carried out in three phases: a) collection of information in documentary materials, mainly the Brazilian legislations; b) survey of the athletes who competed, in Brazil, in the year of 2016, in the main mapper events called Sherdog and, c) interview with five competitors this year to answer a questionnaire about their working conditions, with open and closed questions.
The results of this study show the general situation of the working conditions of these fighters in Brazil. Although the fighters seem to like their work and identify opportunities for their growth in the modality, it is undeniable the precariousness to which they are involved, producing psychological suffering, physical illness, in addition to social and economic difficulties, such as: lack of a safe space for their training; lack of minimum health care; insufficient and unpredictable remuneration and invisibility of their work to Brazilian legislation. Keywords: combat sports, social psychology, psychodynamics of work, sport psychology Mood states as a predispositional condition and its relations with behavior, performance and time Ricardo Marinho de Mello de Picoli (FFCLRP (University of São Paulo)/ ABRAPESP), José Lino Oliveira Bueno (FFCLRP (University of São Paulo)) Studies about emotions in a sport context must focus on the description of complex emotional states which allow to show individual and group differences and the influencing main factors which contribute to the occurence of these differences.
By the way, it is important to follow-up variations and alterations of an emotional profile, pointed out by representative emotional states in sports situations. To the exam these representative emotional states (i.e. mood states), it is necessary that there be appropriate evaluation instruments applicable in sports contexts and that support the analysis to reach the objectives outlined in the studies on the influence of the mood states on athletes.
Engelmann (1986) proposed an instrument (Present Mood States List) to evaluate those states and it has been used in a variety of studies in a sport context. The aim of this presentation is to show the amount of studies conducted by the research group “Estados subjetivos, emoções e esporte” at Laboratório de Processos Associativos, Controle Temporal e Memória da Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão Preto (USP), through the supervision of Prof. Dr.
José Lino Oliveira Bueno. These studies focus on the exam of present mood states in high-performance athletes by the application of the Present List of Mood States (Engelmann, 1986). Studies have been developed with volleyball, 272Symposia Friday July 14th futsal, football and soccer athletes, including the description of the in-competition time course of mood states and the relation of the mood states with the stage of the competition, technical performance, gender, position, in-field behaviors, motivational aspects and leadership.
Results have shown that mood states works as a predispositional condition influencing the athletes’ behavior and performance. Keywords: mood states, sport psychology, psychobiology Excellence in sports and academics Chair: Jitendra Mohan (Panjab University, Chandigarh, Idia) Excellence has been a well documented in India. In the past, mentors (gurus) helped disciples attain the pinnacle of expertise and trained them both physically and mentally.
Training being imparted was based on the knowledge, experience and excellence of the gurus. On the one hand Dronacharya and Arjuna can never be forgotten as being the perfect example of creditable coaching and the ultimate success. In contrast Eklavya shows the motivation, the grit and the will to learn, so very essential for any sport (Mohan, 2015).
The face of academics has changed over time. In the yester years, education was form learning to earning. In this world of industrialization and globalization, education has become highly commercial and academic excellence has gained through tough competitions (Woolfolk, 2001).
Working with toppers in academics and sports, Shooters, Tennis Players, Young Footballers and college athletes the research group found that Personality, Internal Motivation, Anxiety reduction play an important role. The present symposium involving Jitendra Mohan, Puja Kakkar, Guneet Inder Jit Kaur, Akanksha Tripathi and Shruti Shourie aims to develop a dialogue to emphasize the fact the sport performance can be enhanced with appropriate personality interventions and coaching techniques. Keywords: excellence, sport, academics, achievement, passion A study of emotional intelligence and coping with stress among young tennis players Puja Kakkar (Antioch University Seattle, U.S.A.) Young players confront stress as much as adult players.
It becomes very significant for the coach and the parent to help them to cope with it successfully. The Emotional Intelligence training makes them handle it better. In this study two groups of young players (25 each) were included.
The experimental group was given training of Emotional Intelligence for two weeks. The impact of Emotional Intelligence training proved to be helpful in coping with stress and for enhancing performance. The results and their implication will be discussed to develop strategies for enhancing performance of young players.
Keywords: stress, emotional intelligence, performance enhancement Excellence in sports and academics Dr. Guneet Inder Jit Kaur.(Assistant Professor, Department of Psychology, Jain University, Bangalore, India) Excellence has been a well documented in India. In the past, mentors (gurus) helped disciples attain the pinnacle of expertise and trained them both physically and mentally.
Training being imparted was based on the knowledge, experience and excellence of the gurus. On the one hand Dronacharya and Arjuna can never be forgotten as being the perfect example of creditable coaching and the ultimate success. In contrast Eklavya shows the motivation, the grit and the will to learn, so very essential for any sport (Mohan, 2015).
The face of academics has changed over time. In the yester years, education was form learning to earning. In this world of industrialization and globalization, education has become highly commercial and academic excellence has 273Symposia Friday July 14th gained through tough competitions (Woolfolk, 2001).
Working with toppers in academics and sports, Shooters, Tennis Players, Young Footballers and college athletes the research group found that Personality, Internal Motivation, Anxiety reduction play an important role. The present symposium involving Jitendra Mohan, Puja Kakkar, Guneet Inder Jit Kaur, Akanksha Tripathi and Shruti Shourie aims to develop a dialogue to emphasize the fact the sport performance can be enhanced with appropriate personality interventions and coaching techniques. Keywords: excellence, sport, academics, achievement, passion Mental toughness, mindfulness, psychological skills and sportsmanship among Indian competitive athletes Dr.
Akanksha Tripathi. (M.C.M.D.A.V. College, Sector- 36, Chandigarh, India) The concept of mental toughness and mindfulness has gained profound attention from sport psychologists attempting to understand the underpinnings of success in various sports.
Their role has been documented as imperative in the use of various psychological strategies and sportsmanship of athletes in competition. Role of Mindfulness in sports performances have received paramount importance in the field, with mindfulness based interventions evolving as crucial to peak performances in sports. The present investigation will focus on tracing the relationship between mental toughness, mindfulness, psychological skills and sportsmanship orientation among 100 female athletes from various sports, competing at State and National level residing in and around the city of Chandigarh, India.
To make an assessment on the said variables, Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (Brown & Ryan, 2003) will be used to measure mindfulness, Tests of performance strategies scale will be used to measure psychological skills namely goal setting, relaxation, activation, imagery, self-talk, attentional control, emotional control, and automaticity. Multidimensional Sportspersonship Orientation Scale (Stornes & Bru, 2002) will be used to measure five different sportsmanship orientations. Athletic Coping Skills Inventory by Smith and his colleagues (1995) will be used as a measure of mental toughness which contains the 7 subscales of coping with adversity, peaking under pressure, goal setting/mental preparation, concentration, freedom from worry, confidence and achievement motivation, and coachability.
Findings of the investigation will be discussed henceforth. Keywords: mental toughness, mindfulness, psychological skills, athletes Psychological skills training program for rifle and pistol shooters to enhance their performance levels Dr. Shruti Shourie, (D.A.V.
College, Sector- 10, Chandigarh, India) All battles are won or lost in mind. In all competitive sports, mental skills along with sports related talent give the sportspersons an edge above the others. Shooting is a mental game, where acquisition of mental skills becomes an imperative in order to achieve higher.
Shooters report a lot of mental fluctuations during important competitions. The present investigation was designed to study the effect of Psychological Skills Training (PST) among 30 pistol and rifle shooters, in the age range of 17 to 28 years, whereby 15 shooters each were randomly assigned to experimental (PST) group and control group. The subjects in experimental group were given PST for 10 months which involved training the shooters of experimental group in strategies for arousal regulation and stress management, goal setting, time management, changing negative thought patterns into positive, increasing attention and vigilance, enhancing commitment and motivation and increasing self-confidence.
The study involves a pre-post experimental design. Standardized measures and tests of study variables (positive and negative mental states, motivation, emotional intelligence, generalized self- expectancy for success, self-esteem, self-efficacy, self-actualization, attention, stress, arousal, anxiety and depression) were administered to rifle and pistol shooters to obtain their comprehensive profiles before and 274Symposia Friday July 14th after PST. Analysis of data, using paired t test, indicated that the experimental group improved in comparison to the control groups and the critical role PST pays in helping the shooters tame their mental energy in the direction of enhancement of their performance.
Keywords: psychological skills training, shooting, sport performance Self-determination theory: New applications and processes of change Chair: Christopher M. Spray (Loughborough University) Self-determination theory (SDT) has been employed in a range of sport and physical activity contexts to help understand motivational processes. Building on this research agenda, the first half of this symposium focuses on basic psychological needs to help understand novel contexts for physical activity promotion and performance.
In the first presentation, qualitative data will be described that sheds light on how community gardens can represent a novel setting to promote physical activity, healthy diets and well-being. Extracts from participant interviews also reveal the significance of ‘community needs’ for individual health. Although appropriate physical activity has numerous benefits, physically demanding occupations may represent a setting where negative experiences may be prolific.
The second presentation explores this idea in more detail by studying psychological needs satisfaction and frustration within English operational firefighters. Multiple regression analyses are used to illustrate how to prevent stress and depression in physically strenuous performance environments. The symposium moves forward in the second half to study neglected processes of change in SDT-based motivational constructs.
Within the third presentation a reciprocal effects model exploring repeated-measures data obtained from young children will be described. By doing so, some assumptions associated with SDT-based physical activity interventions are questioned. Staying with children as the focus, the final presentation examines change in amotivation within physical education over an academic year.
The results of this work reveal interesting differences in peer and teacher influences on children’s lack of motivation for physical education. Overall, the topics presented in the symposium aim to inspire original thinking in applications of SDT by identifying new contexts and mechanisms for physical activity promotion. Keywords: motivation, self-determination theory, health and well-being, physical activity Sowing the seeds: Exploring the potential role of community gardens in promoting individual and community needs and well-being Eleanor Quested, Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani, Hannah Uren, Sarah J.
Hardcastle (Curtin University), Richard M. Ryan (Australian Catholic University) Community gardens have been associated with a number of positive outcomes, including community and individual health and well-being. This study applied self-determination theory as a framework to explore the social-psychological characteristics that may determine the role of community gardens in promoting and sustaining need satisfaction and well-being among individuals.
The potential role of community gardens as a platform to promote health behaviours such as physical activity and healthy eating were also explored. Semi- structured face-to-face in interviews were conducted with five community garden managers and ten aspiring community gardeners. Data were analyzed via a framework approach to thematic analysis.
Findings support eudaimonic perspectives of well-being and the proposition that satisfaction of community level needs may be the precursor to communities and individuals experiencing well-being, as a function of community gardens. Findings have implications for how community-based interventions could be optimized via targeted integration of theories of motivation and perspectives of well-being. 275Symposia Friday July 14th Extinguishing the stress from firefighting: Psychological need satisfaction and frustration uniquely predict stress and depression in English operational firefighters Peter C.
Rouse, Philip Turner, Andrew Siddall, Martyn Standage, James L.J. Bilzon (University of Bath) Firefighting is a physically active and demanding vocation that is accompanied by stress and compromised mental wellbeing. Understanding the mechanisms that may contribute to, or provide protection against, these negative vocational consequences is important for the health and wellbeing of members of this emergency service.
Operational firefighters (N = 2236; 91% male; M age = 42.16 ±7.8) completed an online questionnaire assessing psychological need satisfaction, stress and depression. Multiple hierarchical regression analyses tested the role of need satisfaction and frustration in predicting stress and depression among firefighters. Results revealed satisfaction of the needs for autonomy, competence and relatedness negatively predicted stress, explaining 16% of the variance.
Frustration of the needs explained an additional 14% of the variance. Positive and significant relationships were observed for the frustration of autonomy, competence and relatedness. With regard to depression, autonomy, competence and relatedness need satisfaction were all significant negative predictors, explaining 28% variance.
On the other hand, autonomy, competence and relatedness frustration positively predicted depression explaining an additional 11% variance. Consonant with the tenets of SDT, basic need satisfaction and frustration make unique and significant contributions to the stress and depressive symptoms experienced by firefighters. Satisfaction of the basic psychological needs, in particularly autonomy, is associated with a buffering against stress and depression.
In contrast, when firefighters perceived their needs to be frustrated at work, increases in stress and depression are associated. These results indicate that fostering need satisfaction as well as minimising need frustration could help extinguish stress and depression in this physically demanding vocation. Future research should identify the antecedents of firefighters' perceptions of need satisfaction and frustration.
Reciprocal effects of motivation in physical education and self-reported physical activity Ian Taylor (Loughborough University) Children’s motivation towards Physical Education (PE) classes has been highlighted as an important mechanism for the development of healthy physical activity behaviour. The present study scrutinized this statement by testing whether self-reported school and leisure-time physical activity have a reciprocal relationship with PE-based motivational regulations described by self-determination theory. Participants were 635 11- and 12-year-old school children from the United Kingdom.
A cross-lagged longitudinal design over two time points was employed. Study hypotheses were analyzed using latent factor reciprocal effects models. Temporal invariance of study measures was supported.
Data revealed positive relationships between both types of physical activity and subsequent changes in autonomous motivation in PE. However, there was no evidence that autonomous motivation in PE predicted changes in physical activity. No relationships were observed in either direction involving introjected regulation.
Theoretically agreeable associations between external regulation and changes in physical activity were observed, but no reverse relationships. Both types of physical activity behavior were negatively associated with changes in amotivation in PE, but contrary to predictions, amotivation in PE was positively associated with changes in leisure-time physical activity. Physical activity behaviour may help children internalize reasons for partaking in PE and foster self-determination.
However, the widespread theory that self-determined PE motives can sustain and promote physical activity behaviour was not convincingly demonstrated. Antecedents of change in amotivation toward physical education across a school year Christopher M. Spray, Rachel M.
Jackson-Kersey (Loughborough University) 276Symposia Friday July 14th Relatively little research has sought to examine the development of multifaceted amotivation in Physical Education (PE) over time. Thus, the present study examined change in dimensions of amotivation across a number of different activities over a school year in PE, and assessed the predictive utility of students’ perceptions of teachers’ psychological need support and peer motivational climate in accounting for change. Data were collected across six consecutive units of work during one academic year.
Units of work consisted of gymnastics, netball, dance, swimming, tennis, and athletics. A total of 61 female students (M age = 11.5 years, SD = 0.86) from an independent secondary school in south-east England completed a questionnaire at the end of each activity. One-way repeated measures ANOVAs revealed that students felt more deficient in their ability and effort beliefs and valued the task less in gymnastics compared to other activities.
Multilevel modelling analyses showed that all three types of perceived need support from the teacher negatively predicted student deficiency in effort beliefs and unappealing task characteristics at the start of the study. Over time, perceived competence support negatively predicted insufficient task value and unappealing task characteristics, whereas perceived autonomy support negatively predicted deficiency in ability beliefs and insufficient task value. With respect to perceived peer climate, emphasis on peer improvement negatively predicted deficiency in effort beliefs, insufficient task value and unappealing task characteristics over the course of the year.
Overall, these findings point toward the importance of perceived teacher need support and peer task-involving climate in helping to prevent the development of facets of amotivation in PE. Advances in psychology applied to adapted physical activity and sport Chair: Jordi Segura (Universitat Ramon Llull) Inclusion in sport is over. The importance of applying sport psychology to the adapted physical activity and sport is increasing.
In this symposium we propose to make a review over these topics, starting with the presentation of five research and intervention projects. The presentations approach different areas of psychological and psychosocial knowledge: physical activity, quality in Paralympics sport services, quality of life of handicapped athletes, Athlete’s Self-Concept and Coaching behavior. However, we also refer several kinds of disabilities: physical handicaps, mental diseases, intellectual disability and visual disabilities.
The symposium meets two goals: to offer advances in psychology applied to adapted physical activities and sport, and to allow a group discussion between the speakers and the audience, in order to explore new perspectives for the next years. The speakers embrace different experiences in the sport field and in the applied research of adapted physical activity and sport, coming from different universities of several regions and countries: Maria.Carbó, Joan Guardia & Climent Giné (Universitat Ramon LLull; Universitat de Barcelona). Physical activity, Intellectual disability and Qualitiy of life.
Félix Guillén & Ángela Urrea (University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain; University Institution of Envigado, Colombia). The Physical Self-Concept in colombian athletes with Visual disabilities. Marit Sørensen & Frank Abrahamsen (The Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, Oslo).
Quality in sport psychology services for paralympic athletes: what is required, and why? M.Evangelina Tribolo & M.Luisa Gennari (Universitá Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan). Mental disease and Sport.
Jordi Segura & Marian Arévalo (Universitat Ramon LLull, Barcelona). Coaching behavior and leadership psychological skills with physical disabled athletes. Keywords: disabilities, paralympic athletes, coaching behavior, psychological topics, quality of life, psychology services Physical activity, intellectual disability and quality of life Maria Carbó-Carreté (Universitat Ramon Llull), Joan Guàrdia-Olmos (Universitat de Barcelona), Climent Giné- Giné (Universitat Ramon Llull) 277Symposia Friday July 14th We present a study in order to identify what impact of the practice of physical activity and sport on the quality of life of people with intellectual disabilities.
An Spanish adaptation of the Personal Outcome Scale (van Loon et al., 2008; Carbó-Carreté, & Giné, 2016) is used. 529 adult people with intellectual disability, 462 members of their family and 522 reference professionals were interviewed. Results offers useful knowledge about how to identify the support needs and how to design and implement the strategies for facilitating a person's physical activity, for increase quality of life in adults with intellectual disability, in their community.
Keywords: quality of life, intellectual disability The Physical Self-Concept in Colombian athletes with visual disabilities Félix Guillén (University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain), Ángela Urrea (University Institution of Envigado, Colombia) The self-concept is one of the most relevant aspects for the personal well-being, therefore, many behavioral aspects are related to this variable, including sports, which found the beneficial effect that produces on this activity in several studies (Alferman and Stoll, 2000; Moreno, Cervelló and Moreno, 2008). In the same way, found the special relevance during adolescence because of important cognitive, physical and social changes occurring at this stage (Harter, 2012). Physical self-concept undergoes a course of evolutionary development internally differentiated in various domains (Goñi, Ruiz de Azúa and Rodríguez, 2004) including gender, age, the frequency and the type of sport or (Goñi, Ruiz de Azúa and Rodríguez, 2004) body mass index.
The exposed above, arises the interest to investigate this variable in 210 Colombian athletes with visual impairment, between 18 and 62 years who were given the scale of physical self-concept (PSPP) (Fox and Corbin, 1989). The results allowed to check on practiced sport (individual, team and chess), significant differences in the subscales of physical condition (F = 13.141; p < .000); Appearance (F = 4.813; p < .009) and perceived competence (F = 3.704; p < .026). Similarly found significant differences in terms of the type of deficiency (total or partial) in three items.
The data suggest that interventions can be generated with athletes who are team sports to strengthen or empower physical self-concept. As regards the type of deficiency, can act with those who have total disability, as the Hare and Hare (1977) the self-concept of the participants with visual impairments could be adversely affected because they cannot fully experience a situation, given his visual impairment, in addition to not having a point of comparison with other subjects. Keywords: physical self-concept, visual disability Quality in sport psychology services for paralympic athletes: what is required, and why?
Marit Sørensen, Frank Abrahamsen (Norwegian School of Sport Sciences) Compared to sport psychology literature on elite athletes participating in the Olympic Games, the literature on service delivery to disability sport athletes participating in Paralympic Games may be considered sparse, even if it has received growing attention in recent years. Building on existing literature, some empirical data from the Paralympic winter games in 2010, and the broad experience of the second author as the consultant for the Norwegian athletes of several Paralympic Games (2006, 2008, 2010,2012), the presenters will share some ideas to consider in order to find answers to the question in the title. Some of the experiences with Paralympic athletes are related to the professionalism of both the athletes and their staff; generally, the Paralympic athletes are very similar to Olympic athletes.
Some important differences do exist however. Often Paralympians are well prepared for external distractions as they happen frequently (i.e. lost/damaged personal equipment during travel/flights).
Sometimes the support staff is well-versed with Paralympic athletes, but need extra training to be prepared for the "big" game, as Paralympic Games are often a lot more cumbersome than 278Symposia Friday July 14th they are used to (i.e. media training, doping tests, and Paralympic team issues). To conclude we will present briefly the outline of the new Norwegian coach education with a specialisation in disability sport.
Keywords: psychology services, paralympic athletes Mental disease and sport M.Evangelina Tribolo, M.Luisa Gennari (Universitá Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, MIlano) According to the World Health Organisation (Action Plan 2013-2020) mental illness affects up to 25% of the European population every year. In 1978 the Italian government passed a law (Legge Basaglia180), resulting in the closure of all mental health institutions and replacing them with public mental health services with the aim of reintegrating patients back into the community. The value of sport as a mechanism to aid psycho- physical wellbeing and social inclusion has always been well known.
Notwithstanding this, there has been a scarcity of scientific literature, in terms of solid theories to prove it. This report intends to present data collected during the SportivaMente project which monitored and evaluated people with psychological disabilities who were under the care of, or associated with, the Mental Health Services in the territory of Milan. The project’s objective involved facilitating both psycho-physical wellbeing and social inclusion through three specific sporting activities as therapeutic and rehabilitative “instruments”, namely; gymnastics, swimming and football.
The purpose of the research was to evaluate a sample group of 55 of 71 participants (40 males and 15 females with a median age of 39) as well as to conduct interviews and group discussions involving the health workers and sports instructors. The evaluation of the participants was judged using three indicators: socialisation, motor skills, and emotional management. The instruments used to collect data at different stages and involving all parties were, presentation grids, observation grids, interviews, self-reporting questionnaires and group discussions.
This report presents the principal outcomes of the project summarised in the following three forms: Determination of an hypothesis detailing the intervention for persons with mental health issues via sport. Definition of an hypothesis detailing the participating evaluation of all involved parties for such an intervention. Development.
Keywords: sport, mental disease, social inclusion, psycho-physical wellbeing Psychological abilities and skills in coaches of disabled athletes Jordi Segura, Marian Arevalo (Universitat Ramon Llull) The coach’s role is important for training athletes and in some sports it is also important for the competition, especially in team sports. The psychological profiles of the handicapped athletes may vary depending on the type of disability. Coaches need to adapt themselves to the necessities of their athletes (Segura, 2016).
We present the results of two investigations about the psychological skills of the coaches of handicapped athletes. In the first study we compare the motivation, commitment and values of coaches and swimmers of the paralympic swimming (Arévalo, 2017). It has been interviewed 23 coaches and 77 Spanish swimmers that have answered the questionnaires about values (CVS of Schwartz y Bilsky, 1990), sport motivation questionnaires (SSM of Pelletier et al., 1995; MPAM-R of Ryan et al., 1997) and the commitment to sport (SCQ of Scanlan et al., 1993).
The results show that the age influences the differences in commitment and reasons for participation, the type of motivational orientation and the scales of the values of both groups. Therefore, as the age of the swimmers increases there is more difference in the sport commitment. For the second study (Segura, 2017), which has been created from a role perspective, has been used a qualitative method.
Up to seven different high performance technicians have been interviewed: wheelchair sports, blind sports, cerebral palsy and mental disability. The purpose of this study has been to identify the psychological needs of their athletes and the abilities of leadership that they may think their athletes need. The results show that the coaches must have the same abilities of leadership than the rest of coaches, along with other 279Symposia Friday July 14th complementary skills in order to be able to help handicapped athletes: emotional management, communication, group relationships and conflict resolution, as well as knowledge about the psychological characteristics of the disabilities.
Keywords: coaching abilities, motivation, commitment, disabled athletes The psychological approach to school physical education and competitive sports in a Korean perspective Chair: Jin Hwang (ChonBuk National University) It is well known that physical education and sports are one of the most critical area not only to set up pedagogical model, but also to improve performance capabilities. However, the specific contents of the academic approach have not been fully understood. In this regard, a large number of Korean studies have indicated that teachers and coaches’ behavior and athletes’ personality are significantly associated with various psychological variables.
Although much information on physical education and sports and its related psychological factors has been frequently published in the Western countries, the same level of studies carried out in Korea is limited. Recently, an increasing effort has been paid to aim at identifying the broad range of psychological variables of physical education and sports in Korea. The current symposium tries to introduce various research outcomes carried out by different research area.
Therefore, I am sure that this symposium will be a very meaningful academic bridge to connect Korean and Western scholars. Keywords: Korean, school physical activity, athletic behavior, sport psychology A cross-validity of the athletic identity measurement scale for Korean athletes Jung Gil Park (Seowon University) The purpose of the current study was to examine the psychometric properties of the Korean version of the Athletic Identity Measurement Scale (KAIMS). The 21-item KAIMS for Korean athletes assesses five dimensions: self-identity, social identity, exclusivity, positive affectivity, and negative affectivity.
Participants were 574 adolescents and collegiate athletes (409 males, 165 females), ranging in age from 13 to 23 (M=17.42 years). The analyses proceeded in two phases. First, structural equation modeling was used to test the proposed measurement model in sample 1.
Second, multi-group analysis across grades (adolescents vs collegiate athletes) was used to cross-validate the final model. Confirmatory factor analysis using SPSS 21 supported the 5-factor structure ( = 1248.15, df=179, Q=6.97, TLI=.913, CFI=.944, RMSEA=.076). This model demonstrated tight cross-validity in a separate sample of adolescents and collegiate athletes.
Invariance of the scale between adolescent and collegiate athletes was not supported ( =35.70, df=16, p=.003). Properties for future evaluations of the KAIMS include examining the invariance of the model in other population and extending evidence for the reliability and validity of score interpretation. Keywords: athletic identity, scale development Relationship between parent interaction and athletic identity among badminton players Jihyun Sung (Korea National Sport University), Seunghyun Hwang (Korea Institute of Sport Science) The purpose of this study was to investigate how athletic identity of badminton players is developed by interaction with their parents, depending on the parents’ Badminton background (i.
e., former badminton players). To examine the relationship, the data on athletic identity, perceived interaction with their parents, and demographics was collected from 249 high-school, college and semi-pro Badminton players registered in 280Symposia Friday July 14th Korea Badminton Association in 2016. In results, there is a significant difference in athletic identity.
Higher status players had a high level of athletic identity, however parent interaction showed no significance by the players’ performance level. Second, parent interaction and athletic identity in badminton family was higher than parent without Badminton background. Third, we found that parent interaction significantly affected social identity development.
Family love was a significant contributor of the social identity in Badminton family, while overall support and parental obsession were higher contributors in the other group who had no badminton family. In the significant relationship between parent interaction and negative emotion, communication significantly influenced uniqueness in Badminton family, while family love and parental obsession influenced in the other group. Also, we found a significantly relationship between parental interaction and athletic identity development.
General support and parental obsession in Badminton family, and family love and general support in the other group affected the identity development. These results imply that parent support and interaction are key factors of athletic development. Keywords: badminton, parent interaction, athletic identity, badminton player family The cross-cultural understanding on counterfactual thinking between korean and chinese elite swimmers Jin Hwang, Chen Gong, Seung-Hun Kim (ChonBuk National University), Bin Seo (NorthEast Dianli University), Hai-Feng Guo (Henan University of Science and Technology) The purpose of this study was to investigate the following questions: First of all, what is the awareness of the function of counterfactual thinking to elite swimming athletes in Korea and China, respectively?
Second, Is there any difference in the counterfactual thinking between them? The semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted with 4 Korean and 4 Chinese 18-to-24-year-old elite swimming athletes. The interviews were recorded and transcribed.
Transcripts of the interviews were analyzed inductively using qualitative content analysis based on the Patton(2000). Study 1 results are as follows. Both nations’ swimmers regarded counterfactual thinking as a multidimensional regret emotion and all athletes’ counterfactual thinking appeared to be a complex interaction of cognitive strategy and emotional satisfaction from failure experience.
All swimmers used more up-ward counterfactual thinking than down-ward counterfactual thinking. Study 2 results are as follows. First, Chinese swimmers showed a tendency to be satisfied with the competition result.
Second, both nations’ swimmers stated that they mostly regret in the practice and competition situations. Third, while Korean swimmers showed ego-oriented upward counterfactual thinking after the competition (e.g. “If only I had practiced more before the competition) and expressed more complaints about coach’s strategy, personnel allotment, Chinese swimmers examined themselves and tried to feel satisfaction rather than regretting about the bad result.
The result of this study is expected to give the intervention strategy for applying to Korean and Chinese Sports Teams. Keywords: Korean, Chinese, elite swimmers, counterfactual thinking The effect of coach-player interaction on sport passion among badminton players Dongkeun Lee, Duksun Chang (Korea National Sport University), Seunghyun Hwang (Korea Institute of Sport Science) This study examined the relationship between coach-player interaction and sport passion among badminton players. A questionnaire on coach-player interaction, sport passion, and demographics was administered to 461 badminton players at various level.
For data analysis, t-test, one-way ANOVA, correlation analysis and regression analysis were performed using SPSS 20.0. First, compared to female players, males showed significantly higher in know-how and communication in coach-player interaction, and flow and vitality in sport passion. High school players were significantly higher than college and semi-pro players in know-how, 281Symposia Friday July 14th communication, and belief in coach-player interaction, while sport passion was not found by players’ playing level.
According to training type, systematic training style showed higher in know-how, communication, belief, encouragement, and technical instruction in coach-player interaction, and commitment and flow in sport passion. In addition to the group difference, Commitment in sport passion was found as a significant contributor of encouragement, belief, and communication. Vitality had a significant influence on communication, know-how, belief, and technical instruction in coach-player interaction.
These results imply that coach-player interaction plays a key role in developing sport passion of elite players. Keywords: coach-player interaction, sport passion, badminton players The relationship between teaching and emotions in physical education lesson from the perspective of elementary school teachers Seang-leol Yoo (Gyeongin National University of Education) The research was aimed to investigate how physical education teachers think about emotions in their students, including their beliefs about emotions and what they see as the most influential factors in students' successful performance in their physical education lesson. Twenty elementary school physical education teachers (9 female and 11 male) participated in the study and were asked about the relationship between teaching and emotions in their physical education lesson.
Their mean teaching experience was 11.86 year (+4.05). In-depth interview, focus group interview, and review of literature were employed to get data. Five other teachers who did not participate in the main research were asked about the same questions to validate the data found in the research.
This data matched to the research results found in this research. Data were analyzed thematically by two researchers. Seven emerging statements emerged: (1) Emotions are critically important in most behaviors in physical education class; (2) Emotions are cornerstone in building and sustaining relationships with others; (3) Positive and negative emotions contribute to academic performance in physical education class; (4) Students' self-confidence and task values are deeply related to emotions; (5) Teachers can help students to regulate emotions using relaxation, reappraisal, competence development, and situational change; (6) Teacher's instruction style and emotions have relationship to students' emotions and motivation; (7) Different achievement goals contribute to students' emotions.
Physical education teachers can make use of students’ varying emotional reactions by identifying the specific tasks and situations that result in them enjoying lessons and help students build their capacity for experiencing positive emotions. Keywords: emotions, physical education, self-confidence, achievement goals The role of sport psychologists in football academies Chair: Raimundo de las Heras (C.E.Constància) Nowadays there are a lot of Sport Psychologists working in football academies, through our work we complement tactical, technical and physical abilities that athletes develop in their training sessions and matches. Even though each psychology department has different possibilities the final goals are the same: develop values in young athletes (Torregrosa y Lee, 2000), to improve mental skills, optimize performance, develop talent (Larsen, Alfermann, y Christensen, 2012), percieve three basic needs and prevent people from giving up the sport (Deci y Ryan, 2000).
To get these goals in academies the sport psychologist usually works directly with players but especially indirectly with coaches and parents because their influence on athletes is enormous (Sousa, Cruz, Torregosa, Vilches y Viladrich, 2006; Smith y Smoll, 2009) In this symposium we will talk about the way to improve mental skills in football during a match or a training session using the model of Soxna Evergrande football academy. How to introduce values in a game model as Levante U.D. does.
How the Sport Psychology department at C.E.Constància works with parent and coaches. What are the most important 282Symposia Friday July 14th resources used at R.C.D. Espanyol during an interview with a coach or an athlete.
And the importance of developing talent program at A.C.Bilbao. Keywords: sport psychologist, football academies, values, performance, awareness, developing talent, parents, coaches, players Cultural integration of Chinese football players in Spain Marta Soler (Soxna Evergrande football academy) In 2014, the biggest football school in the world, called Evergrande Football School which is situated in Guangzhou (China) decided to work in an ambitious Project with an Spanish company called Soxna. This work is based in the experience but considering scientific studies like this one from (Stanvulova, 2009) that explain the development of the players in a context of sport, academic and cultural domains.
The participants are 75 players from all the parts of China, between 13 and 16 years old who are living in Spain for 3 years. The methodology consist on an individual interview with several pictures about different circumstances of their daily life: different food, new language, living far away from home, school, residence, matches, coaches… This way I could detect the more interesting areas for them and the ones where they have more difficulties. After that we talk all together the coaches and the office boss to work through the best way to help them to get used to the new life.
The intervention is about exchanging knowledge about their culture so they do also tell us about their festivities, habits and customs. They learn how to cook Spanish food, and how to make spanish friends. But one of the most important things is that they learn how to play spanish football.
in the way that coming from an individual and hierarchical civilization is very difficult to learn how to play a team sport like football. The results at the time of two years Project is that the two teams that have played the national Chinese tournament have achieved sub champion position. Keywords: ambitious project,mental skills, cultural integration, football Learning football through creating a game model based on values David Llopis (Levante U.D.) This communication will try to base at theoretical-practical level that the psychological skills of footballers during a match are affected positively or negatively by the game model developed by the team, depending on whether or not that model connects with their values.
The values that connect the team are their values and represent the identity that the team wants to transmit. Thus, the closer the model of equipment to the values that the team wants to move the more connected the player will find the game. The methodology that is being used in the LEVANTE UD Football Academy will be presented to bring the game model closer to the identity chosen by each team, through the values that identify each team.
In this study participated sixty under 13s players belonging to four football teams of the LEVANTE U.D. Football Academy as well as their coaches. The results show that values can be developed on a football team by connecting them to the game model.
From this experience, some important implications for the development of values in sport are described. Keywords: psychological skills, values, identity, game model, team Working with the pillars in C.E.Constància Raimundo de las Heras Coll (C.E.Constància) The environment in the football academies is made up of three main groups: coaches, parents and players. We work with each of these groups separately or together to go in the same direction.
We can’t forget that sport alone doesn’t teach anything specific because it depends on the different people who are involved. 283Symposia Friday July 14th Coaches and parents are the pillars of this process and in this communication we will explain how we try to improve their awareness of their role in the teaching of values and in the emotional management of the children in competitions and in their daily lives. The way to do this is different for each group and we use different methods but the final goal is the same: to improve the psychological wellbeing, optimize performance and prevent people from giving up the sport.
Apart from this, working with players individually is useful and how to decide which players to work with is important in our case because we can’t work individually with everybody. The results show that the work with parents and coaches is a way to develop psychological aspects in the football academies. In addition this approach has promoted the acceptance of the figure of sport psychologist in the club, this Sport Psychology Department exists since 2003 working each season.
(Villalonga, Garcia Mas, de las Heras, Buceta y Smith, 2015) Keywords: football academies, coaches, parents, players, awareness The interview as a tool to work Jaume Sabaté (R.C.D.Espanyol) In R.C.D. Espanyol one of the principal functions the Phycology department has is working with coaches and athletes. The goal of this kind of interventions is to improve the performance.
Usually coaches or athletes hope that a Sport Psychologist can solve their problems. If we don’t satisfy these expectations they can lose their confidence in our job and with us. What can we do to show that we are the right people to help them?
When we talk about psychology work with coaches and athletes we are focused in the techniques that we use, but not always the problem is what the person do. We should try that coaches and players discover how to solve the situation for themselves. The interview can be a good tool to teach them these resources.
However, what is important to be successful in this kind of interviews? Keywords: the interview as a tool to work When we talk about developing talent, what are we talking about? Maria Ruiz (Athletic Club de Bilbao) One of the most difficult tasks as coaches is to help players to grow both professionally and personally, because: 1.
When we go to work in a high performance club where the focus is the development of talent, we can not start thinking that with our experience as players or as coaches that is enough. Developing talent compels me to go beyond my competence. It demands much more than what we know.
2. The development of talent is something unfinished. If we feel experts in condition we are limiting the development of the player.
Because then I will be working from the idea that I know everything and therefore I'll teach you. 3. Developing talent is a collective task.
Sometimes, there is a coach or a director who has a long-term vision to develop players. However, the development of talent is something deeper, is a macro encompassing reflection in within organization. 4.
In the development of talent there are no shortcuts, it is a long and mostly through self journey. If you want a real change, we must choose the hard way. Because there are no shortcuts in this trip, this is refer to magic solutions, motivational videos, slogans, quickfix solutions...
Often this involves the transformation of the culture of a football club and it first go through personal transformation. Regarding environment changes, we should first start changing ourselves. What it really develops the potential of people is Interaction, in this case the interaction between Players and Coaches.
And that means, that the more development the coach has the higher quality interactions with the players will take place. Because within this interaction is where learning emerges. The power of coaches is held on their knowledge, in the efficiency on their relationships and on their taking mature actions in the training session and competition.
Keywords: coaches, players, developing talent, collective task 284Symposia Friday July 14th Symposia Session 9. (10.30-12) Psychological intervention with parents and coaches of young athletes Chair: Fernando Gimeno Marco (Zaragoza University) The characteristics and consequences study in parents and coaches interaction, as well as the appropriate psychological interventions to improve this interaction, has been one of the Sport Psychology research lines that has undergone a significant development in the last decades. This symposium presents several studies about motivation, expectations and perceptions of parents and coaches, their consequences on young athletes such as sport drop out, as well as interventions aimed to prevent risk behaviors in young athletes (e.g.
antisocial and unsportsmanlike behaviors, drug use) through their coaches and parents as prevention agents. Keyrords: coaches, parents, young athletes, motivation, expectations, risk behaviors, sport drop out Drug use and unsportsmanlike behaviors integrated prevention with young athletes through coaches and parents Fernando Gimeno Marco (Zaragoza University), Héctor Gutiérrez (San Jorge University), Alfredo Sáenz (País Vasco University), David Lacambra (Aragon Tennis Federation), Patricia Villanueva (Sport psychologist), María Jiménez (Sport psychologist), Carlos Peñarrubia (Zaragoza University), Óscar Saura (Sport psychologist), Milagros Ezquerro (La Coruña University) Tobacco and use drugs in young athletes is an important health problem and it’s associated with antisocial behavior, particularly with unsportsmanlike and violent behavior. For this reason, the study of their prevalence and the "integrated prevention" of these risk behaviors with the involvement of coaches and parents it’s of particular importance.
Participants were 171 coaches from soccer teams grassroots (players between 14 and 17 years old), with at least the coach basic certification and one year of experience. All of them completed a survey informing about their experience with athletes who used drugs. 50% had in their team athletes who used drugs; and of this group, 38% took some action to prevent drug use.
7% of athletes who used drugs their coaches reported that they also had antisocial and unsportsmanlike behavior. The prevention strategies used by this group of coaches emphasize communication with athletes parents', and another direct actions with the athletes who used drugs and the team. This study show the important contribution of coaches to the risk behaviors prevention with young people (drug consumption and unsportsmanlike behavior), but also the need to train with them social skills to manage the interaction between athletes and their parents.
Influence of parents and coaches in developing comprehensive youth athletes Montserrat Vallejo (Sport psychologist) Many young athletes fail to develop their full potential by the absence of proper planning of your progression as athletes and as people. This lack of foresight leads us to find cases of young talents who pointed a promising future and who leave early, not by lack of qualities but because their sports or family environment has not been able to provide the stability needed to properly address every stage of the learning process necessary in the infant sport of competition. These athletes, are doomed to premature abandonment, being the main cause the continuous excessive demand for sports or family environment, focused primarily on objectives of short-term outcome, without better planning or vision of the future that the here and the now, to remain among the best in its category, regardless of priority aspects such as adequate learning skills or emotional stability, that allows them to have a good psychological functioning.
This excessive and inadequate demand by the sports or family environment, causes that young athletes should feel unable to properly handle 285Symposia Friday July 14th the stress inherent in the competition, to receive an evaluation focused exclusively on the results achieved, preventing them from developing the perception of control needed to be able to assimilate the victories and defeats in a balanced and constructive. In this work we review the latest research carried out, exposing the reasons causing the premature abandonment in young athletes and the intervention that we must carry out to prevent and avoid such abandonment. Keywords: sport children, abandonment, parents, trainers, objectives, psychological intervention Perception about the parents of young athletes: Results of a survey José María Buceta Andrés López , Mª Carmen Pérez-Llantada (UNED University), Cristina Fink (Mexican Olympic Committee), Montserrat Vallejo (Sport psychologist) With the aim of obtaining information about the perception that we have of the parents of young athletes, it conducted a survey between the months of February and April 2014.
After a first pilot trial, involving 212 people with training in sports psychology, were drawn up the final versions of the survey in English and Spanish. Both versions were accessible via the internet, and were disseminated through social networks and e-mail. Those interested answered online of way anonymous.
The survey included 31 statements related to the behavior of the parents of young athletes and their environment, with four answer options to express the degree of agreement/disagreement with each one of them. The statements were grouped into six categories: support parents to athletes, information/expectations of parents, communication/cooperation of parents with coaches and others, emotional Parental Control, parents pressure their athletic children, comparison between fathers and mothers, The total sample was of 1506 people composed by: parents of athletes (553), coaches (481), psychologists of sport (101), productivity (67) sports, umpires (63), spectators (37) and others (239). Is made an analysis in each an of the categories describing is the results for each an of them.
Keywords: young sportsmen, parents of athletes, sport psychology Study on the motivation of the parents of athletes José María Buceta), Andrés López, Mª Carmen Pérez-Llantada (UNED University), Montserrat Vallejo (Sport psychologist), Margarita Cerviño (Sport psychologist) What are the reasons why the parents want their children to practice sport? Surely there is more than one; and it is very likely that the main reason why go changing depending on the circumstances which are present throughout the sporting career of the boys at each time. In order to better understand these reasons, we elaborate a questionnaire of motivation that in Spain and Mexico, completed mothers and fathers of young athletes whose only connection with the sport was that.
Parents of athletes who also develop features such as managers, coaches, referees, sport psychologists or other they did not participate. 259 of young sportsmen, of which 166 are mothers (64%) and 93 parents participated in the study (35%) with a mean age of 42,75 years. The questionnaire consists of 35 items.
Parents must respond to the statement "what motivates my son does sport is..." indicating their degree of motivation by using a scale of 0 to 10. The items are grouped into seven categories of reasons: enjoyment of the son, health/safety, personal growth, socialization, sporting success, share with the ego of the father and the son. Data analysis compared the average scores of participants depending on the different variables considered: parents; Spain / Mexico; They have made sport/not have made sport; the son is girl/boy; 9anos/10-14años/15/18 years; individual Sport / Sport Group; level sporting son, according to the parents appreciation, low/medium/high.
The results confirm that the motivation of the parents of young athletes is a fundamental factor to allow these to do sport. Keywords: young athletes, parents of athletes, motivation, psychology of sport 286Symposia Friday July 14th The importance of expectations in training stages of athletes Icíar Eraña (European University) Despite advances in the last 30 years in sport psychology training, when we are working in the training stages of an athlete, there is still great confusion about the purpose and the way of applying psychology. Every time you start before to practice sports, being the parents who decide many aspects and those that accompany the competitions.
In team sports, the coach makes many decisions and it is not always oriented towards the integral development of each player. In individual sports, the development of a player is not only to plan training for the development of physical or technical characteristics, but to have a good orientation towards competition, respect the times, adjust expectations and communicate and team work with parents as well as with the players. That is, to favor a social and emotional context that supports the load that the competition entails, as well as guarantee a good development of psychological abilities, that they serve, besides for his sport race for the rest of his life.
This, when one of the goals of the technician is to keep that job, is very complex. Hence, the application of psychology in the beginning and formation must be more focused on preventing and guaranteeing a good development context rather than intervening on a specific variable, which is most often conditioned by the context itself Of the player. Taking into account the results of previous studies on grounds for abandonment (Cervelló, 2002); The importance of the perception of personal ability in the onset of burnout (Gould and Weinberg, 1996); The impact of having realistic expectations about one's own performance and a good social and family context (Raedeke, Lunney and Venables, 2002).
Keywords: expectations, self- steem, burnout Applications of football psychology: proposals and experiences Chair: Santiago Rivera Matiz (Centro Excelentia) This symposium will introduce different proposals and experiences in the application of football psychology. The first work will address the coaches´ role as trainers of people, which will deepen their ability to transmit confidence, self-motivate, identify their weaknesses and be a good trainer. The second work will address the role of the physical trainer when training psychological skills through field tasks, and offers proposals to form integrated players.
The third will revolve around the creation of the sports psychology department in a professional club, and shares the experiences and challenges it faces in the academy and the professional team interventions. The fourth paper presents the psychological work carried out on a women’s team and will comment the details of the intervention, such as the psychological variables trained, the particularities of the context and the difficulties faced. Finally, the last work will deepen the concept and effective application of coaches´ leadership, taking into account the predominant models in sports psychology and the author´s experience working with coaches of all competitive levels.
In short, this symposium will offer different points of view on how to apply football psychology in different contexts, in addition to the challenges that each of them meant for the authors. Keywords: football psychology, psychological training, coach, physical trainer, leadership, female football Personal strengths of football coaches: how to shape the integral trainer Santiago Rivera Matiz (Centro Excelentia) The paper addresses the factors which relate to the development of the potential of the coach as one integral to training footballers, through the use of positive psychology (Seligman, 2000). These are weaknesses identification, credibility development, training of individuals and selfmotivation (Rivera, 2016).
It is going to be explained who we understand that is the coach and integral trainer, which should be its goals and the difficulties that he finds to avoid putting his personal interests before of those that benefit the players and 287Symposia Friday July 14th teams. Likewise, the aspects that compose each personal strength and the most relevant demographic characteristics associated with them will be detailed. Finally, suggestions on how to help to develop football coaches’ personal strengths are provided.
Keywords: sports psychology, football coach, weaknesses identification, credibility development, training of individuals, selfmotivation Development of psychological skills in specific game situations: analysis of technical performance in young players´ competition Juan Martín Tassi (Club Estudiantes de la Plata) The objective of this work is the propose how can the physical trainer use game situations during training sessions in order to incorporate psychological objectives and contents associated to individual and collective performance. The search for new training tools from the coaches along with the training and the demands of high performance, poses a complexity in young soccer players´ training. It supports and develops at the same time, questions under a glance that takes into account the importance of the psychological and social characteristics for the improvement in personal training and sports performance (Garcia, Marcos, Sánchez, Jiménez & Cervelló, 2008).
This demands, in turn, training and commitment from coaches and physical trainers in the recognition of contexts linked to the game from the psychological point of view. Record it under the glance associated with the integrated psychological development in relation to the game situations, will favour the development of strategies to be implemented during specific field-specific training tasks (Morilla y Gómez, 2009). Which are the tools that coaches and physical trainers have in both the management of psychological situations and the integrated planning?
The association and development of psychological skills in relation to game situations will have objectives on the design such as: 1) attention and concentration trained through situations in tight spaces with the manipulation of the number of companions, type of opposition, modification of rules and the use of the ball; 2) aggressiveness and competitiveness through reduced situations, in numeric equality and short performance spaces; and 3) extrinsic and intrinsic motivation through situations of competition in tasks (result indicators). Within this framework we will analyse if the training of the psychological abilities through the integrated methodology improves the technical performance of young players during the competition. Keywords: competition, performance, psychological skills, game situations Experiences in the sports psychology department of a professional football club in Colombia David Mora, Edwin Lopez (Azul y Blanco Millonarios F.C.) When the psychology department was created, since 2016 in Millonarios FC, a psychological intervention plan was established with the professional team and the academy.
The importance of strengthening player’s psychological skills consist in that they will learn how to face different transitions in their sport’s career. This allows them to establish a life project, answer properly to situations of soccer environment and context (p.e. Anxiety, stress, decision making, attention, motivation).
In order to structure the psychological skills training program, the club's history, goals, values and game identity were considered as well as player’s needs. For the professional team intervention is made developing a sports record for each player, then identifying if the intervention needs to be immediate assistance or if it will consist of an improvement of psychological tools. With the assistance, first we listen, analyze, identify the needs, feedback and monitor behavioral improvement.
In the improvement process, first the psychologist, player or coach identifies a flaw, then analysis and training is made, and finally come monitoring process. On the other hand, in the academy teams, the intervention program involves players, their parents and coaches, With players first a sports record is made, then individual 288Symposia Friday July 14th and group needs are identified and finally training workshops are taught to enrich their psychological development. This turns out into a better performance on the field.
Along with parents, through workshops, information is given in order to orientate them in their kid’s upraising as athletes; with coaches an advice is made in skills, behaviors, leadership and finally tools are provided to improve their training method. All these interventions create an environment which develops players in an integral way. The main goal is to make the psychologist role a fundamental figure in players and coaches development and performance.
Keywords: Azul y Blanco Millonarios F.C., intervention, diagnosis, academy teams, psychological training, football players Main psychological variables trained in a female heterogeneous soccer team in adverse conditions Galatea Cristaldi (SOLCPAD) The presentation is based on work done with a female soccer team belonging to the Womens Major League from the State of Mexico. In order to improve performance, the following variables were worked (Weinberg & Gould, 2007): 1) Team cohesion; 2) Communication between players and coach; 3) Coach Leadership; 4) Individual skills and abilities in handling emotions; 5) Role differentiation; and 6) Injuries. Within professional soccer economic driven motivation is an undeniable fact and must be considered when working with a team.
In the case of female soccer, where economic benefits do not exist or are low, motivation has to be focused on an individual basis, in order to efficiently work with such a team. The low support received by female soccer, a male influenced sport, (Roffe & Jozami, 2010) had been just one of the problems that we had to deal with. Adverse conditions consisted of: 1) no fix and own place to train; 2) players having to pay for the field to train; 3) long distances to train field and matches; 4) players between 13 and 30 years old; 5) personal relationships (couples and parents within team members); 6) different nationalities and languages; 7) high rotation of players within the team; and 8) problems and inconstancy train all together and individual situations with dysfunctional family environment.
According to needs detected and taking into account competences schedules, season´s goals, characteristics of players, time and facilities available, it was decided to work once a month with the team for 1 year and carry out 1 session weekly during two months before the National Competence (i.e. a total of 18 sessions). The sessions took place before and after matches and were focused on teamwork and individual players´ coach´s or staff´s situations.
A team with these heterogeneous natural forces the sport psychologist to have a high capacity of adaptation (Dosil & Garcés de Los Fayos, 2008) necessary to ensure efficiency at work. Keywords: female football, heterogeneous, psychological variables, adversity Leadership in regards to soccer coaches: performance optimization model Marcelo Roffé (SOLCPAD) There are a number of theories and approaches to describe the leader (Roffé & Riccardi, 2016). It is someone who guides, drives, motivates and communicates, he holds both empathy and firmness and based on the previous possesses followers; and soccer holds a special place among all sports, as it is considered the “king of sports”, where a large number of individuals want to make a living of it, either as a player and/or elite trainers, but few actually achieve this.
Following the theory of Bass (1985), we will work with 3 leadership approaches, the transformational, the transactional and the laissez faire. We will also include emotional intelligence (Goleman 1995) as a superior quality of every leader and the multidimensional model from Chelladurai (1980). We will choose the transformational dimension and the inspirational subdimension where the leader motivates towards achieving teams´ goals.
A session with the trainer/leader seeks to especially develop new ways to motivate. The methodology of this intervention it´s focused on the preparation of the 289Symposia Friday July 14th competition and consists of: 1) chose key words or concepts for the game according to the strategy and speech chosen; 2) select one or more videos that promote the understanding of these key words for the pre-party session and 3) write poster with texts chosen together with the leader or selected by himself to consolidate the message. They are placed in rooms, in common places and in the dressing room prior to the competition.
From that perspective and relying on a 22-year experience acquired in youth, junior and professional football, as well as elite level with teams, we will analyze observations and will look at a case that illustrates this view. We will do so both for trainers and for the teams’ captains, as well as the choice and legitimacy of these on behalf of the trainer. The case we will relate to “trainers that fail as reference”, seen on “forming the leader of a team” from Roffé & Riccardi (2016).
Keywords: football, leadership, style, coach, sport psychology Re/building sport psychology through localized approaches: An ISSP Symposium in memory of Bola Ikulayo (1948-2016) Chair: Tatiana V. Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) This symposium is organized to honor the outstanding contribution of Professor Philomena Bolaji (Bola) Ikulayo to international sport psychology and the ISSP. For many, Bola was an iconic figure who transgressed numerous gender, racial, geo-political, and other boundaries by repeatedly becoming first in her class.
She founded the Sports Psychology Association of Nigeria and became its first president in 1985, organized the master’s level course of sport psychology at the University of Lagos, became the first female chair of the Nigerian Sports Associations and the first African sport psychologist accredited at 1988 and 2000 Olympic Games. Bola was active in many international scientific and professional organizations, including serving 20 years on the ISSP Managing Council. Grounded in Bola’s visionary spirit, the presentations comprising this symposium aim to perpetuate her legacy of re/building sport psychological science that aligns with local histories, values, and cultural practices.
The first speaker is a former student of Prof Ikulayo, who will discuss the use of African indigenous dance in psychological support of Nigerian female athletes. The second presenter will provide a brief overview of Latvian sport psychology and drawing on her applied work with the football national team, will share insights of rebuilding sport psychology practices in the new context of an independent state that regained its sovereignty in 1991. The third presenter will introduce his collaborative research on pre- game rituals in Ghana, which is inspired by Bola’s pioneering work on psychological aspects of African ritualistic cultural practices.
The fourth speaker will present the educational aspects of sport psychology in Ukraine and continuous efforts of delivering quality psychological support to athletes and teams in current political climate. Our concluding discussion will draw on all four presentations to exemplify the importance of developing one’s unique localized practices. Keywords: ISSP history, cultural sport psychology, cultural praxis, emerging practices African indigenous dance as an alternative management of emotional disorders among Nigerian female athletes Athanasius Nwanegbo Amasiatu (University of Port Harcourt, Nigeria), Okonkwor Oby (Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Nigeria) Bates (1988) has defined psychological disorders as physical, mental, chemical reactions to certain negative circumstance that frighten, excite, confuse, endanger or irritate the body system of individuals’ behaviour.
The Nigerian negative disposition towards women in competitive sport coupled with unique problems of power uncertainty, inflation, dwindling economy, insecurity, tribal and religious conflicts appear to promote emotional problems. Nigerian women in sport had faced enormous challenges, which pose many 290Symposia Friday July 14th psychological problems on female athletes. Four common psychological disorders (stress, anxiety, depression and phobia) are identified in this presentation.
Alternative application of African indigenous dances has been proposed for the management of these disorders as discussed in this paper. Earlier trials of this approach with Nigerian athletes have been found to be successful. The main purpose of this paper is to identify specific causes of the psychological disorders among Nigerian female athletes and propose the use of African indigenous dance as a technique to managing the disorders.
Recommendations were made towards implementation of this approach. Keywords: African indigenous dance, female athletes, mental health, Nigeria Sport psychology in Latvia: A scientist-practitioner perspective Irina Simonenkova (Private practice, Riga, Latvia) The year 1991 when Latvia regained its independence, was also the year of establishment of national psychological science. In 2004, the Latvian Association of Sport Psychologists was founded to unite people studying sport psychology.
In the initial six years, the Association regularly organized educational seminars for psychologists, members of sport federations, trainers and athletes of various sports, and invited experts from the ex-USSR countries and also from Finland and Sweden. Latvian football clubs and the National Football Federation demonstrated a particular interest towards sport psychology. Under the UEFA and FIFA support, sport psychologists were engaged in educating and licensing Latvian football coaches.
From 2006 to 2013, the National Football team employed a permanent full-time sport psychologist. Latvian sport psychologists mainly apply methods and practices that combine European (Western) and Russian (Soviet) approaches. The key difference between these approaches lies in the interpretation of the sports psychologist’s function in the team structure; namely, the latter approach emphasized the importance of psychological follow-up service in sport, while the former one – psychological intervention.
The rationale for combining these two approaches is prompted by reality; some sports continue to use the Soviet training system for athlete preparation, as there is an obvious lack of Latvian sources in sport psychology, and adapted diagnostic tests and questionnaires. Drawing on my experience working with athletes and coaches of a Latvian Higher League football team, I will provide an overview of Latvian sport psychology over 25 years and also try to identify some factors that hinder its development. Nevertheless, professional commitment of sport psychologists, a strong interest showed by parents of young athletes, and the advent of a new generation of coaches and athletes give grounds for much optimism about the future of Latvian sports psychology.
Keywords: sport psychology, professional practice, Russian and European approaches Integrating pre-game rituals and pre-performance routines in a culture-specific context: Implications for sport psychology consultancy John Elvis Hagan Jnr, Thomas Schack (Bielefeld University, Germany) Common unorthodox pre-game rituals are prevalent in sports, especially football, in Ghana and other Sub- Saharan states. Literature on how to draw valuable insights from these superstitious rituals to optimize sport performance is sparse. This presentation highlights the conceptual differences between pre-game rituals and pre-performance routines based on scientific descriptions, empirical studies, and particular field observations.
We then present the determinants and theoretical underpinnings of these ritualistic behaviors. The main aspect of our presentation focuses on the manifestations of pre-game rituals in different forms during preparatory phases prior to competitive fixtures. We conclude by revealing how sport psychology consultancy could tap into some of these unique ritualistic cultural practices by incorporating them as part of formalized pre-performance routines.
Additionally, suggestions are made regarding possible future research using an intervention approach to empirically test the functions and efficacy of these localized practices. 291Symposia Friday July 14th Keywords: superstition, rituals, routines, ‘Jama’, efficacy, Ghana Educational aspects of sport psychology in Ukraine Georg Lozhkin (State Scientific-Research Institute of Sport, Ukraine), Andriy Kolosov (State Scientific-Research Institute of Sport, Ukraine) Applied sports psychology is one of the leading spheres of the psychological science due to its direct influence on athletes’ mind. The immediate and deep connection of psychological research with practice allows sports psychologists to maintain keen interest in their work.
At the same time, it becomes more and more clear that because contemporary sport is so intense, it is extremely difficult to sustain performance without serious study of athletes’ psychic functions and psychological qualities, virtues, and personalities. The specialized preparation of sports psychologists in Ukraine began in 1994 at the National University of Physical Education and Sports. To specialize in sport psychology, students with the bachelor degree can apply to the master’s program, after which the most successful ones continue their scientific activity at the postgraduate level.
Up to now more than 150 specialists have been prepared. One of the most successful approaches to the preparation of sports psychologists was the involvement of world class athletes in the research, permitting a summary of their sports experience by means of psychology. Moreover, these athletes (e.g., Valeriy Borzov, Sergey Bubka, Vitaliy Klitschko, Vladimir Klitschko, and Oksana Оmel’ianchik) conducted their doctoral research at the department too.
The next important task of sport psychology development is to create state certification standards for coach-psychologists, establish the practice of licensing certified persons to assure quality psychological support for athletes, and to provide the systematic organization and management of various aspects of psychological support and preparation of qualified sportsmen and sportswomen. Keywords: applied psychology, masters degree, post-graduate, coach-psychologist Updating the state of the art of the Caribbean and South American sport psychology Chair: Marcelo Roffé (SOLCPAD) The present symposium shares the path Sport Psychology has taken since its first steps in Latin America, mainly in the case of Cuba, Argentina, Mexico and Chile: to date, highlighting the institutions, associations and people who contributed to the development of said field. Future challenges and prospects are being posed.
It includes the history of the relationship between the psychology of sport and football soccer, specifically in Argentina and Mexico. PSYCHOLOGY AND FOOTBALL IN ARGENTINA: HISTORY OF A COMPLEX RELATIONSHIP Marcelo Roffé key Words. Story, soccer, Argentina, development HISTORY OF SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY IN MEXICO: FROM THE FIELD TO THE LABORATORY Claudia Rivas Keywords: History, sport psychology, Mexico, development, 4 decades.
HISTORY OF SPORT PSYCHOLOGY IN CUBA Francisco Enrique García Ucha Key Words. 35 years, Cuba, psychologists, interventions, athletes, coaches, competitions. HISTORY OF SPORT PSYCHOLOGY IN ARGENTINA Lic.
Raúl Barrios Key Words. Sport, Psychology, university, curriculum, sports, psychologist, Argentina UPDATING THE STATE OF THE ART OF THE CARIBBEAN AND SOUTH AMERICAN SPORT PSYCHOLOGY Paula Ortiz M. Key Words.
Chile, psychologist practices, university, curriculums, story Keywords: sport, psychology, Southamerica, story, present, future, challenge Psychology and football in Argentina: History of a complex relationship Marcelo Roffé (SOLCPAD) 292Symposia Friday July 14th The insertion of the psychologist in Argentina was not. The development of sports psychology had an irregular growth during many years, accelerating notably for the last few decades. To understand this process, we have to keep in mind, among other factors, the socio-economic factor and the roots and progress of the country in psychology.
It’s also important to highlight that this discipline has been developed in this South American nation almost exclusively by psychologist, without marked influences of other sport sciences like physical education, kinesiology, human movement, motor development, as it occurs in other countries (Lopez García y Garcés de Los Fayos, 2002; Weinberg y Gould, 1999). So, an investigation in 2005 estimated that it’s the country with most psychologists in the whole world, with a relationship of a psychologist on every 649 habitants (Alonso, 2005), and with a strong tradition for football, counting as one of the cities of the world with more stadiums for more than ten thousand people (36 stadiums). In this study, we’ll analyze the why’s and will make a recount of the most important works, made in the last 25 years on this sport until we get to the actual situational diagnosis, showing the slow but efficient progress son the work field on youth football as well as professional football, regardless of the observed deficits in the football-psychology relationship.
Keywords: history, soccer, youth, professionals, Argentina, development History of sport psychology in Cuba Marcelo Roffé (SOLCPAD), Claudia Rivas (ISSP, SOLCPAD, AMPDYAF), Francisco Garcia Ucha (SOLCPAD) Sports psychology comes to Cuba in 1960, as one of the first in Latinamerica with the exception of Brasil. It starts on the graduate school of physical education "Manuel Fajardo", and later on the institute of sports medicine. It had the collaboration of socialist countries.
It emerged with other sport sciences in the effort of developing and consolidating the Cuban sports movement as an additional force that contributes to ensure the educational process on the athlete, and results of the training and the competition. For more than 35 years, Cuban psychologists have participated with athletes and coaches in international and national competitions. The contributions are on the development of a model of psychological preparation for the competitions, the application of the historic and cultural focus, the results of research on motivation, emotions, self-worth, mental training, tactical thinking, use of the experimental method, precaution on the transition to retirement of the athlete, psychological rehabilitation of injuries, psychological intervention on teams, efficiency on the job of the multidisciplinary team.
It contributes to the development of the specialty on more than ten countries. Keywords: 35 years, Cuba, psychologists, interventions, athletes, coaches, competitions History of sports psychology in Mexico: From the field to the laboratory Marcelo Roffé (SOLCPAD), Claudia Rivas (ISSP, SOLCPAD, AMPDYAF) "Those who do not know their past are condemned to repeat it" (Espinosa). For good or for bad, history defines us, it sets a course, knowing the past leads us to new horizons, learning from the successes and mistakes made in that past.
As in many Latin American countries – and most of the world - the history of Sport Psychology is very recent, which allows us to get to know the actors that step by step and sometimes in a tumult, have managed to consolidate this branch of psychology in our lands. In Mexico since the late 60's attempts were made to apply principles of psychology (general and clinical) in the sports field, specifically in soccer, being until 1973 with the participation of Dr. Octavio Rivas and René Sánchez Sinencio in the Club of the first division of Pumas of the UNAM when a formal, structured and documented work in this area is achieved.
A brief tour is going to be given, of the various stages of this history that begins from the psychology of applied sports, in the field of sports, to the present moment with a better balance between research, training and the development of specialization and master programs, to the current fieldwork of Mexican sports psychologists in virtually all sports. A descriptive and anecdotal method that shows these stages their successes and the 293Symposia Friday July 14th learning they have left will be used. Four decades of psychological work in our country will be presented, as well as the current challenges.
Keywords: history, sport psychology, Mexico, development, 4 decades History of sport psychology in Argentina Raul Barrios (SOLCPAD) Sports Psychology in Argentina has developed a lot in the last 20 years, both in the insertion of Sports Psychologists in the professional field as in training spaces. Right now, we are many the psychologists that are found working, whether it is in on diverse sports academies or giving counseling to individual athletes. From the institutional field, The football clubs are the ones with bigger demand; as, to the individual counseling, there is not a sport of preference, though we could say that tennis and football are the sports in more need of a psychologist.
The insertion is given in both high performance and amateur athletes. As to spaces of training, there are two institutions that are lighthouses: The faculty of Psychology at the University of Buenos Aires, and APDA, Association of Psychology of Argentine Sports, this one with more of 20 years dedicated to the training of Psychologist specialised in sports. At the Faculty of Psychology, the subject of Sports Psychology, is part of the curriculum of the Bachelor Degree in Psychology with 25 years of existence.
In the Faculty of Psychology, the subject of Sport Psychology, is part of the degree curriculum of the career in Psychology as an elective subject, as in the Universities of Palermo, Belgrano, and Maimonides. In the University of Flores, the subject (of Sport Psychology) is mandatory in the Psychology Degree. A certification course has been held in Mendoza with the support of APDA in 2013.
Regarding other specialties, it is good to underline that the course of Sport Management of the University of Tres de Febrero, the course to be a soccer coach of the Association of Technicians of the Argentine Football Futbol (ATFA) and the soccer specialty for Argentine Footballers (APEFFA) have this subject as mandatory, as well as the annual specialty of the Argentine Sports Traumatology Association (AATD) and the specialty. Keywords: Sport, Psychology, university, curriculum, sports, psychologist, Argentina Updating the state of the art of sport psychology in Chile Paula Ortiz (SOLCPAD) In the last 18 years, Chile has had an exponential quantitative increase of sports psychologists, mainly dedicated to the practice, and also a qualitative improvement in the level of specialization. In 1999, 9 psychologists were working in a formal way, and already in 2004, 50 professionals were registered.
At the level of work performed in high performance, in the High Performance Center, there are three psychologists in a stable way, and the Chilean Olympic Committee has counted on psychologists as important part of the teaching staff in training courses for the regional training centers as federations and trainers of different sports. The Ministry of Sport was created in 2013 with the objective of promoting public policies in relation to the development and maintenance of sport at the level of performance, recreation, school and athlete's career. At the formal training level, it is not until 2004 that the first course of university specialization in Sports Psychology is created at the University Diego Portales together with the University of the Balearic Islands of Spain and the following year the first person graduates.
Currently, Chile has two programs of Magister (Central University and Bernardo O'higgins University), one post and three graduates. At the organizational level, there are two separate associations in terms of vision and personal proposals: The Chilean Association of Sports Psychology and the Chilean Society of Sports Psychology. As for research, there is no record with all sports psychology publications in scientific journals, which constitutes a challenge and a work proposal.
There isn´t a formal register of professionals working in the area and in which sports, or those who work and who are really trained for it. It would be very interesting to know from history, which of our outstanding athletes have had 294Symposia Friday July 14th psychological support formally and as part of their training. This becomes an important task to be undertaken, both for responsible Keywords: Chile, psychologist practices, university, curriculums, story Global efforts in developing credentialing systems for sport and exercise psychologists: Four organizational perspectives (AASP, FEPSAC, EFPA, and ISSP) Chair: Artur Poczwardowski (University of Denver, USA) As the field of professional practice in sport, exercise, and performance psychology grows, the issues of education, training, and supervision are continually being addressed.
Similarly, with the greater public awareness of and need for sport psychology services, professionals and organizations around the world are carefully developing credentialing systems. In this symposium, The European Federation of Sport Psychology (FEPSAC), the Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP), the European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations (EFPA), and the International Society of Sport Psychology (ISSP) will be detailing their respective efforts in establishing sound, inclusive, and rigorous credentials of international scope. The first presenter will discuss the processes and tentative outcomes of FEPSAC’s initiatives to introduce a new certification system in Europe.
For example, a clear delineation between competencies to consult on performance versus mental health issues is one of the cornerstones of their model. Next, two AASP representatives will be focusing on the first exam-based certification, which is a shift from a portfolio credentialing that the organization had in place for the past 25 years. The third presentation will address the most recent developments in credentialing sport psychologists in Europe through EFPA and their recommendations for specialty-focused education and undergoing a supervision in the specialty-focused practice.
Finally, the fourth presenter will offer a summary of ISSP’s progress in developing an international registry that is meant to facilitate development of sport psychology around the world, especially in regions and countries that have a clear need for it. The symposium will close with an exchange of mutually supporting observations and points of constructive criticism, that will be facilitated by a discussant’s opening remarks and monitoring of the conversation flow. Keywords: certification, accreditation, international trends The FEPSAC certification for specialists in applied sport psychology Karin Moesch (Swedish Sports Confederation, Halmstad University, FEPSAC), Anne-Marie Elbe (University of Copenhagen, FEPSAC) A main goal of the currently elected Managing Council of the European Federation of Sport Psychology (FEPSAC) is to establish certification guidelines for specialists in applied sport psychology.
These guidelines are to define the minimum standard for practitioners in the field of sport psychology - who can have an initial qualification background in either psychology or sport science - that must be met to qualify for professional independent practice in the field of applied sport psychology. This certified practitioner should be able to plan, execute and evaluate sport psychology counselling for mentally healthy athletes who aim to enhance and optimize performance and wellbeing. This excludes work with athletes who suffer from mental health problems, whilst being aware that the line between performance enhancement and mental health issues is not an obvious one (see Roberts, Faull & Tod, 2016).
Up until now the members of the FEPSAC MC have analyzed and evaluated the certification systems of different European countries and discussed the topic with individuals and organizations with expertise in certification and education in applied sport psychology. Based on the outcome of these discussions, the MC put forward criteria that need to be met by practitioners in order to be able to receive the FEPSAC certification. These criteria relate to four areas, namely: (a) higher education qualification; (b) sspecialization in sport psychology; (c) supervised applied practice; and (d) commitment to 295Symposia Friday July 14th European and FEPSAC values.
During the presentation we will outline these four areas in more detail and further describe the progress FEPSAC has made with regard to implementing its certification system. The goal is to have the certification system running by 2019 preceded by a pilot phase in 2018. Keywords: certification, accreditation, international trends AASP certification: The critical move to an exam-based credential Jack Watson (West Virginia University, USA), Angus Mugford (Toronto Blue Jays, Canada) The Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP) first developed and implemented its certification program (Certified Consultant – Association for Applied Sport Psychology; CC-AASP) in 1992.
Since that time, over 600 individuals have been certified using a portfolio review and 400 hours of mentored practice to determine an individual’s readiness to work as a performance enhancement consultant in sport, exercise and performance psychology. In 2011, AASP President Jack Lesyk constituted the Future of Certification Ad Hoc Committee and charged it to review the current certification program and make recommendations for modifications and improvements. One of the most important recommendations was a move to meet the accreditation standards of the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), requiring the development of an exam that all individuals wishing to become or remain certified would need to pass.
Over the past two years, an exam as well as initial eligibility and recertification requirements have been created and a new certification program will be formally rolled out in October 2017. While this new certification will initially be focused on the practice of sport psychology in North America, a future goal would be to extend this certification program internationally. The purpose of this presentation is to provide an overview of the development and implementation of AASP’s new certification program, while also discussing the perceived impact on the practice of applied sport psychology.
Keywords: certification, accreditation, international trends EuroPsy: European accreditation for professional sport psychologists Enrique Cantón (University of Valencia, Spanish General Council of Professional Psychologists, Sports Division Coordinator), Alexandre Garcia-Mas (University of the Balearic Islands, Spanish General Council of Professional Psychologists) The European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations (EFPA) builds a credentialing system for the professional psychologist certification and accreditation based on the EuroPsy concept, which is the European qualification standard for practicing psychologists. EuroPsy supplements national standards and helps the public to identify whether a psychologist can be considered competent to practice in a particular area of psychology. This presentation will focus on summarizing the major objectives and principles that have guided this process.
Since as early as 2010, EuroPsy has awarded credentials to psychologists who meet a list of educational and professional requirements. Specifically, the Areas of Practice well defined within the EuroPsy standards are: (a) clinical and health psychology, (b) industrial and organizational psychology, and (c) educational psychology. Sport psychology (SP) as another Area of Practice is well expected to be included in 2017.
By following additional specialty-focused education and undergoing a supervision in the specialty- focused practice, a psychologist can become qualified as specialist in the designated area. Currently, the types of specialist expertise recognized by EuroPsy are psychotherapy and industrial and organizational psychology. Regarding the EuroPsy certification, there are three main foundations for being accredited as a professional in the SP area: (a) formation, (b) regulated practice, and (c) supervision.
What needs to be noted is that besides the EuroPsy regulation, there are big differences among the participating countries regarding the enforcement capabilities for the EuroPsy regulation. Keywords: certification, accreditation, international trends 296Symposia Friday July 14th ISSP progress in introducing international credentialing: Processes, challenges, and emerging solutions Artur Poczwardowski (University of Denver, USA), Gangyan Si (Hong Kong Institute of Education, Hong Kong) One aspect of the mission of International Society of Sport Psychology (ISSP) involves professional practice: “The Society exists to: … (c) improve the quality of research and professional practice in sport psychology.” In applied sport psychology (ASP), there are only national and regional certifications; and yet, the zeitgeist is one of internationalization, unification, and collaboration. It is envisioned that ISSP Certification (ISSP-C) or ISSP Registry (ISSP-R) will respond to increased international mobility of both sporting clients and consultants.
ISSP-C/R aims at adding to the visibility and credibility of the profession internationally and augmenting the professional standards; thus, ultimately enhancing the experience of those receiving sport psychology services around the world. The focus is to support those countries, in which ASP is at a developing stage in pursuing higher professional standards. This presentation outlines details of a 4-year collective effort to establish internationally recognized credentials defining the minimum standard of sport psychology practice.
A non-statutory system (either certification or registry) was considered to avoid many inter-nation issues and due to the limits of ISSP resources. Second, the goal was not to develop one global system, but rather a system of relatively balanced criteria that reflect the needs of the different regions of the world. Third, it was more practical and feasible for ISSP to focus only on sport psychology consultant/practitioner area, with the goal to include exercise psychology in a later future.
After considering credentialing models in 13 countries and one regional organization, proposals of minimum criteria in the areas of degrees earned, fields of specialization, amount of applied work, amount of supervised practice, and continued education were formulated. This presentation will detail the emerging proposals to be piloted, tested and refined in the next six years. Keywords: certification, accreditation, international trends Sport Performance enhancement through various psycho-physiological and psycho- motor training Chair: Jayashree Acharya (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) Basically there are three “domains” of learning – cognitive, affective and psychomotor, each of which is organised as a series of levels or pre-requisites.
Psychomotor learning is one of the three domains, or broad categories, of educational behaviors. It is based on manual or physical skills, and includes fine and gross motor dexterity, coordination, and movement. The focus is on physical and kinesthetic forms of learning.
Where as in psycho-physiology it is the integration of mind and body for the effective preparation of training and performance strategies of athletes. The purpose of the symposium is highlighting the various training modalities to improve upon performance through various psycho-physiological and psycho-motor training. To achieve this objective number of research in various areas were integrated and explored to measure cognitive, affective and psycho-motor tasks by applying advance equipment and training modalities with the help of Vienna test system (VTS), sensobalance, EMG and quick board.
The research undertaken were: to compare the coordinative and proprioceptive abilities between hockey players and footballers; analysis of selected physiological variables on psychomotor functioning of athletes under stress; assessing cognitive power and heart rate against selected quick board drill for athletes; an investigation of muscle activation while performing fine motor task among badminton players and finally the effects of psychological training on performance of track and field athletes. Research and applications of this kind of sciences of sports help us to understand the movement physiology of the human body and thought processes, thus emphasizing on psycho-physiological phenomenon. The results of all the studies indicated an integration of mind and body for achieving excellence in performance.
The finding will be discussed by each group of presenters. 297Symposia Friday July 14th Keywords: psycho-physiology, psycho-motor, training , VTS An investigation of muscle activation while performing fine motor task among badminton players Anshuman Mishra, Jayashree Acharya, Jaiprakash Bhukar, Nibu R Krishna (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) Muscle activation is a result of the effort of muscle but the relationship between EMG activity and effort is only qualitative (De Luca, 1997). EMG enables us to record muscular activity, and it is often advisable to carry out a synchronized cinematic measurement.
The objective of the study was to investigate between the fine motor task and muscle activation of the groups of muscles (brachioradialis and wrist flexors) among badminton players. Ten players in the age group of 18 to 24 years with a mean & SD of 20.5 ± 1.84 were tested on photo electric rotary pursuit for fine motor task, where the motor speeds were fixed to 30 revolutions per minute (RPM) for 60 seconds. Procomp Infiniti –two channels C & D was used for measuring muscle activation of the muscles groups while performing the task.
The mean and SD of muscle activation while performing fine motor task in brachioradialis and wrist flexors of the participants were 35.86 ± 3.2 μV microvolts and 20 ± 4.47 microvolts. The obtained t (18 df) value was 9.122, p = .000. A statistically significant difference 0.86 (95% CI, 12.21 to 19.51) was found.
The mean and SD of the time on target; time off target and number of target hits were 40.88 ± 5.61; 18.22 ± 5.09 and 63.2 ± 10.65 respectively. Pearson's product moment correlation indicated strong negative correlation between the time on target & time off target, (r = -0.824) and strong positive correlation between number of target hits and time off target (r = - 0.719).The results may be owing to the fact fine motor task requires less than the absolute maximum available for the muscle activation, hence the performance on that task will be independent. Keywords: EMG (Electromyography), photoelectric rotary pursuit, badminton Analysis of selected physiological variables on psychomotor functioning of athletes under stress Nibu R Krishna (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education,Gwalior), Ashutosh Acharya (Government College of Physical Education, Bhubaneswar, Odisha), Vivek Pandey, Jayashree Acharya (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) Cognitive psychology emphasizes on the study of internal processes associated with processing information leading to task mastery.
Psychomotor performance skills typically include production of motor actions and recognition of environmental conditions that trigger actions. The present experiment was to compare the selected physiological variables (heart rate, respiratory rate) prior to and after administering determination test (Form S-5) of 11 minutes with three subset in reaction mode (DT-number of correct stimuli, number of incorrect stimuli) as a measure of stress tolerance with the help of Vienna Test System (VTS). Fifteen male athletes were selected at random in the age group ranging from18 to 24 with a mean & SD of 21.47 ± 1.45 years.
A paired-samples t-test was applied to determine mean difference of heart and respiratory rate. The mean and SD of pre observation of heart and respiratory rate of the participants were 69.4 ± 3.09 beats/minute and 17 ± 1.93 breaths/minute. The mean and SD of post observation of heart and respiratory rate of the participants were 101.47 ± 6.16 beats/minute beats/minute and 26.
2 ± 3.19 breaths/minute. The obtained t(14df ) value of 30.189, p < .0005,d = 7.80 for heart rate and for respiratory was 18.78, p < .0005, d = 4.84. There is a statistically significant increase of 1.06 (95% CI, 29.788 to 34.345) for heart rate and 0.49 (95% CI, 8.15 to 10.25) for respiratory rate was noted.
Further Pearson's product moment correlation was applied to find the relationship between pre & post mean differences of heart rate and breathing rate along with the 298Symposia Friday July 14th determination test scores that was found insignificant. The present finding may be owing to the reason that the level of sensory stress is different for respondents with differing reaction speeds as per the test criteria. Keywords: determination test, VTS, Heart rate, Respiratory rate Comparison of coordinative and proprioceptive abilities among selected team games Gayatri Pandey, Vivek Pandey, Dilip Kumar Dureha (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior), Ashutosh Acharya (Government College of Physical Education, Bhubaneswar , Odisha) Dynamic balance is one of the greatest physical predictors of athletic success which is measured by proprioception and coordination (BMS 1.0, 2008).Balance exercises facilitate proprioception pathways under competitive circumstances effectively (Hanney, 2000) and possibly reduce the time between neural stimuli and muscular response (Zachazewski et al., 1996).This research compares the coordinative and proprioceptive abilities of hockey and football players.
Thirty randomly selected male (15 each), age ranged between 17 to 23 years with a mean & SD of 20 ± 1.15 years acted as subjects. Foot eye coordination and proprioception were assessed by using the sensbalance software v2 system where the subjects were asked for controlled and precise movement along the front-back & left-right axis and in proprioception, test was conducted in two parts (to move to a target point with visual feedback & without visual feedback). Hand-eye coordination was assessed by Vienna test system (Test form S1- 10 minutes).
The two sample t-test was applied and level of significance is set at 0.05. The mean and SD of hockey and football players on foot-eye coordination were 6.89±1.80 & 4.03±1.20; on proprioception 8.16 ± 3.54 & 8.95 ±5.43 and on hand-eye coordination were 27.53±7.22 & 19.20 ± 2.84 respectively. The obtained t value in foot-eye coordination and hand-eye coordination is 5.10 and 3.71, which is greater than the required value of 1.70 at 0.05 (28 df), thus signifying the difference between hockey and football players.
No significant difference was observed in the factor of proprioception t.05 (28) = (.470). The above findings clearly indicate that the footballers were better on foot- eye coordination where as hockey players had an upperhand in hand-eye coordination. Propriception as an ability is required by both the sport group athlete thus signifying the requirement of the nature of sport.
Keywords: coordinative ability, proprioceptive ability, team games Effects of psychological training on performance of track and field athletes Jaiprakash Bhukar, Indu Bora (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education,Gwalior), Shailaja Mohan (Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Trivandrum), Gayatri Pandey (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) Mental skills training have been recognized as an effective method to enhance the psychological component of physical movement, (Driskell, Copper, & Moran, 1994; Feltz & Landers, 1983). Mainly mental skill training has developed from the necessity of the athlete to learn more about their individual mental life to allow a degree of control in coordinating effective movement through various psychological states of performance (Martens, 1987; Rushall, 1992). The present experiment was conducted to find out the effect of a mental skill training program on the performance of four track & field athletes.
Hardy and Nelson’s mental skills Questionnaire (1996) that has six sub factors i.e imagery ability, mental preparation, self confidence, anxiety management, concentration ability and relaxation ability was adopted as a measure during baseline (pre-training phase) and after treatment (post-training phase). Along with the mental skills, their performance was recorded. The study was of single subject design.
During the intervention phase of 8 weeks, training module of mental skill program with the help of vienna test system (VTS) in the parameter of sustained attention (DAUF), visual pursuit (LVT), visual memory (VISGED) & determination test (DAUF) was specifically designed for each athlete. It was observed that all the athletes had improvement in their mental skill scores in comparison to pre-treatment phase. Mental skills training techniques can be grouped into two basic categories, 299Symposia Friday July 14th that is cognitive and somatic methods.
In the present experiment stress was given to cognitive method to enhance the mental development of the athlete. Detail discussion with regard to each athlete will be presented during the symposium. Keywords: mental skill training, goal setting, imagery, baseline phase, treatment phase Testing of cognitive power and heart rate against selected quick board drill for athletes Jayashree Acharya (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education,Gwalior), Shailaja Mohan (Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education,Trivandrum), Indu Bora, Anshuman Mishra (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) One of the most formidable tasks for the brain of an athlete during a play is to perceive and integrate complex moving patterns while allocating attentional resources in different key areas.
Athletes integrate the information over variable visual field areas. The movements of the players and the object of play can be extremely unpredictable. Reviews suggest that measures for cognitive performance is lacking in literature.
The objective of the study was to test the visual memory and heart rate before and after taking the Quick board drill. Twelve male athletes were selected at random, the age ranging between 20 to 24 years (mean ± SD: 18.42 ± 1.38). Vienna Test System was used for measuring visual memory (S1 test form –screening type for 15 minutes duration) and heart rate was recorded prior to and after administering X-Hop quick board reaction drill.
The pre and post data of visual memory; number of items worked & heart rate are 0.89 ± 0.45, 16.5 ± 2.65 &70.17 ± 3.21 and 1.23 ± .64, 13.67 ± 2.30 &138.58 ± 2.07 respectively. The paired t-test for visual memory; number of items worked and heart rate is 3.72; 5.45 and 92.05 at t (11df), p< 0.05 that is statistically significant. The mean of parameter VISGED θ (respondent's visual short term memory) showed improvement from 90th to 95th percentile.
The finding reveals that X-hop drill had a significant effect on the cognitive faculty and heart rate, but further no correlations were found between the difference of pre-post visual memory variables and difference of heart rate. The visuospatial memory includes visual perception of spatial relationships among objects and it depends on the research designs. Howsoever, the present findings suggest that cardiovascular exercise improves visuospatial short-term memory which is in consonance with findings of Roig et al., (2013).
Keywords: X-hop drill, visual memory ability, heart rate Psychosocial processes in competitive and interactive sports Chair: Erkut Konter (Dokuz Eylül Üniversity) This symposium represents contemporary research examples in recreational and competitive sports with mostly open motor skills (soccer, futsal, volleyball, handball, water polo, and table tennis). Each study seeks to uncover particular psychosocial processes (e.g., courage, leadership, psychological preparation, mental practice, achievement motivation, and performance anxiety). Study one examined sport courage with a validated scale including 5 subscales (mastery, determination, assertiveness, venturesome and sacrifice behavior) in relation to personal (age, education, BMI), social (income) and performance (participation level) variables with a survey method.
This study indicated a number of significant differences. Study two investigated athletes’ leadership of Brazilian college teams (basketball, volleyball, handball and futsal) according to leadership styles and personal characteristics with a sociogram method. The results showed that the Brazilian university leaders were characterized by the style of motivational and social leadership.
Only 30% of the leaders were the captains in their teams. Study three took an applied perspective related to psychological preparation of the Croatian national water polo Olympic team which won a silver medal in Rio Games. The psychological preparation process was organized on different levels including team-building as well 300Symposia Friday July 14th as working with athletes, coaches, and other related experts within the team.
Study four investigated the effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills in volleyball with an experimental method. The results revealed that by 12 weeks of mental practice and physical practice was an effective technique to improve performance in volleyball. Study five examined motivational profiles and performance anxiety in recreational and competitive table tennis.
The findings suggested five motivational profiles that were related to performance anxiety and competition levels in table tennis. Keywords: courage, leadership, achievement motivation, mental practice, psychological preparation, performance anxiety Courage profile of female soccer players in relation to individual, social and performance variables Erkut Konter (Dokuz Eylül Üniversity) There is almost no research related to courage in female soccer although soccer is regarded the most popular sport in the world. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the courage profile of female soccer players in relation to individual, social and performance variables.
Data were collected from 210 female soccer players aged 12 to 27 (M=17.97 ± 3.34 yrs.). Female soccer players were administered the “Sport Courage Scale-31” (SCS-31) including 5 subscales (mastery, determination, assertiveness, venturesome and sacrifice behavior) with good validity and reliability scores (Konter & Ng, 2012) and the personal information form to collect data. Collected data was analyzed by Spearman correlations, various parametric and non- parametric tests, and revealed a number of significant (p<.05) differences.
Spearman correlation analyses indicated significant results between the SCS-31 factors and measured individual (age, education, body mass index), social (family income) and performance (level of participation, being selected and non-selected national team) variables. Results of the SCS-31 in relation to indicated variables revealed a number of significant differences. For example, extroverted female soccer players have significantly higher points of mastery, determination, assertiveness and total SCS-31 scores than introverted female soccer players.
In addition, non- substitute female soccer players have significantly higher points of mastery than substitute female soccer players. Moreover, a number of significant differences were found that related sport courage factors and family income, religious beliefs, learning preference, playing positions and injury. More research is needed to have more certain results.
Keywords: courage, females, soccer, individual variables, social variables, performance Characteristics of athletes leadership of college sports teams in Brazil Victor Cavallari Souza, José Lino Oliveira Bueno (University of São Paulo - Brazil) The study of athletes leadership brought another perspective which was historically focused on the role of the coach in team’s members. Recent studies showed that the leadership exercised by athletes is relevant to understanding the dynamics of the sports team, process of group cohesion, satisfaction and team performance. The aim of the present study is to characterize the athletes’ leadership of Brazilian college teams, according to leadership styles and personal characteristics.
The study included 30 men's and women's teams of basketball, volleyball, handball and futsal of the University of São Paulo, totaling 364 athletes. During the team’s training, the researcher applied a Sociogram questionnaire adapted to identify the team leader, resulting in two groups, 14 women and 16 men. Attached to the Sociogram questionnaire, participants were asked to answer some questions about their involvement with the sport and with the university.
After this stage, field observations were conducted during the training sessions. Furthermore, the researcher recorded with a camera the behaviors of the leaders during competition games on university campus. The results showed that, regardless of gender, the Brazilian university leaders are characterized by the style of 301Symposia Friday July 14th motivational and social leadership.
Only 30% of the leaders were the captains of the teams, which confirms data from the literature. In addition, 90% of the leaders were in their third or fourth year of graduation, which shows that college experience is relevant to building leadership in the group. No relationship was observed between the position of the athletes and the leadership for any modality, which shows that social interactions are determinants for this process.
Keywords: athlete leadership, college athletes, basketball, volleyball, handball and futsal Process or outcome: How to make a balance? Psychological preparation of the Rio Olympics water polo silver medalists Renata Baric (University of Zagreb) Elite athletes dedicate several years preparing themselves for highest-level competition as Olympic Games, where nuances are crucial and everybody are trying to neutralise all factors that could, besides training, influence the final results. Psychological preparation helps elite athletes to optimize their performance.
The aim is to present sport psychology interventions provided to Croatian national water polo team, former Olympic champions, during 3-months, before the Rio Games. Psychological preparation process was organised in eight 3 to 5 days cycles during preparation period, firstly with wider selection, and progressively with less players. Initially, detailed evaluation of team and each player was conducted.
According to the results obtained psychological preparation process was organised on three levels with an important framework – to keep their focus on process instead on desired results only that was not an easy task due to previous Olympic results they wanted to confirm again. The first level included team-building program following 4 CO model: commitment, cooperation, cohesiveness, concentration. Second level included individual work with athletes, primarily oriented toward arousal regulation techniques by learning relaxation, breathing exercises and biofeedback, but also to individual issues.
On third level sport psychologist worked intensively with a coach and whole expert team within individual consultations, workshops and daily meetings. Some psychological techniques were practiced on the pool, during or after training (concentration and relaxation exercise), implemented into conditioning or regular training sessions. Permanent team-work on training and competition goals and disciplined use of certain key words by all participant helped to keep the focus on process.
Good collaboration with the coach and his will to change himself according to initial evaluation, and significant increment of group cohesion forcefully helped the process. Keywords: psychological preparation, olmypic games, team building, individual consultancy, arousal regulation, waterpolo Effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills in volleyball Pothula Madhusudan Reddy (Physical Director National Institute of Technology Warangal, India) The comparative effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills of volleyball was studied by carrying out experiments with randomly selected men subjects. They were divided into three equal groups of 30 each named as group of mental practice, physical practice and control group.
The subjects were administered mental practice and physical practice for duration of 30 minutes over a period of 12 weeks. The AAPHER volleyball skill test was selected as criterion variable to test the skills ability of subjects for the experiment. Mental practice and physical practice methods were found to be significantly better in improving learning motor skills i.e., volleying, serving, passing, and setup in comparison to control group.
The effect of mental practice and physical practice methods on the learning rate in the motor skills of volleyball at periodic interval of first 2 weeks of duration of an experiment revealed that there was no significant improvement in any of the skill mentioned above due to mental practice, physical practice and control group. However significant improvement was found in all the skills performance due to mental practice and physical practice 302Symposia Friday July 14th methods, from 4th week onwards. The findings revealed that there was no periodic significant improvement in volleying and serving due to mental practice method between the 4th week and 6th week, 6th week and 8th week, 8th week and 10th week, and 10th week and 12th week.
However, periodic significant improvement was noticed in passing and setup skills due to mental practice method between the above mentioned training phases. The findings also revealed that there was no significant improvement in learning of motor skills of volleyball neither over a period of 12 weeks duration nor at a periodic interval of 2 weeks duration in the case of control group. The 12 weeks of mental practice and physical practice was effective method to improve performance and learning rate in motor skills of volleyball.
Keywords: mental practice, physical practice, volleyball, motor skills Motivational profiles and anxiety in table tennis players: Differences across competition levels Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu (University of North Texas, Texas, USA) Motivational profiles, based on self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985), are useful heuristics that predict psychosocial outcomes among athletes. Although motivational profiles have been recently studied in table tennis players, the investigations were limited to elite young athletes in Europe (Martinent & Decret, 2015; Martinent et al., 2014). More research across genders, ages, cultures, and competition levels are needed in order to understand the potential differences in motivational profiles among different groups.
In addition, sport anxiety (i.e., somatic anxiety, worry, and concentration disruption) is an important psychosocial outcome of sport performance to study, which is related to motivation. The primary purpose of this study was to examine the motivational profiles and their frequency across competition levels (from recreational to international). The secondary purpose was to examine the relationships between motivational profiles and anxiety by competition level.
Participants are 200 table tennis players, most of which are from the United States and China, with a small number from Canada, an European country, or an Asian country (other than China). They completed validated questionnaires that assess motivation for table tennis, sport trait anxiety, competition levels, as well as demographic information. A hierarchical cluster analysis was used to examine the motivational profiles in the sample.
Inspection of the agglomeration schedule and dendrogram suggested a five-cluster solution, namely, “high autonomous motivation” (32.5%), “balanced motivation” (27%), “low intrinsic motivation” (18.5%), “low extrinsic motivation” (16%), and “high controlled motivation” (5%). These profiles demonstrated relatively positive profiles in the majority of the table tennis players. The associations of the profiles with anxiety and competition levels will be discussed in detail in the symposium.
The findings reveal the importance of considering competition levels. Keywords: table tennis, achievement motivation, performance anxiety, competition level Critical perspectives on exercise is medicine Chair: Toni Williams (Leeds Beckett University) Based on extensive research on the relationship between exercise and health, exercise as a form of medicine is a powerful concept of growing popularity within healthcare, academia and policy. Proponents of this exercise is medicine movement, frame exercise and physical activity as a panacea for a variety of health issues and duly call upon individuals to take responsibility for their health becoming more active.
This symposium adopts a critical perspective towards the theory and practice underpinning the exercise is medicine concept. We bring together a series of cutting edge presentations that draw upon extensive research across various clinical populations; including people with rheumatoid arthritis, spinal cord injury, depression and youth who have experienced trauma. This symposium will address two main concerns related to exercise as a 303Symposia Friday July 14th form of medicine.
First, we argue for a more nuanced approach to exercise promotion and prescription for health and well-being across different populations. Through rigorous analysis of participant experiences, we will highlight potential negative side effects of exercise as medicine and identify how for some people exercise can be an unobtainable commodity. Second, we will emphasize the need for critical appraisal of the research used to guide evidence-based medicine and physical activity recommendations for clinical populations.
Methods drawn upon to appraise the research will include the systematic review and meta-synthesis of qualitative research and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. The symposium will conclude by offering academics, interventionists and health care professionals alternative reflective and ethical strategies to promote and prescribe exercise and critically appraise research. Keywords: exercise is medicine, clinical populations, evidence-based medicine, critical appraisal, theory, practice Dances with wolves: If exercise becomes medicine, how might the medicines respond?
Panteleimon Ekkekakis (Iowa State University) In the past quarter-century, Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) has become the backbone of medical education and the framework upon which the development of clinical practice guidelines is based. Within the EBM model, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and meta-analyses of RCTs are recognized as the main types of research evidence. In an idealized EBM scenario, for exercise to be introduced in clinical practice for the treatment of a particular disease, three steps would be required: 1) multiple, high-quality RCTs should be summarized in a meta-analysis, 2) guideline development panels should appraise the evidence and conclude that the inclusion of exercise in clinical guidelines is warranted, 3) the guidelines must be disseminated to medical practitioners, who should implement them.
Although steps 1) and 2) have been completed for several diseases, implementation remains limited, in apparent violation of EBM. The processes contributing to this phenomenon remain poorly understood. The presentation will focus on lessons learned from the introduction of physical activity as a treatment option for subthreshold, mild, and moderate depression within the National Health Service (UK).
As with other diseases, in the case of depression, a (mostly) non-commercialized option was introduced in a market always dominated by commercial, for-profit options. Given the economic ramifications, it is reasonable to expect tension but the exact manifestations of this tension have not been studied. Evidence will be presented illustrating efforts to 1) corrupt the evidence base by introducing biased RCTs and meta-analyses in the medical literature, 2) utilize the mass media to create doubt and confusion among medical practitioners and the public about the strength of the evidence.
The presentation will conclude by emphasizing the need for exercise science curricula to sensitize students to the reality of bias in medical research and prepare them to critically appraise RCTs and meta-analyses. Keywords: evidence-based medicine, randomized controlled trials, meta-analysis, depression, bias, critical appraisal Exercise is medicine: Extending the metaphor to include biomedical ethics Anthony Papathomas, Emily Hunt (Loughborough University), Brett Smith (University of Birmingham), Toni Williams (Leeds Beckett University) The term “exercise is medicine” has attracted criticism for its imperfect correspondence to pharmaceutical understandings of what medicine is. Notwithstanding these critiques, accepting that exercise does possess medicinal qualities actually presents new and as yet unconsidered problems.
If exercise has a role to play in the treatment and management of chronic ill health, its use must be held to the same ethical standards as traditional medical practices. Yet, few exercise interventions incorporate due ethical consideration in a medical sense. As part of a broader program of ongoing collaborative research, we collected semi- structured interviews on the physical activity experiences of participants from a variety of clinical populations.
304Symposia Friday July 14th Participant perspectives were deductively analysed according to Beauchamp and Childress’ (1979) 4 pillars of biomedical ethics: a) respect for autonomy, b) non-maleficence; c) beneficence; and d) justice. Participants described exercise experiences that fulfilled each of the four ethical pillars. In contrast, some participants told stories about exercise that contravened biomedical ethical obligations.
Further, the complexity of chronic illness dictates that although an ethical pillar is fulfilled in one time and context, it may not be fulfilled in another time and context; non-maleficence can quickly become maleficence. In conclusion, exercise is mostly good and good for most; but not always and not for all. Letting go of dogma in favor of more nuanced, reflective, and ethically scrutinized forms of exercise promotion may lead to more efficacious, person-sensitive interventions.
If exercise is medicine, there is a case for both academics and interventionists to reflect on how we might begin to prescribe it in an ethical way. The 4 pillars model, in conjunction with alternative ethical positions, may support ethically minded exercise psychology. Keywords: medical ethics, physical activity, clinical populations Experiences and perceptions of sport and movement-based activities for those enduring trauma during their youth: A systematic review and meta-study William Massey (Concordia University Wisconsin), Toni Williams (Leeds Beckett University), Alexis Geiger (Concordia University Wisconsin) Proponents of the exercise as medicine movement often focus on the positive affects exercise can have on both physical and mental health outcomes.
However, one overlooked area pertains to the role of sport and movement based therapies for individuals who experience trauma. Current evidence of effective therapies for trauma survivors remains inconclusive for both sport based therapies (Lawrence et al., 2010) and various psychological treatments (Gillies et al., 2016). Given the inconclusive nature of experimental evidence, it is necessary to understand the complexities of utilizing sport and/or movement based therapies from the perspectives of trauma survivors themselves.
The purpose of this study was to conduct a qualitative meta- study to examine the extant literature exploring the experience of trauma survivors in sport and movement based activities. A comprehensive search of 10 health and social science databases (e.g., SCOPUS, Web of Science, PsychInfo, SPORTDiscuss) yielded 7,247 records. After titles and abstracts were screened 28 articles were included.
Additionally, 17 journals were manually searched from 2000-2017 and content experts were contacted for papers. This resulted in an additional 24 studies. Two authors independently screened the full text of each article, resulting in a final sample of 13 studies.
Meta-study methodology was drawn upon to systematically analyze the final studies. Meta-theory involved the critical exploration of theoretical frameworks and paradigmatic assumptions. Meta-method comprised a critical examination of research design, methodology and method.
Meta-data analysis included a critical interpretation of the analysis and findings of each study. Lastly, the synthesis stage brings the analysis together to offer new interpretations and identify implications for future qualitative research. Findings are discussed in relation to the potential opportunities and pitfalls when utilizing sport based interventions with trauma survivors.
Keywords: Youth, trauma, sport, qualitative research, meta-study The exercise is medicine narrative: When alternative stories matter Toni Williams (Leeds Beckett University), Brett Smith (University of Birmingham), Anthony Papathomas (Loughborough Univeristy) The exercise is medicine narrative tells a story of improved health and well-being through continued engagement in physical activity (Papathomas et al., 2015). Following serious chronic injury and illness, the exercise is medicine narrative depicts an idealistic approach whereby participants are exercising for ailment relief, health maintenance and illness prevention. Linked to a powerful long-term commitment to living an 305Symposia Friday July 14th active lifestyle, the exercise is medicine narrative is the meta-narrative within rehabilitation and community settings.
The aim of this study was to critically explore the storied experiences of physical activity participation for people following spinal cord injury (SCI). Data was collected through semi-structured interviews and participant observation with 10 clients with SCI, and 5 trainers, during an intensive exercise program known as activity-based rehabilitation. Following a thematic narrative analysis, three central themes were constructed.
These were: 1) exercise beyond medicine 2) exercise as a commodity and 3) exercise for pleasure. Taken together, these themes illustrate how the exercise is medicine narrative depicts an overly romantic story of exercise participation. For example, when medicine is perceived as the art and science of healing, stories of exercise participation can speak of cure, and restitution, rather than health and well-being.
Furthermore, exercise can become a commodity for people with SCI, one which some can purchase, while others cannot. Lastly, the exercise is medicine narrative – with a focus on the medicinal benefits of exercise – may not motivate those who want to exercise simply for pleasure. Thus, healthcare professionals, academics and policy makers need to take a more critical approach to exercise promotion by addressing possible adverse consequences and barriers to exercise.
Furthermore alternative stories of exercise should be promoted if others are to ‘buy in’ to a physically active lifestyle. Keywords: narrative, spinal cord injury, physical activity, rehabilitation, community The negative side effects of exercise as medicine: Understanding the patient experience Melissa Day (University of Chichester) Exercise is hailed as ‘the long sought after drug needed to prevent chronic disease and extend life’(Sallis, 2015, p.23). Yet while exercise undoubtedly plays a valuable role in the prevention and management of a range of conditions, the negative side effects of this ‘drug’ have not been well considered.
Instead, exercise has often been uncritically promoted and prescribed, without detailed consideration of patients’ experience. While the psychosocial and environmental barriers to exercise in range of health populations have been well deliberated(Hefferon et al., 2013), we often neglect to consider the difficulties of participation. Consequently this talk focuses on the patient experience of participating in exercise as a form of medicine, drawing from interviews with populations who have suffered physical trauma (e.g.elderly fallers, amputees, cardiac patients).
Each of these participant groups had been recommended exercise as part of their recovery, with most taking part in hospital exercise rehabilitation. During individual interviews participants were asked to reflect on their exercise experiences. While all participants described the valuable role played by exercise in the recovery process, they also highlighted that participation itself could act as a catalyst for negative experiences.
Participant descriptions highlighted how commonly reported strategies for coping with trauma (comparison processes, self-blame and responsibility, meaning making) could be experienced negatively in the exercise environment. Further, descriptions also revealed how the medical model underpinning exercise as medicine encouraged participants to view successful rehabilitation as a return to pre-trauma baseline rather than considering how they may continue to improve beyond their previous levels of functioning. To conclude, we should be wary of uncritically promoting exercise and should better prepare for the potential negative patient experiences brought about by this popular ‘drug’.
Keywords: patient experience, exercise, physical trauma, coping, cardiac rehabilitation Identifying personal and contextual motivational factors to change behaviour in different performance settings Chair: Nikos Ntoumanis (Curtin University) 306Symposia Friday July 14th We present five papers that illustrate different ways in which motivational factors, both personal and situational, have been targeted in efforts to understand and/or change behaviour engagement in different performance settings. The first presentation outlines two projects (including a large cluster RCT) examining the role of coach motivational strategies in predicting indices of athletes’ motivation, willingness to dope, and doping use in Australia, Greece, and the UK. The second presentation outlines provides qualitative evidence of the appeal of professional sport (Australian Football League) as a setting to engage overweight and obese fans in a weight loss programme.
It will also present a pilot study, which builds upon these findings to train community coaches in motivational communication strategies that can effectively motivate AFL fans during the programme. The third presentation will present qualitative and quantitative evidence of what older adults perceive to be ideal peer leader characteristics. Such peer leaders will then be trained in effective communication strategies to act as walking ambassadors in a motivationally embellished walking intervention (clustered RCT) in residents of retirement villages in Australia.
The fourth presentation discusses motivational mediators of a digital intervention tool aiming to promote self-determined exercise motivation in Swedish adults. The fifth presentation discusses the stressor experiences over a 10-week period in a sample of infantry personnel from an Australian Army unit who were preparing for deployment. A variety of factors including motivational (proactive goal regulation) are tested as mediators of some of the effect of stressor exposure on work engagement in this longitudinal survey.
The five studies provide diverse methodological evidence (RCTs, surveys, interviews) from diverse populations with regard to the role of motivation in explaining behavioral engagement, adherence, and physical/mental health. Keywords: motivation, physical activity, interventions, weight management, goal regulation, doping Coach interpersonal styles of communication and athletes’ willingness to dope: Cross- cultural evidence Nikos Ntoumanis (Curtin University), Vassilis Barkoukis (Aristotle University of Thessaloniki), Susan H. Backhouse (Leeds Beckett University), Amy Dyer (Curtin University), Laurie Patterson, Lisa Whitaker (Leeds Beckett University), George Pavlidis, Stella Kaffe (Aristotle University of Thessaloniki) The first comprehensive meta-analysis of psycho-social predictors and outcomes of doping in sport by Ntoumanis et al.
(2014) revealed that very few studies in this area were interventions. Those that did exist were athlete-centered, yielded only small changes in attitudes towards and intentions to engage in doping, and had no effect on doping behavior. Surprisingly, there is no published intervention study in the doping literature that has trained coaches to promote an anti-doping motivational environment by focusing on their behaviors and how they communicate with their athletes.
Drawing from self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 2000), we present the results of two projects examining the role of coach interpersonal styles of communication in predicting indices of athletes’ motivation, willingness to dope, and doping use. The first project was a longitudinal study of 205 Greek athletes from the beginning to the latter part of a sport season. The findings from a structural equation modeling analysis showed that perceptions of controlling coaching communication style were positive indirect predictors of continued doping use across the season via psychological need frustration, moral disengagement for doping, and endorsement of cheating.
The second study comprises a large clustered randomized control trial currently taking place in Australia, the UK and Greece. This is a coach- focused intervention aiming to increase coaches’ need supportive communication styles, reduce controlling communication styles, and foster coaches’ efficacy to discuss anti-doping matters (targeted age 14-18 years). The primary outcome of this trial is athletes’ willingness to take substances that might be prohibited.
We will test the effects of the intervention over 12 weeks and at a 3-month follow-up. In the symposium, we will present preliminary findings from this project; data collection is currently on-going. Keywords: coach motivational strategies, doping, cross-cultural 307Symposia Friday July 14th Aussie-FIT: Evidence of the need for and appeal of the Australian version of the Football Fans in Training (FFIT) Program for overweight and obese Aussie Rules Football (AFL) Fans Eleanor Quested (Curtin University), Kate Hunt, Cindy Gray, Sally Wyke (Glasgow University), Suzanne Robinson, Deborah Kerr (Curtin University), Philip Morgan (University of Newcastle, NSW), Robert Newton (Edith Cowan University) Obesity is the second highest contributor to burden of disease in Australia.
Men aged over 45 are particularly at risk with 79.4% being overweight or obese. Most men in Australia, however, lead inactive, sedentary lifestyles with low levels of physical activity (PA). Moreover, Australian males are more likely than females to eat a diet that is unhealthy and likely to lead to weight gain.
Professional sports settings have been shown to act as a powerful ‘hook’ to engage men in health behavior change programs. There is a substantial evidence base supporting the feasibility, sustainability, and cost-effectiveness of the innovative ‘Football Fans in Training’ (FFIT) program, delivered by community coaches in professional UK football (soccer) clubs. FFIT participants made long term (12 months) improvements to their weight, PA, diet, alcohol consumption, and psychological health.
The primary aim of our multi-method study was to explore whether our Australian version of FFIT (Aussie-FIT), was appealing to overweight and obese male Australian Football League (AFL) fans. AFL fans (N=151) aged 35 – 65, (49.41=+ 8.74) completed an online survey and a subsample participated in individual interviews. Of those surveyed, 74.2% were overweight or obese, 53% were insufficiently active (mins of PA per week < 150 of somewhat hard - very hard PA), and 64.9% were seriously considering trying to lose weight in the next 6 months.
After viewing an informational video about FFIT, 90.5% indicated they thought this program would appeal to AFL fans. In conclusion, the AFL is a viable and attractive setting in which to engage overweight and obese men. Findings have informed the development and further customization of the Aussie-FIT program, which is now being tested in a pilot and feasibility study among fans of AFL clubs in Western Australia in preparation for a nationwide RCT.
Keywords: weight management, intervention In search of key attributes of peer leaders for the promotion of physical activity in older adults Marlene Kritz, Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani, Barbara Mullan, Burton Elissa, Keith D Hill (Curtin University), Ester Cerin (Australian Catholic University), Stuart Biddle (Victoria University) The Residents in Action Trial (RiAT) is a 16-week RCT which aims to evaluate a proof-of-concept motivationally embellished walking intervention designed to increase walking, reduce sitting and improve mental health in older adults living in retirement villages in Western Australia. The intervention involves training physically active residents to motivationally support their less active peers to increase walking, reduce sitting and improve mental health. In this preliminary stage, the aim is to determine what older adults, differing in their physical activity engagement, perceive to be ideal peer leader characteristics.
A mixed methods concurrent triangulation design was used to identify key attributes of effective older peer leaders as perceived by participants differing in their physical activity engagement and leadership experience. Participants (N=60; M age (SD) = 73.86 (6.71) were recruited from retirement villages and existing walking groups in Perth. They were inactive individuals interested in joining RiAT, physically active residents interested in the peer leader role, and individuals who had already served as walk peer leaders or had taken part in other walking programs.
Semi- structured interviews were conducted and thematically analyzed to identify ideal peer leader attributes for walking groups. Questionnaires measured motivation to walk, ideal peer leader traits (experienced and prospective participants), motivation to volunteer, leadership traits, and physical activity. In addition all participants wore an ActivPal over a 7-day period to allow for an objective assessment of physical activity.
Data are currently being analysed and will be presented at the conference. The findings are expected to advance 308Symposia Friday July 14th knowledge about relevant characteristics of an effective older peer leader and will be used to guide peer leader recruitment for the RiaT. In our presentation we will also provide an overview of the other aspects of the trial.
Keywords: walking, intervention, mental health, peer leaders Occupational stressors and work engagement in a sample of Australian army personnel: The role of mental toughness, stressor appraisals and proactive goal regulation Daniel Gucciardi (Curtin University), Monique Crane (Macquarie University), Philip Temby (4Land Division, Defence Science and Technology Group, Australia) Occupational stressors are commonplace within modern work and organisational landscapes. Within military settings, occupational stressors typically occur across three broad environments, namely garrison, training and deployment. To date, a considerable body of work has focused on the influence of deployment- related stressors on various psychological, behavioural and social outcomes.
However, less attention has been devoted to understanding the antecedents and consequences of occupational stressors that occur within normal duties in garrison and training environments. We addressed this gap in knowledge in the current study by taking a longitudinal approach to understand the dynamics of stressor experiences over a 10-week period among a sample of infantry personnel from an Australian Regular Army unit who were preparing for deployment (some for the first time). In total, 70 participants (24.85 years of age + 5.95; 4.87 years served + 5.35) completed 2 or more weekly assessments and were therefore included as part of our main analyses.
We found that participants’ experiences of occupational stressors fluctuated within individuals over time and across situations. In terms of mediational pathways, mental toughness but not stressor appraisals and proactive goal regulation explained some of the effect of stressor exposure on work engagement. Specifically, mental toughness suppressed the direct effect of stressor exposure on work engagement.
Mental toughness is a concept that resonates with individuals who are interested in high performance; as such, interventions that are marketed and targeted as ‘mental toughness development’ could be used as a hook to enhance buy-in from military personnel, and complement existing programs such as BattleSMART and Mental Fitness. Keywords: goal regulation, resilience, stress, motivation Zooming in on the effects –psychological need satisfaction mediates the effects of a digital exercise intervention on motivational regulations and exercise behavior Karin Weman Josefsson, Urban Johnson (Halmstad University), Magnus Lindwall (University of Gothenburg) Examination of the mediating mechanisms within the self-determination theory process model will provide deeper insight in the mechanisms of motivational regulations and psychological need satisfaction. Optimally, such studies should also include examination of action theory links and conceptual theory links to consider theory capacity (Cerin & MacKinnon, 2009).
We studied 318 participants (aged 23-67 years) included in a controlled trial testing a digital intervention tool aiming to promote self-determined exercise motivation using 3 wave measurement over the course of 6 weeks. The participants (279 women and 40 men) were randomized into experimental and control group and completed a web-based test battery with the SDT-related measures (Psychological needs in exercise scale, Behavioral regulations in exercise scale -2, and Leisure time exercise questionnaire) at baseline, post intervention (3 weeks) and follow up (6 weeks). Mediation analyses were conducted using the SPSS macro Process by Hayes (2013).
Results showed indirect effects of psychological need satisfaction regarding the effect of the intervention on motivation and exercise behavior at follow up measures. In the group of participants exposed to the intervention, higher levels of autonomy need satisfaction at follow-up predicted lower levels of amotivation and external regulation. In these models we found positive significant action theory links and negative conceptual theory links, showing the intervention to impact autonomy in positive direction, while higher autonomy need satisfaction in turn decreased controlled 309Symposia Friday July 14th motivation and amotivation.
Higher scores of autonomy need satisfaction at follow-up also predicted higher scores of identified regulation, intrinsic regulation and autonomous motivation. Lower levels of amotivation were linked with higher levels of total exercise. In sum, the results reflect expectations from a a self- determination theory perspective and are in favor of intervention efficacy.
Keywords: psychological need satisfaction, exercise behavior Fool’s gold: Expert perception of deceptive motion Chair: Robin Jackson (Loughborough University) An effective sidestep, feint, or step-over can create an opportunity to alter the outcome of competitive encounters. Although much research has been conducted on anticipation skill and the use of advance information, it is only recently that researchers have started to systematically examine expertise effects in perceiving deceptive motion. This symposium brings together some of the researchers who have led research in this area.
They will draw on their research findings to given an insight into recent methodological, conceptual, and technological advances. Robin Jackson will open by using evidence from soccer step-overs to consider the nature of the expert advantage and the visual information used to discriminate between non- deceptive and deceptive moves. He will argue that to fully understand expert performance it is critical to distinguish between susceptibility to deception and performers’ ability to resolve deceptive motion as it unfolds.
Rouwen Cañal-Bruland will argue that interactive competitive encounters can be likened to dancing a waltz, and that the concept of embodied simulation has the potential to drive theoretical development of deception detection, one that includes emotional and cognitive processes. José Navia will then discuss the importance of examining timing, using evidence from his research on temporal calibration in soccer goalkeepers’ responses to deceptive and non-deceptive penalty kicks to. Cathy Craig will round off the symposium by sharing her experience of using virtual reality to study coupled perception/action responses in soccer and rugby, and discussing the insights gained from in-depth analysis of player movements.
Keywords: deception, anticipation, decision making, expertise, virtual reality Expert perception of deceptive motion: three fundamental questions Robin Jackson (Loughborough University) An extensive body of research has consistently shown that high-skilled performers are able to anticipate the actions of their opponent(s) better than their less-skilled counterparts. A potential disadvantage of being highly attuned to early visual information is that it leaves performers vulnerable to deception (Jackson, Warren & Abernethy, 2006). In this presentation I argue that, to fully understand deception, we need to make a conceptual distinction between performers’ susceptibility to deception and their ability to resolve deception as the movement unfolds.
In discussing this, I will address three fundamental questions in the study of deception in sport: (1) Are experts less deceived than low-skilled performers? (2) Are experts better at ‘resolving’ deceptive motion? (3) Are experts more attuned to global (rather than local) information?
Using analysis of performance data in temporal and spatial occlusion studies of soccer step-overs, combined with self-report and confidence data, I argue that susceptibility to deception may be driven by local information while the ability to resolve deception may be underpinned by global information. Keywords: perception, deception, anticipation, expertise 310Symposia Friday July 14th Embodied Simulation in Deception Detection Rouwen Cañal-Bruland (Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena) In many social contexts, recognizing deceptive actions is of great practical importance, be it the referee in sport recognizing a dive or someone identifying the deceitful actions of a pickpocket. This is particularly relevant for manifold situations in sports.
Despite the accumulating evidence for the ability of humans to identify deceptive intentions based on kinematic cues, a comprehensive theoretical framework of deception detection has not been established yet. This does not only limit our current theoretical understanding of deception detection, but it does also mean that there is no theoretical framework at hand that provides us with testable hypotheses which may finally help researchers to systematically examine deception detection in sports and other social contexts. By contrast, for pro-social, cooperative human interactions, often referred to as joint actions such as dancing a waltz, such an encompassing theoretical account is available based on the concept of embodied simulation.
In a nutshell, embodied simulation is frequently construed as the interplay between perception and action, but at the same time it incorporates interactions with emotional and cognitive processes. In this talk, I will outline why I think the concept of embodied simulation is a promising steppingstone to develop an overarching, embodied theory of deception detection. I will argue that it is imperative to integrate and jointly scrutinize motor, perceptual, cognitive and emotional processes to improve our understanding of deception detection, and, in particular, to understand how the distinct processes interact and what their contributions to the successful detection of deceptive intentions are.
In my talk I will present first theoretical ideas that will hopefully allow to generate testable hypotheses. Ideally, these hypotheses may then help to systematically examine deception detection with the aim to finally develop a comprehensive embodied theory of deception detection. Keywords: perception, action, cognition, emotion, deception, embodiment The role of deception in the temporal calibration of constrained actions José Navia (Technic University of Madrid) Temporal calibration during the execution of constrained tasks refers to the ability to scale the timing of the action to the actual spatiotemporal demands, based on both perceptual information and current action capabilities.
In this work we focus on the effect of deception on the reliability and availability of information to- be-perceived over the interpersonal interaction in constrained actions. Hiding and deceiving can hinder and disrupt the potential relationship the opponent would establish between kinematic movements and the final outcome of the action. Hence, at first glance, one might expect that players would perform better under non- deceptive behaviors of their opponents.
However, recent research points towards a more elaborate explanation of success regarding temporal calibration and information. For instance, Navia, Dicks, van der Kamp and Ruiz (2017) did not find any effect of deception in success or timing among expert goalkeepers. However, participants showed an apparent disruption on temporal calibration under different time constraints when facing non-deceptive and deceptive penalties.
Along these lines, other have argued for different calibration rates according to the availability of relevant information. For example, as biomechanical laws dictate, deceptive movements cannot be maintained indefinitely, so the temporal shift in optical information reliability regarding kinematic movements becomes crucial in relation to the timing of the response. This new approach for studying deception will be discussed in terms of its value for explaining outwardly unconventional behaviors as acting outside the safe temporal margins or disturbance in calibration under different time constraints..
Keywords: anticipation, spatiotemporal demands, sport 311Symposia Friday July 14th My eyes are deceiving me: How virtual reality technology can help us understand the effects of deception on players’ decision-making in sport Cathy Craig (Queen’s University Belfast) Deception is widely used in sport to gain a competitive advantage over an opponent. Deception can take many forms such as a player putting spin on a ball to make it fly unpredictably or controlling the movement of their body to signal false intentions to their opponent. To properly understand deception in sport it is important to use a methodology that can adequately and accurately recreate the perceptual information that contains the deceptive event.
Furthermore, it needs to allow us to measure and understand how this information influences a player’s decisions about when and how to act. In this talk I will show how immersive, interactive virtual reality technology can offer an exciting new way of studying deception in sport where the perception/action cycle is preserved (Craig, 2014). The versatility of this technology means it can be easily applied to many different sports.
Using two different examples that show how ball spin in soccer (Dessing and Craig, 2010) and deceptive player movement in rugby (Brault et al, 2012) can be realistically represented, I will show how these types of deception influence players’ decisions about action. I will also show how an in-depth analysis of player movement as the deceptive event unfolds provides valuable insight into expert/novice differences (Craig & Watson, 2011). Keywords: virtual reality, deception, soccer, rugby, expertise, decision-making Symposia Session 10.
(15.30-17) The role of sport and exercise psychology journals in the development of scientific and professional field Chair: Victor Rubio (Universidad Autónoma Madrid) Since 1965, when ISSP 1st World Congress took place, to present, the field of sport and exercise psychology has expanded in scope, in terms of representativeness, professionals involved, and reputation. Both cause and consequence are the publication of a number of scientific and professional journals having sport as exercise psychology as leading or complementary subject. These journals have contributed to the growth, dissemination and benchmarking of the field.
This round table includes editors of some of these journals: Journal of Applied Sport Psychology (JASP, born in 1989); Revista de Psicología del Deporte/Journal of Sport Psychology (RPD/JSP, founded in 1992); Psychology of Sport and Exercise (PSE, starting in 2000), International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology (IJSEP, inaugural issue in 2003), Sport, Exercise and Performance Psychology (SEPP, coming out in 2012), and is aimed at discussing the following topics: From submitted original to published or rejected manuscripts (Are all accepted submissions good and all rejected bad papers? How can authors increase success, how can journals improve papers’ quality?) Journal impact, paper impact and professional practice (Is scientific literature useful beyond its scholarly purpose? Research and applied psychology, parallel paths?) Social responsibility of scientific journals (Can scientific journals promote good/bad science?
Is transparency and replicability an unsolved matter?) Capacity building (how can the journals in our field augment global standards, beyond developed countries). The future of scientific journals (Is there room enough for so many journals?) Keywords: psychology of sport and exercise journals Presenters: Stephen Mellalieu (JASP), Victor Rubio (RPD/JSP), Bernd Strauss and Nikos Ntoumanis (PSE), Robert J. Schinke and Athanasios G.
Papaioannou (IJSEP), Maria Kavussanu (SE&PP) 312Symposia Friday July 14th Moderator: Alexandre Garcia-Mas Psychological interventions in high performance: case studies Chair: Enrique Aguayo (Sociedad Chilena de Psicología del Deporte) Four case studies of psychology applied to high-performance sport are presented. Cases were selected from the athletes who worked with the authors, including athletics, archery, water skiing, soccer, grass hockey and table tennis. Case 1 (Aguayo, E.) The psychological conditions in which athletes obtained world and olympic medals, the case of disruptive actions by a leader and an external attribution case of the coach in explaining the defeat, involving the sports psychologist are described.
Case 2. (Larenas, C.) Two athletes who participated in Rio 2016, were submitted to a cardiac coherence training program, observing an improvement in stress control. Case 3.
(Planella, V.) The coach´s coach, is a unique case study unfolding conditions that influenced coach´s focused reflection as optimal preparation for women´s junior world championship competition. Case 4. (Carrascosa, J.) Learning to Compete, teaches emotional skills to players ages 7-18.
Coaches should use certain emotional skills to generate the appropriate climate for players to achieve the indicated learning, exercising the psychologist a role of facilitator of the process. In these sports psychology applications, we studied variables such as: pre competitive and competitive stress, coherence and cardiac breathing, emotional climate, training of coaches and leadership. Various methodologies were used, such as experiential learning, skills learning, biofeedback and cognitive training.
The roles of psychologists ranged from delivering structured instruction to being facilitators of learning, training psychological skills in coaches and athletes to achieve effective learning. Performance improvement was observed, as well as the presence of unforeseen situations, which negatively affected the attention of some athletes and coaches. Both successful and unsuccessful interventions are presented, in order to learn from them and consider proper handling in future interventions.
Keywords: high performance, cardiac coherence, disruptive intervention, emotional competencies, multimodal strategies, stress management Psychological intervention programs in high performance sports, some problems to consider Enrique Aguayo (Chilean Society of Sport Psychology) It is usual to observe that high levels of pre competitive and/or competitive stress are attributed to athletes performing less than expected, according to the tests performed in the training sessions. The purpose of this case study is to describe some examples of situations observed when working with high performance athletes, defined as athletes competing for international medals. It is analyzed from the perspective of the cognitive-behavioral approach (Butler, Chapman, Forman & Beck, 2006), understanding that the beliefs that athletes have as well as their emotional experiences have important relationship with their behavior when competing.
The cases have been intentionally selected in order to show relevant situations that deserve to be analyzed from the perspective of the sport psychology, as they are part of the reality that sports psychologists can face when intervening in the highly competitive sports. Some of the cases studied were 6 athletes who won Olympic and / or World medals under a very high pressure level (skeet shooting, tennis, archery and water ski); others includes sports officials who intervened to damage the public image of the coach and players in a football selection, and an gymnastics coach who made a negative and public assessment of the intervention of the sports psychologist, attributing the responsibility of not having achieved the sports goal. It is concluded that when planning a psychological intervention program for high performance athletes, the presence of 313Symposia Friday July 14th unforeseen and / or disturbing situations, both internal and external, should be considered as a relevant factor and that appropriate measures should be taken to achieve the objectives of performance.
Keywords: pre-competitive stress, sports performance, disruptive intervention, causal attribution Use of cardiac coherence to improve respiration effectiveness as a technique for stress management in high performance Claudia Larenas (Chilean Society of Sport Psychology) The objective of this case study was to verify the effectiveness of cardiac coherence monitoring in the management of competitive stress. We worked with two athletes, women's athletics and high-performance table tennis, who competed at the Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio de Janeiro in 2016, respectively. Both were submitted to EMWAVE Pro (HeartMath) cardiac coherence equipment for 2 months to train breathing.
Prior to training, the Spanish version of the RESTQ-76 (González-Boto, 2007) questionnaire was administered. In post-training evaluation, with the same questionnaire, it was observed that the athletes reacted very positively to the intervention. Thanks to the software that helped to use the device, it was observed how their response to stress was and how they could improve it.
After this experience, it can be pointed out that the breathing training used to improve cardiac coherence and its evaluation seems to be an effective technique for stress management, where each athlete must develop a specific work program according to the objectives and their personal characteristics. More research is needed to clarify the variables that operate in the use of this technique. Thus, it is possible to contribute with tools for the management of competitive stress, a fundamental aspect in the sport performance as shown by the innumerable investigations about this subject (e.g., Olmedilla, Rubio, Ortega & García-Mas, 2016; Valmet, 2011).
Keywords: stress management, cardiac coherence, breathing, instrument, competence The coach’s coach: a case study unfolding conditions that influenced coach’s optimal improvement M. Verónica Planella (Chilean Society of Sport Psychology) Coaches are diligent in planning and implementation strategies when preparing athletes (Partington & Cushion, 2013). However, it is unclear how deliberate coaches are in implementing strategies that would help them prepare and monitoring their own coaching performance.
Thus far, evidence has demonstrated that typically a coach trusts primary experience for professional preparation and relies on the “art of coaching” for managing their coaching practice (Cushion, Armour, & Jones, 2003). In line with Martens (1997) understanding that effective coaches can translate experience into knowledge through a process of focused reflection and informed by Gilbert and Trudel's (2001) model of experiential learning, this case study examined how applying reflective conversation influenced a coach’s quality preparation. Specifically, this case study adopted a life- story approach (Bathmaker & Harnett, 2010), questioning the role and impact of sport psychology consultant in guiding the reflective conversation for the last twelve weeks of a coach’s preparation and during the 2016 women’s junior field hockey world championships.
Data from life-story interviews sessions, coach’s journal and participant observation followed an interpretive thematic analysis using inductive and deductive reasoning (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Supporting previous research, results showed that specific coaching issues afforded reflective conversation and it is constrained by the perceived coach’s role. Further, evidence revealed four conditions that allowed successful professional collaboration between a specialty field hockey coach from Argentina and sport psychology practitioner from Canada: (a) collective trust, (b) non-involved approach, (c) safe association, and (d) multimodal strategies.
Findings from this case study open the discussion regarding the role of practitioners in implementing strategies for facilitating coach’s improvement, in turn enlighten consultant education programs and initiatives. 314Symposia Friday July 14th Keywords: optimal improvement, collective trust, non-involved approach, safe association, multimodal strategies Training of emotional competencies in a football team José Carrascosa (Saber Competir) In a consistent way, in education fields has been proved the need of teaching and learning through skills. In a soccer team we have to talk about the emotional skills to teach to players and coaches (staff).
The competencies that are directly related with performance and emotional well-being of the soccer players are: 1) emotional autonomy, 2) resilience, 3) team work, 4) social skills, 5) emotional leadership 6) values and 7) healthy life styles. Emotional skills to train coachs are: 1) team building 2) assertive communication, 3) conflict management, 4) motivation, 5) emotional leadership 6) emotional autonomy and 7) training’s pedagogy. The teaching-learning methodology is based on: 1) the Kolb learning model (Stice, J.
E., 1987); 2) emotional training workshops; 3) the direct observation and the use of audiovisuals, and 4) support through reading of key concepts. The psychologist becomes a facilitator of learning in soccer players and coach. Evaluation is carried out at three levels: assessment by the psychologist or coach; self-evaluation and co-evaluation (evaluation by team mates).
The aim is to educate players, who are responsible, self-critical, with good self-esteem, tolerant and understanding success and failure, oriented to the task and to permanent learning, prepared to overcome the difficulty (“Resilient”, e.g., Ruiz-Barquín, R. et al, 2012), receptive to live and work with any partner. With regard to the coach the aim is to promote a leadership style that generates commitment, involvement, cohesion and individual and collective performance.
Keywords: emotional competencies, teaching-learning, performance, personal development, emotional well- being Sport as a veritable tool to enhance peace sustainability in Port Harcourt metropolis of Rivers State, Nigeria. Chair: Athanasius Nwanegbo Amasiatu, A.V. Ogunleye, B.G Akuru,.(Department Of Human Kinetics University Of Port Harcourt, Rivers State Nigeria) The purpose of this study was to find out the impact of sports as tool among boys and girls in Port Harcourt Metropolis of Nigeria.
The study examined the roles of sports to the development of boys and girls in peace- keeping fostering their physical, emotional health and building valuable social connections. While a descriptive survey research design was used with a questionnaire. With a sample size of one thousand and eight hundred (1,800) respondents for the study, using the simple random sampling techniques which involved two stages divided non- probability and probability sampling technique on a population of all male and female youths from the crisis area of Port Harcourt metropolis of Rivers State, Nigeria.
The result was subjected to descriptive statistics of percentage, mean and standard deviation. The results showed that there was a significant relationship between the variables of sports in terms of social control, cultural/ ethical value, character building, occupational mobility, group dynamics and youth positive restiveness on peace and development. Based on these recommendations were made that both state and federal government should give priority to the provision of resources for the establishment of sports facilities and centres at the community level to bridge the social gap so as to foster National peace and development within Port Harcourt Metropolis of Rivers State in Nigeria.
Keywords: sports, peace and development Abua communities 315Symposia Friday July 14th Cultural perspectives to sport psychology: experiences of working with national teams in Botswana Tshepang Tshube(Department Of Physical Education and Health, University Of Botswana) and Stephanie J. Hanrahan (School Of Human Movement And Nutrition Sciences and School Of Psychology, The University Of Queensland) The primary objective of this presentation is to share experiences and methods used when consulting with athletes and their entourages in Botswana. Authors used notes and observations made by the first author when he consulted with athletes and their entourages at three major games/championships (Olympic Games, Africa Games, and Africa Senior Track and Field Championships) and three training camps in preparation for the Olympic Games.
Authors observed context specific approaches, a difference in conceptualizations of mental skills in the Setswana culture, and general culture and sub-cultural adaptations. There is rich language diversity in Botswana, and some athletes may have difficulty understanding English. Directly translating some mental skills (e.g., self-talk) may result in unintended meanings that can confuse athletes.
Psychologists require an understanding of the context and cultural backgrounds of athletes. For example, some athletes and their entourages may believe in engaging a sangoma (a spiritual healer) or use muti (traditional medicine used for powers or a talisman) to enhance performance. In addition, sport psychologists may be expected by management to take on roles not typically considered to be appropriate for psychologists, and there may be multiple issues with the basic logistics of international team travel.
For example, sport psychologists may spend a lot of time addressing issues relating to delayed allowances and uniforms. In conclusion, it is important for sport psychologists to have deep knowledge of cultural customs, language, and organizational cultures (power dynamics in the organization) when working with athletes in Botswana. Keywords: Botswana, Culture, Role expectations, Spiritual assistance, Translations Talent development and athletes’ fulfilment in Nigerian secondary school sports competition.
B. L.Oluwatunbi, , O. A.
Ipinmoroti, A. O. Adesokan, (Department Of Human Kinetics, Sport And Health Education, Lagos State University, Ojo, Lasu, Nigeria.) Through participation in sport, young people learn about the importance of key values such as honesty, teamwork, fair play, respect for themselves and others, and adherence to rules.
The purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which sports competitions in Nigerian secondary school contribute to talent development and participants’ fulfillment. Descriptive survey research method was employed. A total of 200 athletes and 20 sports masters/mistresses were selected randomly from 4 secondary schools in Ikeja Local Government Education Area of Lagos State, Nigeria.
The instrument used to collect data for the study was a self-structured questionnaire named “Talent Development and Athletes’ Fulfilment Questionnaire (TIAFQ)”. This was developed by the researcher and validated by two experts in sports psychology. The validated instrument was administered on selected respondents.
The data collected was used to develop a frequency distribution table for analysis. Three (3) research hypotheses were formulated and tested. The descriptive statistics of frequency counts and percentages was used in presenting the data collected, while inferential statistics of t-test was used to test all hypotheses at a 0.05 level of significance.
The three hypotheses were accepted. Hence, school sports does not influence talent development in Nigerian secondary schools; school inter-house sports competition does not have any significant influence of students’ participation in sports; participation in school sports has no significant influence on participants’ development and fulfilment in sport. It was recommended that sport masters/mistresses should arouse the interest of students to participate in sports particularly beyond immediate benefits; in exercising their expertise, school sport masters/mistresses should improve on the tactical skills of the students; and that school authorities should partner with the 316Symposia Friday July 14th government, corporate organizations and philanthropists to provide sporting facilities and equipment in schools.
Keywords: competition, fulfilment, potential, school sports, talent development. Barriers to sports participation as a means of achieving sustainable social development. O.
R.Osifeko, C. O. Osifeko,.
B. E. Folarin,.
(Department Of Physical And Health Education, Michael Otedola College Of Primary Educaton, Noforija-Epe, Lagos Nigeria) During these difficult economic times, nations are looking for ways to improve their finances, preserve the environment as well as the socio-political climate and educational institutions, which are needed to increase their economy and preserve their sustainable development. Sport is one of the ways through which sustainable development can be achieved. The purpose of this study was to examine the barriers to participation in sport.
A total of 1,025 students were purposively selected from all the five schools (School of Arts and Social Sciences, School of Languages, School of Education, School of Sciences and School of Vocational and Technical Education) in MOCPED. A questionnaire, with a tested reliability coefficient of 0.71, was used for data collection. The collected data were subjected to the descriptive survey research design.
The findings showed that sports facilities, funding and lecture schedules were significant barriers to sports participation. It was recommended that sports facilities be provided by the Lagos. Keywords: MOCPED sports, sustainable social development, sports participation, state government Youth sport research in the African context: a key to evidenced based programming for youth psychosocial development Leapetswe Malete; (Michigan State University USA) The growing number of youth sport programs aimed at youth development across Africa signal an increasing awareness of the potential impact of youth sports to the overall development of youth.
Compared to most community youth sports programs in the developed countries, the typically agency sponsored programs in Africa seek to address the socio economic and other challenges faced by the youth in the continent. They are developed within the UN framework of sport for development and peace (UNOSDP, 2016). They target at risk or disadvantaged youth and such issues as social inclusion, unemployment, health, poverty, and reducing the impact of civil strife.
All of these are noble intentions and evidence suggests that they are making a difference to the lives of the youth involved. The challenge is that the programs seem to outpace the evidence needed to guide their structure, assess their outcomes and impact, and if they work the same way across varying contexts. Also worth knowing is the extent of any unintended consequences of youth sport that have been identified in the literature and how these may be affecting the individual child.
Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to share existing evidence on the relationship between youth sport and youth psychosocial outcomes in Africa; make a case for more evidenced-based youth sport outreach; as well as the need for investigations on appropriate methodologies that take into account unique contextual elements of youth’s sport environments across Africa. The paper makes a case for strengthening the research-practice nexus in youth sport and youth development research as well as the need build sustainability into program development. Key Words: Youth sport, youth development, research, outreach 317Symposia Friday July 14th Motivational profiles in exercise and physical activity behavior Chair: Karin Weman Josefsson (Halmstad University) From a self-determination theory (SDT; Deci & Ryan 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2002) perspective, the nature of motivation is dynamic and the quite recent concept of “motivational soup” suggest that different types of motivational regulations coexist within people and that these within-person patterns in turn will produce different patterns of behavior.
Instead of using traditional approaches focusing on variable centered analyses and between-person patterns, the relatively new trend (within this area) of using person-centered statistical analyses permit insights and understanding in how motivational regulations interact within persons and how these interactions relate to behavior. Such knowledge would provide a valuable contribution to the tailoring of interventions aimed to target specific groups of people using potent psychographic profiles as moderators instead of more blunted demographic variables (Hardcastle & Hagger, 2015). This symposium brings together European researchers from four different universities to discuss new insights on within-person relationships in different steps of the SDT process model.
The first presenter will look into the associations between behavioral regulation profiles and exercisers’ emotional response in a large sample of health clubs members. The second presenter will discuss exercise motivational profiles of obese patients and how these relate to exercise behavior 6-months post-discharge. The third presenter will describe a model with four motivation profiles for exercise professionals in relationship to multiple continuous outcomes such as work satisfaction, emotional exhaustion and depersonalization.
The fourth presenter will share results from a latent transition analysis on a three-wave longitudinal study in a digital context. The following discussion will then be focused on overlapping and specific motivational profiles in relation to exercise and physical activity promotion and strategies for future research and applications. Keywords: motivational profiles, exercise, self-determination A "feel good factor" analysis of four exercise motivation profiles Antonio Palmeira (University of Lisbon, Portugal), David Sánchez-Oliva (Universidade Lusófona, Portugal), Diogo Teixeira (University of Extremadura, Spain) Self-determination theory predicts that positive emotions are linked with self-determined exercise behavior.
Motivational profiles study these associations, but literature is sparse, especially in large samples of exercisers. This study aim was to evaluate the emotional response to exercise in different exercise motivation profiles of regular exercisers in health club / gym settings. This was a cross-sectional study with 495 health club members (186 women, 40.50±13.54 years, 2.61±1.29 sessions per week).
Exercise behavior regulations (Autonomous, Controlled and Amotivation), and exercise emotional response (Positive/Negative Affect; Psychological Well-Being/Distress/Fatigue; and Perceived Exertion) were measured through self-report. Cluster analysis was used to define the motivational profiles. No gender differences were detected in the profiles, so an ANOVA, with post-hocs, was used.
Four profiles were detected (1 - Low motivation, n=135; 2 - Controlled, n=111; 3 - Autonomous, n=217; and 4 - Amotivated, n=32). In general, the exercise emotional response was more intense in the autonomous and controlled, when compared to the low motivation and amotivation profiles (p's<.003). Specifically, the autonomous profile had more Perceived Exertion, Positive Emotions and Psychological Well-Being, and less Negative Emotions, Distress and Fatigue than the low motivation profile (p's<.043).
A similar pattern was observed with the controlled profile, but mostly for positive emotional responses (p's<.008), as Distress scores were similar between controlled and low-motivation profiles (p>.05). Interestingly, we observed more Negative Emotions, Distress and Fatigue in this group when compared with the autonomous profile (p's<.003). The autonomous profile, with high quality of motivation, displayed the best pattern of emotional responses.
The controlled profile presented a pattern where high levels of positive and negative emotional responses coexist. 318Symposia Friday July 14th Keywords: motivational profiles, organismic integration theory, exercise emotional response Becoming active post-therapy – an exploration of motivational profiles during exercise change in obese patients Anna Wasserkampf, Jens Kleinert, Chloé Chermette (German Sport University Cologne, Germany) As the motivational background of exercise behavior in obese patients following hospitalization is not well documented, the present study intended to characterize exercise motivational profiles, based on Organismic Integration Theory (Deci & Ryan, 2000), and to relate these to exercise behavior post-discharge. Patients (N = 262; 34.2% female, age M = 46.53, SD = 9.76, body mass index M = 40.3, SD = 8.8) were asked to complete inventories that assessed exercise behavior pre-hospitalization and 6-months post-discharge (by means of Godin Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire) as well as exercise behavioral regulations 6-months post-discharge.
Motivational profiles were identified by using K-means non-hierarchical cluster analysis. Relationships between motivational profiles and exercise behavior were tested by means of Chi-square tests. Three exercise motivational profiles emerged: a moderate controlled cluster (i.e., moderate controlled regulations, low autonomous regulations; n = 80), a moderate autonomous cluster (i.e., moderate autonomous regulations, low controlled regulations; n = 78) and a high autonomous cluster (i.e., high autonomous regulations, low controlled regulations; n = 104).
The majority of patients who became active over time (52%) belonged to the high autonomous cluster, while the fewest belonged to the moderate autonomous cluster (22%). While the high autonomous cluster appears to be most promising, the moderate controlled and moderate autonomous clusters seem to be equally favorable regarding prolonged exercise behavior change, despite their obvious differences in autonomous regulations. Investigating motivational profiles helps health care professionals to better tailor their interventions to facilitate continued exercising.
Keywords: organismic integration theory, obesity, exercise, post-discharge, motivational profiles Effects of a digital intervention program on motivational regulation patterns in an exercise context: A latent transition analysis of the “motivational soup” Karin Weman Josefsson, Andreas Ivarsson, Urban Johnson (Halmstad University), Magnus Lindwall (University of Gothenburg) Within the self-determination theory of motivation the concept “motivational soup” refers to motivational regulations forming profiles of accumulated drives towards behavior. Few studies have examined the probability of intervention effects to change such motivational profiles over time, knowledge that might inform future program design to promote sustainable exercise motivation. Participants (N=318) were 279 women and 40 men, aged 23-67 years (Mage=46.7; SD=9.4) consisting of adult members of a web-based step contest provided by their employers.
Of the 166 individuals randomly assigned to the experimental group, 85 logged in to the digital intervention platform at least once and were considered treated as intended. This group had access to a web-based digital exercise motivation intervention based on SDT for three weeks. The trial had three measure points; T1 baseline, T2 (3 weeks) and a follow up T3 (6 weeks).
To investigate the potential effect of the intervention on the odds of participants to change motivational profiles between T1 and T3 we used Latent Transition Analysis. The intervention had positive main effects on exercise level. A four profile solution showed good quality of classification into the separate profiles (entropy = .92).
The profiles were labeled high-high (n=262), high-low (n=26), low-high (n=8), and low-low (n=12), where the label high reflected a more autonomous regulation pattern (missing n=10). Participants in the autonomous profile at T1 had high probabilities of remaining there at T3, but slightly lower probability in the control (82%) than the intervention (95%) condition. Participants in the control condition also had a statistically significant increased probability to belong to the profile with a decreased level autonomy T3 (high-low profile) (OR=4.0, p=.008).These results 319Symposia Friday July 14th indicate that this digital exercise motivation intervention can increase the likelihood for participants to sustain autonomous motivation profiles over time Keywords: atent transition analysis, exercise, self-determination, motivational profiles, intervention Understanding motivational strategies used by exercise professional: A person-centered approach David Sánchez-Oliva, Eliana V.
Carraça (Faculty of Sports and Physical Education, Lusófona University, Portugal), Pedro J. Teixeira (Faculty of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon, Portugal), Antonio Palmeira (Faculty of Sports and Physical Education, Lusófona University, Portugal), Marlene N. Silva (Faculty of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon, Portugal) Using the self-determination theory (SDT), the aim of this study was to identify different profiles of motivational strategies used by exercise professionals in gym contexts (supportive vs controlling), as well as to examine associations between these motivational profiles and perceptions of job pressure, exercisers’ motivation, work-related need satisfaction/frustration, type of motivation, and burnout.
Participants were 366 exercise professionals (193 males; experience = 7.7±5.8 years). Using the Latent Profile Analysis (LPA) approach, we included supportive and controlling behaviours to estimate one to four profiles solutions. From the retained model, we also tested the relationship between profiles groups and multiple continuous outcomes.
The 3-profiles model was retained as the best solution, composed by a supportive profile (n = 225), a controlling profile (n = 42), and a mixed profile (n = 99). The supportive profile displayed the most optimal pattern, with higher scores in exercisers’ self-determined motivation, need satisfaction, self-determined motivation at work, and personal accomplished, and lower scores in job pressure, need frustration, emotional exhaustion, and depersonalization. On the contrary, the controlling profiles displayed the most maladaptive pattern of associations with outcomes, even in comparison to the mixed profile.
The current study extends previous variable-centered research by using a person-centered approach, and it highlight that, although much emphasis has been given to promote need-support, reducing controlling practices seems comparably important, as professionals relying mostly on this type of strategies displayed a worse quality of their own motivation and higher burnout. Keywords: latent profiles analysis, motivational strategies, exercise professionals Establishment of sport psychology international accreditation Chair: Gangyan Si (Managing Council -MC-) The purpose of this presidents’ symposium is to target one important topic “Establishment of Sport Psychology International Accreditation” in the international sport psychology community and promote the exchange of views in relation to this topic among the presidents of different sport psychology organizations. Considering the different development levels of sport psychology around the world, we believe that the regions and countries under various socio-cultural and economic backgrounds may have their specific requests or considerations on the “International Accreditation Standard”.
ISSP would like to provide a platform for a dialog among international sport psychology organizations in this regard. We would especially appreciate the expressions/comments of the presidents of organizations from sport psychology developing regions. Within this symposium, the Asian and South Pacific Association of Sport Psychology (ASPASP), the African Society of Sport and Exercise Psychology (ASSEP), and the FIAP Sport Psychology section (Iberoamerican Federation of Professional Psychologists) will be discussing their respective efforts in establishing sport psychology accreditation and accreditation standards.
The symposium will close with an exchange of opinions and 320Symposia Friday July 14th suggestions, that will be facilitated by two discussants’ dialog/comments from the perspective of the European Federation of Sport Psychology (FEPSAC) and the Association for Applied Sport Psychology (AASP). Development of accreditation system of sport psychologists in Asian-South-Pacific region Dr. Liwei Zhang (President of Asian-South Pacific Association of Sport Psychology; Beijing Sport University, China) This paper introduced the current statues and future trends about the development of accreditation system of sport psychologists in Asian-south-pacific region.
In this region the development of such a quality management system or accreditation system is unbalanced. In some countries such as Australia there is a well- organized accreditation system developed by the Psychology Board of Australia and approved by the Australian Health Workforce Ministerial Council and all sport and exercise psychologists must first gain general registration as a psychologist and then complete the requirements for “area of practice” endorsement in sport and exercise psychology for their professional practice and activities. Korea Society of Sport Psychology has developed a three level accreditation system for sport psychology consultants since 2004 and held 20 sport psychology consultant certification training workshops until 2016.
Currently, there are more than 800 certified sport psychology consultants in Korea. In other countries the sport psychology associations are planning to put such a national accreditation system into practice. In future the Asian-South-Pacific Association of Sport Psychology (ASPASP) is considering to introduce an online open course of sport psychology as a first step of ASPASP accrediting sport psychologists.
The challenges and difficulties of developing an international accreditation system of sport psychologists were also discussed. African Society for Sport and Exercise Psychology-The way forward Prof. Athanasius Nwanegbo Amasiatu (Acting President of African Society of Sport and Exercise Psychology; University of Port Harcourt, Nigeria) The African Society of Sport and Exercise Psychology was established four years ago during the 12th ISSP world congress held in Beijing, China in 2013.
The aim was to foster collaboration among National Sport and Exercise Psychology groups to professional bodies and get involved with National Sport Federation, coaches and athletes alike. In general, sport psychology is still in its infancy in Africa, particularly in organized form. Thus it has been difficult to obtain information on training and selection in most countries in the region.
The 2001 source book entry for Africa indicates that key countries in sport and exercise psychology currently include Nigeria, South African, Kenya, Zimbabwe Mozambique, Egypt and Botswana. Most of the countries in the continent organize sport and exercise psychology association to foster, unity, research and services to coaches and athletes for competitions. Also there is no organized method for certification/licensing for professionals in sport psychology.
Rather the only method to become members of the association is either obtaining sport psychology degree at graduate or post graduate level from Psychology or Human Kinetics departments. There is therefore need to harmonize the professional preparation of sport psychology in our sub-region which will pave way for quality assurance of professionals across National boundaries so as to ensure international standards and acceptability. This 14th ISSP world congress is another opportunity for participants from our sub- region to come together so as to brain storm on the way forward to move our society to the next level.
“Taking the bull by the horns”: Accreditation of the specialty Dr. Enrique Cantón (Coordinador División Psicología Deportedel Consejo Psicología de España; Coordinador División Psicología Deporte de la Federación Iberoamericana de Asociaciones de Psicología; Universidad de Valencia, España) 321Symposia Friday July 14th The expression heading the title reflects the need to address in a very direct way an issue, although it presents difficulties that may scare a little. In addition to thinking about what should be required for an accreditation of a specialty such as the psychology of sport, we should also think about other equally important issues.
First, what this accreditation should serve for. Second, who should do it. And third, how the evaluation should process be.
To this we should add what criteria to require. Therefore, even if it generates debate, or because it is necessary to do it, I will ‘take the bull by the horns’ and I will aim to express the position of the organization I represent. In relation to the first point, I believe that there is enough consensus to understand it as an accreditation for professional practice of the psychology in the framework of the activities we have defined in the broad concept of sport and exercise.
Consequently, it is not an academic accreditation, a training only certification, or a formal recognition of a level of research. The answer to this issue is crucial as a derivation point to which institution would correspond its concession. In that sense, it should be those who regulate the profession who are ultimately responsible for the license.
Related to the third issue, the lines of support and collaboration with other entities or organizations could fit in it. Firstly, as it has already been done with private professional associations and in our specific field, for the historical development of our discipline, other organizations not exclusively composed by psychologists can contribute their opinions, experience and their criteria about the process, which does not exclude their own certification processes. These are some of the issues that need to be approached.
Are the stage of change theories applicable to model health behavior change in Chinese sample? Chair: Yanping Duan (Hong Kong Baptist University, China) According to stage models, health behavior change is a dynamic process that consists of a sequence of discrete, qualitatively distinct stages. For example, the Transtheoretical Model (TTM; Prochaska et al., 1992) includes 5 stages (precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action and maintenance), the Health Action Process Approach (HAPA; Schwarzer, 2008) consists of 3 stages (non-intentional, intentional and action), while the Four Steps from Inactivity to Activity Model (FIT; Brehm, Duan et al., 2010) proposes 6 stages (not- considering, considering, preparing, fluctuating, exploring and maintaining).
In addition, each stage model contains different psychosocial variables, which are regarded as essential catalysts for transitions between the stages. During the past two decades, stage models have been widely used in the western countries to explain and predict individual’s health behavior change. However, there are still limited studies conducted in the eastern country.
This symposium aims to explore the applicability of stage models for health behavior change in Chinese samples. Presentation 1 focuses on the TTM-based intervention application for physical activity among Chinese people by using systematic review. Presentation 2 addresses the applicability of FIT model for physical activity by reviewing three cross-sectional studies in large sample size among Chinese young adults and mixed adult sample (Chinese and German).
Presentation 3-5 targets the examination of HAPA model. In particular, presentation 4 tests the hybrid feature of the HAPA for physical activity among Chinese adults with two longitudinal studies. Presentation 5 examines the effectiveness of a web-based intervention on multiple behaviour among Chinese university students.
Stages of changes for physical activity (PA) and fruit and vegetable intake (FVI), motivational and volitional variables of behaviours are the outcome indicators in this study. Keywords: stage of change, psychosocial variables, health behaviour, chinese sample The transtheoretical model-based intervention application for physical activity among Chinese people: a systematic review Qi Si (Zhejiang University, China) 322Symposia Friday July 14th The transtheoretical model (TTM) was first proposed in China in 1998. Since its initial introduction some 19 years ago, no systematic review has been conducted on the body of whole works of its application that have been produced.
The purposed of this presentation is to address the application by reviewing the body of work on TTM and physical activity behavior in China from 1998 to 2016, and test the effectiveness of TTM based intervention to promote Chinese physical activity. Studies published between January 1, 1998 and December 31, 2016 were located by searching three database (i. e., CNKI, WANGFANG DATA, & VIP).
Each of the full texts of the potential papers and the associated reference lists of all relevant publications were retrieved and reviewed, a total of 6,435 potential papers were identified. Data were coded and analyzed from the 16 eligible papers using a semi-quantitative summary. The results showed that the TTM model remains a popular theoretical basis for the study of physical activity in China, however, intervention and/or longitudinal designs, as well as the study carried out using all of the core TTM constructs were insufficient, the suitability and applicability of the model remains to be further tested.
Future research is needed that focuses on longitudinal study designs, diverse participant recruitment, measurement validation, and studies based on all dimensions of TTM. There is an increasing need to provide definitional criteria for physical activity (i.e., information about duration, intensity, or frequency) and standardize the stage of change. Keywords: physical activity, review, research methodology, effectiveness Testing the four steps from inactivity to activity model for physical activity: three empirical studies Yanping Duan (Hong Kong Baptist University, China), Walter Brehm (University of Bayreuth, Germany) The Four Steps from Inactivity to Activity Model (FIT; Brehm, Duan et al., 2010) has recently been developed to specifically describe and explain health-enhancing physical activity (PA) behavior.
It consists of (1) self report PA behavior; (2) a stage algorithm with six stages of PA including not-considering, considering, preparing, fluctuating, exploring and maintaining; (3) ten psychosocial correlates such as outcome expectations, affective attitude, barriers, self-efficacy, body-concept, plans, intrinsic motivation, activity emotions, assessment of activity situation, and social support; and (4) five health outcomes including fitness, subjective well-being, health satisfaction, physical complaints, and BMI. By reviewing three cross-sectional studies based on FIT model, this presentation aimed to examine the applicability of FIT model for PA in large sample size among Chinese and mixed sample (German and Chinese adults). Study 1 assessed stage of change among 1012 Chinese university students in terms of PA, psychosocial variables and health outcomes.
Misclassification, sensitivity, specificity, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, nonlinear trends, and planned comparison were computed. The measurement quality of the stage algorithm was verified in study 1. Study 2 tested the relationships among psychosocial correlates, stages of change for PA and health outcomes in university students from a 770 mixed sample (404 Germans, 366 Chinese).
The results revealed that barriers and intrinsic motivation were the critical psychosocial variables related to stages of change. The link between stages of change for PA and health outcomes (ie, fitness, health satisfaction) was well established. Study 3 examined the relationships of selected psychosocial correlates of PA with stages of change in a 2017 mixed adult sample (865 Germans, 1206 Chinese).
All data were analyzed with a two-way ANOVA. Keywords: FIT model, stage algorithm, psychosocial correlates, health outcome, adults Testing the hybrid feature of the health action process approach (HAPA) for physical activity among Chinese adults Borui Shang, Yanping Duan (Hong Kong Baptist University, China) The health action process approach (HAPA) is a hybrid model that can be analyzed either as a stage model or as a continuum (mediator) model. On the one hand, HAPA as an explicit stage model make a distinction 323Symposia Friday July 14th between intention formation in motivational phase and behavior change in volitional phase.
Thus three stages are discriminated as pre-intender, intender and actor. The Psychosocial variables such as risk perception, outcome expectancies and planning play different role corresponding to different stages. On the other hand, HAPA can be regarded as a continuum model.
Variables such as self-efficacy and social support are regarded as mediators throughout the whole process. This presentation incorporates two longitudinal empirical studies regarding physical activity (PA) behavior based on HAPA by structural equation modeling (SEM). In the first study, 580 university students were recruited to assess the usefulness of HAPA model.
The model fit indices (χ2/df=1.718, p<0.01; TLI=.954; CFI=.959; RMSEA=.035) showed the HAPA model is well-fitting for PA behavior prediction among this sample. The second study examined the model usefulness of the HAPA with a sample of 331 university staff. In general, the model fit the data well with RMSEA=.057, χ2/df= 2.09, CFI=.892.
Specifically, 71% of the variance of intention was explained by the two robust variables of positive outcome expectancy (path coefficientβ=.349, p<.001), and action self-efficacy (β=.566, p<.001). The intention (β=.127, p<.05), in turn, with plan (β=.294, p<.01) as well as recovery self-efficacy (β=.343, p<.001) collectively predicted the PA behavior. In addition, results indicated intention was a significant predictor of planning (β=.225, p<.01) and PA behavior (β=.294, p<.01), while planning was a significant predictor of PA behavior (β=.127, p<.05).
These results supported planning as a partial mediator bridging the intention-behavior gap. Keywords: the health action process approach, stage model, continuum feature, physical activity, Chinese adults Application and effect of psychological intervention of multiple health behavior on cardiac patients in home-based rehabilitation aftercare Wei Liang, Yanping Duan (Hong Kong Baptist University, China), Lan Guo (Guangdong General Hospital, China), Gangyan Si (Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China), Sonia Lippke (Jacobs University Bremen, Germany) The literature review shows it is often difficult for rehabilitation patients to integrate learning outcomes from clinical rehabilitation into their daily life after they discharge from rehabilitation. In China, there are numerous limitations of post-rehabilitation service for cardiac patients such as the insufficiency of rehabilitation facilities that result in some obstacles to their recovery and health.
To overcome these problems, this study aimed to provide an e-health learning strategies in China, which the patients can follow at home after they are discharged from rehabilitation. Through behavior change techniques (e.g., motivating intention, prompting specific goal setting, feedback on performance, presenting follow-up prompts, and prompting barrier identification), using Health Action Process Approach (HAPA) as theoretical backdrop, we aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of the web-based intervention program of multiple health behavior for 8 weeks. 92 Participating patients (Mean age=49.2 yrs, SD=14.84; male=57, female=35) were recruited in an outpatient cardiac rehabilitation center.
All of these participants were assigned randomly into one of two groups: 1) intervention group, first PA (week 1-4) and then healthy dietary behavior (week 5-8); 2) the control group. All groups were further contacted to collect data at the beginning of intervention (T1, N=92), at the end of intervention (T2, N=57), and one month follow-up (T3, N=51). Self-reported data including behavior-related indicators for PA and FVI, and psychological indicators of health behavior (i.e., intention, planning), as well as perceived health outcomes (i.e., Quality of Life, QoL, BMI, and depression) were evaluated and analyzed.
Keywords: e-health learning, web-based intervention, physical activity, fruit and vegetable intake, cardiac patient, rehabilitation-aftercare 324Symposia Friday July 14th Effect of a web-based intervention on physical activity and fruit and vegetable intake among Chinese university students Chun Hu, Yanping Duan (Hong Kong Baptist University, China), Julian Wienert (University of Lübeck, Germany), Gangyan Si (Education University of Hong Kong, China), Sonia Lippke (Jacobs University Bremen, Germany) Ample evidence demonstrates that university students are at high risk for sedentary behaviours and inadequate fruit and vegetable intake. Internet-based interventions for multiple health behaviour appear to be promising in changing such unhealthy habits. Limited randomized controlled trials have tested this assumption among Chinese university students.
This study aimed to test the continuous effectiveness of Health Action Process Approach among Chinese university students. Health Action Process Approach divides the health behaviour change process into motivational phase, in which people who do not intend to change their behaviour (non-intenders) are motivated to develop their intentions, and volitional phase, in which people initiate and perform the behaviour. Within the volitional phase, a distinction can be made between people who have the intention to perform a specific behaviour but do not act (intenders) and people who already perform the behaviour (actors).
An 8-week web-based intervention was conducted to improve stage of change for physical activity (PA), stage of change for fruit and vegetable intake (FVI) as well as the psychological variables of PA and FVI. Self-reported data including stages of change for PA and FVI, motivational (risk perception, outcome expectancies, self-efficacy) and volitional (action planning, coping planning, social support) indicators for PA and FVI were collected. In a randomized controlled trial, university students from one university in the central region of China were recruited during their PE class.
493 students were randomly assigned into one of two groups: (1) intervention group: first 4-weeks on PA and subsequent 4-weeks on FVI; (2) the control group. Three web-based assessments points were conducted including one at the beginning of the intervention (T1, N=493), at the end of the 8-week intervention (T2, N=337), and at a 1 month follow-up after the intervention (T3, N=142). Keywords: web-based intervention, physical activity, fruit and vegetable intake, university students, motivational indicators, volitional indicators Youth Experience Survey: Where it started, where it has traveled, and what issues it faced along the way Chair: Scott Rathwell (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada) Contemporary approaches in sport psychology have adopted strength-based methods for facilitating positive development (Danish et al., 1993).
This approach has been exemplified through expanding research in Positive Youth Development (PYD; Gould & Carson, 2008; Lerner et al., 2005). One limitation in the PYD literature is the lack of agreement of an operational definition of PYD which has led to multiple instruments measuring the construct (MacDonald & McIsaac, 2016). Based on their synthesis of PYD literature, Gould and Carson (2008) advocated for the use of the Youth Experience Survey (YES 2.0; Hansen & Larson, 2005), contending that it assesses pertinent themes related to positive youth developmental.
Therefore, the aim of this symposium is to present the evolution of the YES and how it has emerged as a useful measure in PYD. Each speaker will summarize a unique variant of the YES and will discuss the merits of the scale. The first presentation by David Hansen will highlight the history of the YES and present recent development with the instrument.
The second presentation by Sandy Mosher will discuss adaptions of the YES to a Special Olympics population while the third presentation by Patricia Gaion will discuss adaptation of the instrument into Portuguese. The fourth presentation by Scott Rathwell will review work conducted on a new variant of the YES that is specific to the university sport setting. The fifth presentation by Mathew Marini will speak to a short form version of the YES-S and its utility within youth and university settings.
Finally, Dany MacDonald will act as 325Symposia Friday July 14th the symposium discussant and respond to the presentations and reflect on the future of quantitative assessment in PYD through sport. Keywords: positive development, psychometrics, measurement The history, evolutions, and future of the Youth Experience Survey David M Hansen, Nadia Jessop (University of Kansas, Lawrence Kansas, United States of America) The history and ‘evolutions’ of the Youth Experience Survey (YES) will be discussed with the intent of highlighting its conceptual and psychometric strengths and limitations, and future research questions that it can address. A burgeoning research field on positive youth development in out-of-school or after-school youth programs—including sport—emerged in the mid-to-late 1990’s.
Although there was growing recognition of the role youth programs in supporting positive development (National Research Council, 2002), the field lacked measures to assess the range of development within these programs. In response to this absence, the YES, 1.0 was developed as a self-report measure to inventory high-school adolescents’ developmental experiences in a particular extracurricular activity or community-based youth program (Hansen et al., 2003). An overarching aim in creating the YES was to focus on ‘tangible’ experiences that adolescents could readily identify and rate the frequency of their occurrence.
Although the original YES contained some statements about what adolescents’ learned in a program, the authors’ intent was to focus on experiences (e.g., “I set a goal) rather than on learning (e.g., “I learned that…”). This distinction, however, is often blurred. Since its publication in 2003, the YES has undergone numerous revisions by one of the original authors (Hansen; versions 2.0, 3.0, and 3.1) and by other researchers (e.g., MacDonald et al., 2012).
The purposes for changing the YES are varied and include strengthening its psychometric properties, and adapting it for use with different ages, languages, cultures, and settings (e.g., formal education). While significant improvements have been made, several conceptual and psychometric questions remain, e.g., what is an appropriate response scale? Results from research with two recent revisions (Hansen et al., 2015; 2016) will be presented, along with future research questions on what the YES can (and cannot) address.
Exploring the factor structure of the Youth Experience Survey for Sport adapted to Special Olympics athletes Alexandra Mosher, Jessica Fraser-Thomas (York University, Toronto, Canada), Dany J. MacDonald (University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Canada), Jonathan Weiss (York University, Toronto, Canada) Special Olympics (SO) is the world’s largest sport organization for individuals with intellectual disabilities. The SO mission is to “transform lives through the joy of sport everyday, everywhere” (SO, n.d.).
Given this mission, it is important to examine the experiences of young people within SO programs. The purpose of this study was to test the factor structure of a modified version of the Youth Experiences for Sport (YES-S; MacDonald et al., 2012) in a sample of parents of youth in SO Ontario. The original YES-S measures youths’ developmental experiences participating in organized sport activities in five specific domains: personal and social skills, cognitive skills, goal setting, initiative, and negative experiences.
The modified version of the YES-S used in this study included only 12 of the original 37 items, with a focus on positive (versus negative) experiences that could be best answered through parent proxy (i.e., eliminating cognitive skills and most goal setting skills items). Participants consisted of 470 parents of SO Ontario athletes. Parallel and Scree plot analyses suggested a two-factor solution be retained.
An exploratory factor analysis retaining two factors was conducted using the maximum likelihood extraction method with direct oblimin rotation. Due to cross-loadings above the .30 cut-off, one item was removed, resulting in an 11-item scale with all items having factor loadings above 0.32. The two factors are consistent with two of the original YES-S domains (i.e., personal and social skills, and initiative).
Findings suggest the modified 11-item YES-S offers a valuable parent-proxy tool to 326Symposia Friday July 14th measure social experiences and initiative experiences among persons with intellectual disabilities participating in sport programs. Additional research may focus on further testing the tool in diverse samples (i.e., non-SO programs) and cultures, and exploring other potential domains of developmental experiences in this population. Cross-cultural adaptation and psychometric properties of the portuguese version of the Youth Experience Survey for Sport (YES-S) Patrícia A Gaion Rigoni (State University of Maringá, Maringá, Paraná, Brazil), José R A Nascimento Junior (Federal University of Vale do São Francisco, Petrolina-PE, Brazil), Isabella C Belem (University of Paraná, Umuarama-PR, Brazil), Lenamar Fiorese Vieira (State University of Maringá, Maringá, Paraná, Brazil), Dany J.
MacDonald (University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Canada) There has been a significant amount of research directed at measuring the experiences of youth engaged in structured sport activities (MacDonald & McIsaac, 2016). Although this work has been undertaken internationally, most of the research has been conducted on English speaking youth. One reason for this may be due to the lack of validated instruments applicable to youth who speak different languages.
To address this shortcoming, this study aimed to examine the cross-cultural adaptation and the psychometric properties of a Portuguese version of the Youth Experience Survey for Sport (MacDonald et al., 2012). For content validity, an expert group consisting of translators and academics performed the translation and evaluate the content of the instrument. Reliability was evaluated with a sample of 139 athletes while temporal stability was conducted with 19 athletes across two data collections periods.
Construct validity was tested with two different samples totaling 728 athletes. An exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was conducted on the first sample (n = 428) while a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted on the second sample (n = 300). Data analysis was conducted through the Content Validity Coefficient (CVC), Cronbach’s alpha (α), intraclass correlation (ICC) and EFA/CFA.
Results showed a Portuguese version containing clear and relevant questions (CVC > 0.80), good internal consistency (α > 0.70) and acceptable temporal stability (ICC > 0.70). The EFA model revealed a four factor solution with 22 items, which was followed up with a CFA model that produced acceptable properties for the scale. The revised 22-items scales extends original work using the YES-S and measure youth development across the subscales of personal and social skills, cognitive skills, initiative experiences, and negative experiences.
Conclusions of this study are that the Portuguese YES-S is a valid measure for assessing experiences of Portuguese speaking youth sport participants. Adapting the youth experience survey for emerging adult athletes: The creation and ongoing validation of the university sport experience survey Scott Rathwell, Bradley W. Young (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada) Most Youth Experience Survey (YES) based sport research has looked at adolescent (e.g., Wilkes & Côté, 2010) or youth populations (e.g., MacDonald et al., 2012), with little assessment of developmental outcomes and experiences of emerging adults.
The limited focus on emerging adult athletes may be due to a lack of measurement tools available. We sought to establish a valid measurement tool for university sport. Model fit of a modified YES instrument was tested using a pan-Canadian sample of 605 university athletes.
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Exploratory Structural Equation Modeling (ESEM) showed poor fit. Post-hoc modifications improved fit, resulting in a 46-item, 9-factor model with five positive and four negative dimensions, which was named the University Sport Experience Survey (USES; Rathwell & Young, 2016). Criterion validity was tested using an independent sample of 498 university athletes.
Results showed good model fit. Invariance tests were performed on data from both samples (N = 1103 athletes). The USES was fully invariant across sport sanction (varsity or competitive club), sport type (team or individual), player status (starter or non-starter), and eligibility status (rookie or senior), and structurally invariant across gender (male or 327Symposia Friday July 14th female).
Finally, using data from the first sample of 605 athletes, concurrent validity was examined by comparing athletes’ responses on the USES with their ratings of their coaches’ transformational, transactional, and laissez faire leadership behaviors. Results showed significant correlations between USES outcomes and coaches’ use of transformational and laissez faire leadership. These results show the USES is a valid assessment tool for positive development outcomes related to initiative, basic skills, interpersonal relationships, teamwork and social skills, adult networks and social capital, and negative experiences of stress, negative peer interactions, social exclusion, and inappropriate adult behavior.
The short form YES-S and its utility within youth and university settings Philip Sullivan, Matthew Marini, Kaitlyn LaForge-MacKenzie (Brock University, St. Catharines, Canada) The Youth Experience Survey has a history of ambivalent support for its psychometric properties and factor structure (MacDonald et al., 2012; Sullivan et al., 2015). A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with a sample of 346 Canadian youth sport participants (M age = 15.4 years) showed a poor fit of the model to the data (CFI = .860, SRMR = .076, RMSEA = .071).
However, deleting the items with poor factor loadings (as per Hair et al., 2006) resulted in an excellent model fit (CFI = .955, SRMR = .054, RMSEA = .059). This revised version, titled the short form YES-S, includes 22 items that reflect MacDonald et al.’s (2012) five-factor structure. Subsequent research has examined the factor structure of the short form YES-S with university athletes.
Rathwell et al., (2015) found that the indices met the criteria for good model fit (CFI = .909, SRMR = .056, RMSEA = .058) with a sample of 605 Canadian university athletes (237 male, 368 female; M age = 20.0). Composite reliability analyses provided additional support for this conclusion; whereby, the coefficients indicated that all subscales had strong internal consistency reliability (CR ≥ .70; Hair et al., 2010). More recently, Marini and Sullivan (2016) investigated the potential difference in YES-S outcomes in a sample of 82 participants (M age = 15.0) in three different youth sport streams: community, competitive, and instructional.
They found significant differences between groups in three sub-scales. Competitive athletes scored significantly higher than community athletes on both Cognitive Skills and Goal Setting, whereas instructional athletes were significantly higher than community athletes on Initiative. In conclusion, the short form YES-S appears to be a valid and reliable assessment of PYD in various youth sport contexts.
This is particularly promising considering the history of psychometric properties of PYD measures. Imagery measurement and psychophysiological correlates Chair: Anthony Watt (Victoria University) Imagery is a powerful mental process that can influence sports performance. To examine the impact of imagery and its relationship to cognitive, affective, and behavioural variables, it is essential to measure aspects of imagery in a reliable and valid way.
Further, such measurement is important to the development of effective programs of imagery training in sport and to the assessment of program impact. An element of imagery that is central to these endeavours is imagery ability. Individuals with low imagery ability might not be in a position to take advantage of imagery training.
In this symposium, we include four presentations that examine the measurement of imagery ability and psychophysiological correlates of imagery in sport. Given the advent of modes of electronic communication, developing ways to administer measures of key variables, such as imagery ability, is valuable. In the first presentation in the symposium, Montse Ruiz and colleagues describe the development of an online measure of imagery ability, based on the Spanish version of the Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM; Watt et al., 2004) and report on cross validation of the online form with the original hard copy version.
Next, Zhang Bin and colleagues present a study validating the Chinese version of the SIAM across a diverse sample in Shanghai. Then, Dagmara Budnik-Przybylska and colleagues discuss a study examining the psychophysiology of sport imagery in which EEGs and a range of psychophysiological measures were 328Symposia Friday July 14th monitored, while participants imagined scenes from the SIAM and the KWS (Budnik-Przybylska, 2014). Finally, Soni John Thanikkal and colleagues report on the neural correlates observed during imagery of a finger- movement task from internal and external imagery perspectives.
Tony Watt leads audience discussion of the implications of these studies. Keywords: imagery measurement, imagery ability, online administration, psychophysiological correlates Spanish version of the Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM): cross validation of hard copy and online forms Montse C. Ruiz (Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Finland), Anthony Watt (College of Arts and Education, Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia), Natalia Palacios (Sports Studies, Research and Medicine Centre, Pamplona, Spain), Tony Morris (Institute of Sport, Exercise, and Active Living, Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia) Imagery is a popular tool used by athletes, coaches, and psychologists for skill learning and performance enhancement purposes (Cumming & Ramsey, 2009; MacIntyre & Moran, 2007).
An accurate assessment of imagery ability can assist in the implementation and evaluation of imagery training programs. The Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM; Watt et al., 2004) is a 48-item self-report questionnaire that uses four sport- related scenes to examine five dimensions of imagery (i.e., vividness, control, duration, ease, and speed of generation), six senses (visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, and kinesthetic) and the experience of emotion. In this study, we examined the dimensional structure and reliability of the hard copy and a newly developed online adaptation of the Spanish version of the SIAM, constructed using the Qualtrics program.
Participants were 540 (306 male, 234 female, aged 15 to 61 years) athletes competing in individual (n = 263) and team sports (n = 277) at regional (n = 107), national (n =292), or international (n = 141) levels. Two- hundred-and-seventy-four participants completed the hard copy and 266 the online version. Cronbach’s alpha coefficients were typically above α =.7, and ranged from ease (α = .57) to gustatory (α = .87).
We undertook exploratory structural equation modeling and confirmatory factor analysis using Mplus software. Results demonstrated satisfactory fit (e.g., CFI = .980; RMSEA = .055) for a 3-factor (i.e., generation, feeling, and single senses) solution of the SIAM for data from the hard copy and online forms. Multi-group comparisons provided support for measurement invariance across gender and competitive level.
However, evidence of partial invariance was obtained for both formats of administration. The findings provide tenable support for the reliability and validity of the Spanish version of the SIAM in both formats of administration. Keywords: sport imagery, internal consistency, factor analysis Validation of the Chinese version of the Sport Imagery Ability Measure Zhang Bin (Shanghai University of Sports, Shanghai, China), Tony Morris (Institute of Sport, Exercise & Active Living, Victoria University, Australia), Anthony Watt (College of Arts and Education, Victoria University, Australia) Imagery techniques are widely used by Chinese athletes, so it is important to measure athletes’ imagery ability to optimize effectiveness of imagery training.
No validated Chinese-language measure of imagery ability exists, so development of SIAM in Chinese is timely. The present study examined the reliability and validity characteristics of the Chinese version of the Sport Imagery Ability Measure (SIAM; Watt et al., 2004). The sample comprised 391 participants (249 male, 142 female) drawn from 32 sports and ranging in age from 16 to 55 years (M = 22.73, SD = 6.17).
All participants had sports experience, they came from various professions, such as professional athletes, coaches, and university students in physical education. Participants competed at national ( n = 97), state ( n = 80), district ( n = 118) and community level ( n = 77). The Sport Imagery Ability Measure is a 48-item self-report questionnaire that uses four sport-related scenes to examine five dimensions 329Symposia Friday July 14th of imagery (i.e., vividness, control, duration, ease, and speed of generation), six senses (visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, and kinesthetic) and the experience of emotion.
SIAM was translated into Mandarin using a standard back-translation procedure. The 3-factor model demonstrated a good fit with the sample (NFI = .91, CFI = .92, RMSEA = .11). Cronbach’s alpha coefficient (α = .95) indicated good internal consistency for the overall measure.
Internal consistency for the subscales was sound, ranging from .61 (ease) to .85 (control). Test-retest reliability for the questionnaire sub-scales was good ,(between 0.86 (emotion) and 0.95 (visual)) over a 4-week period (n = 63). The Chinese version of SIAM demonstrated acceptable factor structure, internal consistency, and test-retest reliability across a wide range of sports contexts.
Based on further statistical analysis, refinement of the Chinese version is in progress. Keywords: imagery, psychometrics, sport, Chinese SIAM Psychophysiology of sport imagery Dagmara Budnik-Przybylska, Jacek Przybylski (University of Gdansk, Poland), Krzysztof Malej (Neuro-Device, Poland) To enhance understanding of the functioning of imagery in sport, studies of imagery have often examined psychophysiological parameters (Holmes, 2006). This pilot study analyzed brain waves (alpha wave) and physiological parameters, including pulse rate (PULS), amplitude of the pulse (PVA), temperature (TEMP) and electrodermal activity (SCL), while athletes imagined different situations related to sport.
Participants were 10 athletes (female=5; male=5), aged between 14 and 40, with different sport experience. They imagined six scenes related to sport. Situations were extracted from two imagery questionnaires, namely SIAM (Polish) (Budnik- Przybylska, et al., 2014) and the KWS (Budnik-Przybylska, 2014).
During imagery, EEG waves and physiological parameters were monitored using Biofeedback Expert and g.Nautilus. The hierarchical linear model for mixed effects was used to assess differences between EEGs and physiological measures for participants and tasks. Physiological measures: SCL, BVP, PVA and PULS were significantly related to gender, age, and sport experience.
All effects were significant, but only same indicators of physiological reactions were sensitive to individual differences during the task, but the effects for individual differences for all localizations were significant and effect sizes were moderate or large (from .23 for PZ to .36 for P3). For four localizations, task effects were not significant and all effect sizes were small (.01 to .06) and for individuals, effects for FP1, FP2, T8, P4, PO8 were not significant. Other effects were significant, but very small.
Further research is needed to examine changes in psychophysiological parameters during imagery training. Keywords: imagery, psychophysiology, EEG Neural correlates of internal and external imagery Soni John Thanikkal (Christ College, Irinjalakuda, Kerala, India), Tony Morris (Institute of Sport, Exercise & Active Living, Victoria University, Australia), Joseph Ciorciari (Swinburne University, Melbourne, Australia) We examined the neural correlations of internal and external imagery perspectives (Mahoney & Avener, 1977) in order to increase understanding of the differences between the two perspectives of imagery. The experimental task comprised video stimuli presented from internal and external views.
The views exhibited an index finger pressing the white triangular ready key on a custom-built keyboard, then moving to one of four equidistant, blue, rectangular task keys. The experimental task contained eight video stimuli in random sequences, four showing an internal view (IV; the participant’s perspective) and four showing an external view (EV; the perspective from the monitor). We collected EEG data while participants performed the research 330Symposia Friday July 14th tasks.
We used Low Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography Analysis (LORETA; Pascual-Marqui, Michel, & Lehmann, 1994) in order to localize the source of neural activations during experimental conditions based on the EEG data. LORETA revealed the brain sources of electrical activity based on power generated during experimental conditions from EEG recorded from 64 electrodes. The LORETA analysis used brain vision analyser software, which displays the strongest current density, using Talairach coordinates (Talairach & Tournoux, 1988), consistent with the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) system (Collins, Neelin, Peters, & Evans, 1994).
These coordinates are mapped to Brodmann areas. This revealed the brain areas associated with internal and external imagery perspective use. We found that internal imagery activated BA 2, BA 4, BA 20, BA 21 and BA 40, whereas External imagery activated BA19, BA20, BA 22, BA 37, BA 39, BA 40.
The findings provide evidence that internal imagery engages more sensory-motor areas of the brain, whereas external imagery engages primarily occipital, that is, visual areas. Keywords: internal imagery perspective, external imagery perspective, EEG, Low Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography Analysis Addressing mental health in sport: An international perspective Chair: Natalie Durand-Bush (University of Ottawa) Competitive athletes face complex demands and pressures that can impact their well-being and performance. It is thus not surprising to find that they are predisposed to similar or an even greater risk of mental health issues as their non-athlete peers (Hughes & Leavey, 2012).
Concern for the well-being of athletes has traditionally been restricted to their physical health and its influence on performance outcomes (Bergeron et al., 2015). One potential explanation for this is the assumption that athletes are inherently mentally healthy (Bond, 2002). Another is that mental health challenges and illnesses have not been openly discussed within this population due to a prevailing stigma.
This has led some athletes to deny distress (Mazzer & Rickwood, 2015) and underutilize mental health services (Lopez & Levy, 2013). We have, however, worked with competitive athletes experiencing mental health challenges and will share critical aspects of our experiences in this symposium. Using an international perspective and a multiple case study approach, we will first present an overview of the literature on mental health, including results of a recent study on the mental health of Canadian athletes.
We will then discuss the status of mental health in sport in Sweden, with a focus on two specialized mental health clinics that were recently opened to service elite Swedish athletes and coaches. Third, we will address important skills and tools that enabled Canadian athletes to effectively manage their mental health at the 2016 Rio Olympic Games. Finally, we will shed light on key environmental and political factors that have shaped the mental health of high performance Norwegian athletes and coaches.
The role of the sport psychology consultant in managing critical events and relationships directly impacting athletes' and coaches' well-being will be explained. Strengths and limitations regarding mental health research and practice in sport will be addressed. Keywords: mental health, mental illness, elite sport, performance, well-being, athletes, practitioners Mental health and well-being in Canadian intercollegiate athletes Krista Van Slingerland (University of Ottawa), Natalie Durand-Bush (University of Ottawa), Scott Rathwell (University of Ottawa) Mental health has become increasingly important worldwide, including in the context of sport.
Although some researchers have investigated the mental health of athletes (e.g., Eklund, Dowdy, Jones, & Furlong, 2011) and attempted to understand their vulnerability to specific mental illnesses (e.g., eating disorders and substance abuse, Reardon & Factor, 2010), empirical evidence on mental health in sport is scarce. The purpose 331Symposia Friday July 14th of this presentation is to provide an overview of the prevalence and factors contributing to mental health and mental illness in sport. In particular, results of a recent study with Canadian intercollegiate athletes underscore the importance of taking a holistic perspective when examining mental health in sport.
Athletes from 30 Canadian universities completed an online mental health survey in November 2015 (n=388) and March 2016 (n=110) in order to generate foundational data and help guide the creation of mental health policies and standards of practice. Results showed that mental health levels were, on average, moderate to high, and more athletes were flourishing than languishing (Keyes, 2002). Mental health levels did not significantly differ across time nor based on gender, alcohol use, living situation, year of study, and type of sport.
Of the 110 athletes who participated at both time points, 18% reported a previous mental illness diagnosis. These athletes maintained moderate mental health across time and 30% of them were flourishing at Time 2. These findings support Keyes’ (2002) dual-continua model of mental health and mental illness, and suggest that the presence of mental illness does not automatically imply low levels of well-being and dysfunction.
This presentation concludes with a brief case study showcasing how sport is a powerful medium that can alleviate or exacerbate mental health issues. Recommendations to improve and sustain the mental health of Canadian athletes are provided. Keywords: mental health, well-being, athletes, university sport Well-being and ill-being in the context of elite sports: A reflection on the complex interdependency between performance and clinical issues Göran Kenttä (The Swedish Sport Confederation & The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences) Sean McCann published an important article titled “At the Olympics everything is a performance issue” in 2008.
A range of clinical issues faced and reported at the Games by the U.S. team sport psychologist was presented. Nevertheless, performance accomplishments will always be a fundamental concern when supporting Olympic level athletes, despite co-existing clinical issues, especially in the midst of the Games.
This fact raises several challenging questions. A critical question is about how to reduce stigma surrounding mental health and thus increase help-seeing at an earlier stage (Schwenk, 2000). Moreover, we need to better understand the dynamic and complex relationships between mental health and athletic performance and discuss related ethical questions.
Unfortunately, knowledge about mental health and elite sport is still limited. Interestingly, the following relationship between psychiatric disorders and elite athletes has been suggested: (a) athletes may obtain high levels of success in spite of a coexistent primary psychiatric disorder, (b) athletes may have chosen the athletic arena as means of coping with the disorder, and (c) athletes may have psychiatric illness precipitated or worsened by sport itself (Reardon & Factor, 20110). This presentation will address reflections and lessons learned from a collaborative effort between the Sport Confederation Elite Department and a Mental Health Clinic specifically devoted to support elite sports.
This Clinic started as a pilot project in 2015 within the public health care system as the first of its kind in Sweden. It will be argued that sport psychology staff need to consider performance enhancement, facilitate well-being, prevent ill-being but also provide professional treatment of clinical issues when needed. Ultimately, the purpose is to provide a support system that contributes to more sustainable mental health in the general population of elite athletes, but especially to those vulnerable to mental health.
Keywords: well-being, ill-being, elite sport, performance, clinical issues Mental illness and health within the Olympic sport environment: Issues and solutions Penny Werthner (University of Calgary) There is little research examining high performance athletes and the prevalence of mental health issues. Athletes in high performance sport are often seen to be healthy both physically and mentally, and there is an 332Symposia Friday July 14th “overall cultural inclination to idealise athletes and their health, thereby foreclosing the possibility of their having psychiatric illnesses” (Bar & Marker, 2013). We know this is not always the reality.
However, we must also recognize that the high performance and Olympic environment is not ‘normal’. The pressure to perform at World Championships, Olympic qualifications, and the Olympic Games is immense. Many athletes learn how to manage those stressors very effectively, particularly with skilled coaches and support staff (Din, Paskevich, Gabriele & Werthner, 2015).
Nevertheless, many others struggle with anxiety and depression that may become clinical, as well as issues such as eating disorders and substance abuse. And unfortunately, many athletes at this level of sport participation are hesitant to seek help, particularly in a culture that rewards strength and ‘toughness.’ According to Reardon and Factor (2010), it is critical that the stigma of mental illness be alleviated and appropriate diagnosis and treatment of mental health issues for this population be provided. This case study examined the lives of two 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympic athletes who struggled with mental illness.
The mental health issues faced by each of the athletes, the tools and strategies utilized, and the professionals engaged, over a two-year period, to enable each of the athletes to recognize, accept and, in time, to become mentally healthy, will be discussed. Based on these findings, recommendations on how to effectively manage mental illness within the high-performance environment are provided. Keywords: Olympic sport, mental illness, mental health, practitioners Collateral damage: The dark side of extraordinary opportunities in elite sports P.
Nicolas Lemyre (Norwegian School of Sport Sciences) Athletes and coaches in elite sports share exceptional talent, dedication and commitment in order to deliver high-level performances. Recent research has identified an increase in the media attention and scrutiny of elite athletes and coaches (Kietzmann, Hermkens, McCarthy, & Silvestre, 2011). In general, an increase in visibility tends to lead to greater opportunities for sponsorships and endorsements.
However, this increase in popularity does not only lead to benefits. It also puts the athletes and coaches at a great risk for suddenly having to deal with stakeholders, who were originally peripheral to their world but have become main actors. When profiled athletes and coaches face personal challenges during the course of their career, the media exposure and the interaction with stakeholders during these crises will create potential biases of decision makers and often result in an unequal playing field.
The mental health of these athletes and coaches is treated as a case of public interest. The aim of this presentation is to highlight the role of the sport psychology consultant in supporting the individuals struggling to obtain fair treatment within the professional sport structure and having their life, liberty, and opportunities being predicated on the media's agenda of selling newspapers or getting hits, expanding media circulation, or conquering ratings (Robinson, 1998). Examples from profiled media cases in Norway will be used to highlight the complex political environment of elite sports and the opportunities for sport psychology interventions to prevent the heightened risks for exhaustion and other debilitating states in athletes and coaches.
Keywords: elite sports, athletes, coaches, exhaustion, debilitative states The effects of exercise on anxiety, depression, and associated unhealthy behaviours Chair: Fabien Legrand (University of Reims Champagne Ardennes, France) Adult mental health is determined by many diverse biological, environmental and psychosocial factors, many of which are impossible to modify (e.g., early life experiences, personal genetic information). However, mental health is not predetermined entirely by uncontrollable processes. For instance, individuals can learn to be more resilient by employing thinking strategies that minimize the negative impact of their vulnerabilities.
Likewise, tobacco and alcohol use have been identified as common self-regulatory behaviours in individuals 333Symposia Friday July 14th with high anxiety or depression-related symptoms. Over the past decades, research has also emphasized the potential of physical exercise to alleviate depression and anxiety. In addition, psychological as well as neurobiological explanations have been developed (and are still developing) to account for the link between physical exercise and mental health.
The aim of this symposium is two-fold: one aim is to describe research evidence on the efficacy of exercise training programs for relieving depression/anxiety and substance abuse in individuals with depression/anxiety. A second aim is to propose an explanation for the effects of exercise by presenting known or putative psychological and neurobiological mechanisms. We will also highlight current gaps in the literature and questions yet unanswered throughout our presentations.
To introduce the debate, Matthew Herring will provide a thorough literature review on the anxiolytic effects of acute and chronic exercise. Jolene Jacquart will pursue this further by presenting a co-authored contribution examining how exercise can help participants with high anxiety sensitivity to quit smoking. Third, Fabien Legrand will shift the debate on to whether aerobic exercise can be used as an adjunct treatment in hospitalized patients with severe depression.
Lastly, Lindsey Hopkins will examine the efficacy and acceptability of yoga interventions among two specific samples of depressed participants. Keywords: exercise, anxiety, depression, tobacco use The effects of exercise on anxiety: What is known and how might exercise work? Matthew Herring (University of Limerick, Ireland) Research into the effects of acute and chronic exercise on anxiety continues to increase, but, compared to well-established antidepressant effects, the anxiolytic effects of exercise remain understudied.
Additionally, little is known regarding how and why exercise might reduce anxiety. Thus, this symposium presentation will provide: i) a critical synthesis of the available empirical evidence regarding the effects of acute and chronic exercise on anxiety among adults, including otherwise healthy adults, chronically-ill adults, and adults with a clinical or subclinical anxiety disorder; and, ii) a brief overview of previous and emerging evidence regarding plausible mechanisms of exercise effects on anxiety, including sex-related differences, anxiety sensitivity, inflammatory markers, and attentional biases to emotional stimuli. The available empirical evidence supports that acute aerobic exercise attenuates state anxiety (Ensari et al., 2015) and that exercise training has consistent, small-to-moderate effects on anxiety symptoms among otherwise healthy adults (Herring et al., 2014), adults with a diverse range of chronic illnesses (Herring, O’Connor & Dishman, 2010; Herring, O’Connor & Dishman, In Preparation), and adults with an anxiety disorder (Herring et al., 2012, 2015, 2016; Stubbs et al., 2016).
Emerging evidence supports acute effects of aerobic exercise among young adults with probable Generalized Anxiety Disorder (Herring, Hallgren, & Campbell, In Review) and the anxiolytic effects of resistance exercise training (Gordon & Herring, In Review). Sex-related differences (McDowell et al., 2016), and decreased anxiety sensitivity (Broman-Fulks & Storey, 2008), pro-inflammatory cytokines (Herring et al., in preparation), and attentional biases toward negative emotional stimuli (Herring, Thom, & Campbell, in preparation) have been implicated as plausible mechanisms of exercise effects on anxiety and will be discussed. Keywords: anxiety, chronic exercise, acute exercise, mechanisms for effects An exercise augmented smoking cessation treatment for individuals with high anxiety sensitivity: The relationship between attendance patterns and quit success Jolene Jacquart (University of Texas, Austin, USA) The variability in treatment response across studies suggests that exercise may be most efficacious for specific populations of individuals who are most prone to respond.
Individuals with high-anxiety sensitivity (AS) are one population for whom exercise interventions appear particularly facilitative. Evidence suggests elevated AS is a risk factor for poor smoking cessation outcomes and there is growing support that targeting AS with 334Symposia Friday July 14th aerobic exercise benefits smoking cessation interventions. However, low treatment attendance is considered problematic.
We examined the association between attendance patterns and smoking outcomes in a randomized, controlled exercise augmented smoking cessation intervention for individuals with high AS. In addition to standard smoking cessation treatment, participants were randomized to 15 weeks of an exercise intervention or an education control condition. Latent class growth analysis (LCGA) tested whether intervention attendance would be better modeled as qualitatively distinct attendance patterns rather than as a single mean pattern.
Multivariate generalized linear mixed modeling (GLMM) was used to evaluate associations between the attendance patterns and abstinence at the end of treatment and at 6-month follow-up. The LCGA solution with three patterns characterized by high probability of attendance throughout (Completers, 46.3%), gradual decreasing probability of attendance (Titrators, 23.5%), and high probability of dropout within the first few weeks (Droppers, 30.1%) provided the best fit. The GLMM analysis indicated that titration was associated with lower probability of quit success for those in the control condition.
Probability of quit success was not significantly different between Titrators and Completers in the exercise condition. These findings underscore that discontinuation is not necessarily indicative of poorer abstinence outcome, and generate testable hypotheses for future research. Keywords: anxiety sensitivity, smoking cessation, exercise intervention The antidepressant effects of exercise in the first two weeks of antidepressant therapy among hospitalized inpatients with major depressive disorders Fabien Legrand (University of Reims Champagne Ardennes, France) Many intervention studies have reported very positive results regarding exercise for treating depression (e.g., Legrand, 2014; Legrand & Heuze, 2007).
However, a majority of these studies were conducted with participants who had not been recruited from clinical settings but were defined as depressed on the basis of cut-off scores from self-reported questionnaires. Most researchers (e.g., Krogh et al., 2011) now consider that trials should specifically focus on people who had presented to clinical services because this is more likely to mirror clinical situations in which health professionals might consider prescribing exercise as a treatment for depression. The investigation we report here is a randomized controlled trial including hospitalized inpatients with major depressive disorders (MDD).
It can be read in full details elsewhere (Legrand & Neff, 2016). Thirty- five inpatients with MDD received either a brief aerobic exercise intervention (10 days of walking/running, n = 14), placebo exercise (10 days of stretching, n = 11), or no intervention (usual care, n = 10). The study outcome was the change in the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) total score from baseline to the end of the study period.
All participants had to have started antidepressant drug therapy for < 2 weeks at study entry. The mean initial score on the BDI-II was 36.5 (no between-group differences). Compared to baseline mean scores, both the aerobic (p < .001) and placebo (p = .011) exercise interventions yielded significant improvements.
However pre-to-post intervention reduction in depressive symptoms appeared to be statistically higher in the aerobic exercise group (p = .012). Aerobic exercise resulted in a clinical response for 57.1% of participants versus 9.1% of those treated with placebo exercise. Having participants with length of antidepressant use < 2 wks at study entry minimizes the confounding effect of pharmacotherapy.
Keywords: severe depression, hospitalized inpatients, exercise intervention, adjunct therapy Yoga for depression: Two trials examining efficacy, mechanisms, and acceptability Lindsey Hopkins (VA Medical Centers, San Francisco, USA) Yoga is an increasingly popular approach to enhancing mental health and supported by preliminary research (e.g., Cramer et al., 2013). However, replication and greater methodological rigor is needed to establish yoga as an empirically supported treatment. This presentation will provide a critical review of extant 335Symposia Friday July 14th evidence for yoga’s antidepressant effects and discuss new findings from two independent trials.
Study 1: Women (N=51; age M=33.5) high in perceived stress and disordered eating were randomized to an 8-week heated hatha yoga intervention or to waitlist control. Multilevel modeling was used to examine change in depressive symptoms (which were elevated at baseline: M=18.1, for BDI-II total score), mindfulness, and self- compassion assessed at baseline and weeks 3, 6, and 9 (post-treatment). Results revealed significant intervention effects on depression (p=.009).
When mindfulness and self-compassion subscales were examined together in a multiple mediation model, decreases in critical self-judgment emerged as the most robust mediator. Correlates of adherence and early drop-out will be discussed. Study 2: Male military veterans (N=23; age M=59.9) participated in an (uncontrolled) pilot study of an 8-week hatha yoga program.
T tests revealed significant improvements in depressive symptoms (p=.007), experiential avoidance (p=.035), and mindfulness (p=.047). Improvement in depressive symptoms was associated with reductions in experiential avoidance (p<.0001), increases in mindfulness (p=.006), and higher attendance (p=.014). Qualitative interviews suggested high acceptability and perceived benefits of yoga among older, male veterans.
These trials build on prior work supporting the utility of yoga for treating depression by utilizing more rigorous methodology; extending to new populations; and implicating changes in mindfulness, experiential avoidance, and self-judgment as mechanisms of action. Future research directions will be discussed. Keywords: yoga intervention, depression, women, military veterans Emerging methodological approaches in sport and exercise psychology research Chair: António Fernando Rosado (Faculdade de Motricidade Humana) The widespread use of scales in sport psychology assumes that the measures possess adequate psychometric properties, that is, that they reliably and validly assess the constructs in question.
However, a perusal of contemporary psychology journals demonstrates that quantitative reports of scale reliability and validity estimates are often missing or incomplete. The purpose of this symposium is to present research work where psychometric reporting characteristics in sport psychology research are updated and exemplified. In fact, if factors do not demonstrate adequate validity and reliability, moving on to test a causal model (a structural model) will be useless.
Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) is a statistical approach to explore the factor structure that is illustrated in some of the present studies. We add several studies with Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA), seen as a necessary step after exploratory factor analysis to determine the factor structure of a dataset. The studies describe the specific procedures to: data screening and analysis of missing data, normality and multivariate normality, detecting and controlling for outliers, linearity, homoscedasticity and homoscedasticity as well as measures that can be calculated to determine goodness of fit.
They look to the modification indices for the covariances and for the SRCs, present new procedures considering the measuring of reliability (namely, composite reliability), convergent and discriminant validity (Average Variance Extracted (AVE), Maximum Shared Variance (MSV), and Average Shared Variance (ASV) and Square root of AVE greater than inter-construct correlations. There are articles studying Measurement Model Invariance (configurational and metric) dealing with first and second order factors. The studies present also procedures for criterion- related validity (concurrent and predictive).
We add also studies considering the creating of factor scores from latent factors and latent means comparison Development of a self-efficacy scale for athletes of collective sports Andréa Duarte Pesca (Faculdade Cesusc), Sidónio Serpa (Faculdade Motricidade Humana), António Fernando Rosado (Faculdade de Motricidade Humana), Roberto Cruz (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina) 336Symposia Friday July 14th According to Bandura (1997), effectiveness sources are the product of a complex process of self- evaluation and self persuasion that are inserted into the cognitive processes of various sources of information. For Bandura (2001) the construction of a consistent and reliable self-efficacy scale requires a specific analysis of the factors that influence at a certain selected domain. It is essential to know the determinants that influence the fields of activity and allow to specify the aspects of self-efficacy that shall be measured.
Based on the theoretical model of Bandura (1997), Feltz (1988; 1994) developed six dimensions for self-efficacy in sport: past performance accomplishments, vicarious experiences, verbal persuasion; physiological indicators; emotional indicators and imaginative experiences. These dimensions based the construction of the scale items. The objective of the research was to develop six scales, each one evaluating a determinant of self-efficacy for team sports according to the model of Feltz (1994).
Based on scientific articles of the area, 6 items were elaborated for each factor of each scale, totalizing from 10 to 20 items in each scale. Upon completion of the first version of the scale, it was conducted by seven young experts in sports psychology, a content analysis.Thus, the dimensions were reorganized according to the indications of the judges. At this moment, is under way an application of the preliminary version of the scale to be followed by the process of confirmatory factor analysis, whose data will be ready for presentation at the conference.
A confirmatory factorial analysis will be employed to test whether the proposed multi-factorial structure of the scale fits the Portuguese data well. The psychometric properties of the new model will consider the study of internal consistency, convergent validity, and discriminant validity. Keywords: self-efficacy theory; psychometric scales; high performance sport Fear of failure in sport: A portuguese cross-cultural adaptation António Fernando Rosado, Marco Correia, Sidónio Serpa (Faculdade de Motricidade Humana) The Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory (PFAI) is a multidimensional measure of threat appraisals associated with one’s fear of failure.
Whilst emerging research has supported the validity and reliability of the PFAI with North American and British sport participants, its psychometric proprieties remain untested within Portuguese samples. This study examined the psychometric proprieties of the PFAI with a sample of 556 Portuguese athletes distributed in two convenience samples. The mean age of the first sample (n = 350) was 15.65 years old (SD = 2.45) and approximately two-thirds were males (72%).
Regarding the second sample (n = 206), the mean age of the participants was 15.29 years old (SD = 2.47) and the great majority were males (79.6%). A confirmatory factor analysis was employed to test whether the proposed multi-factorial structure of the PFAI fits well the Portuguese data. The results demonstrated an acceptable fit [χ² = 146.63, B-S p < 0.001; χ²/df = 2.19, PCFI = 0.70, PGFI = 0.60, CFI = 0.96, GFI = 0.94, RMSEA = 0.06].
Composite reliability values ranged from .75 to .79, indicating that the constructs were internally consistent. Evidence for convergent validity was obtained since average variance extracted values ranged from .51 to .62, being greater than the recommended standard of .50. Multi-group analysis revealed cross-validity and the models’ invariance.
The correlations between fear of failure and sport anxiety measures revealed evidence of its concurrent validity. The second- order measurement model was also tested and presented an overall acceptable fit to the data [χ² = 176.32, B-S p < 0.001; χ²/df = 2.42, PCFI = 0.75, PGFI = 0.64, CFI = 0.94, GFI = 0.93, RMSEA = 0.07]. The PFAI appears to be a psychometrically sound measure and a valid and reliable tool for assessing fear of failure in Portuguese sport contexts.
Keywords: fear of failure, cross-cultural validation, confirmatory factor analysis 337Symposia Friday July 14th Sources of sport-confidence questionnaire to brazilian athletes: Transcultural adaptation and preliminar evidences of semantic validity Gabriela Frischknecht (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina), Andréa Duarte Pesca (Faculdade Avantis), Roberto Cruz, Carlos Nunes, António Fernando Rosado (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina), Sidónio Serpa (Faculdade de Motricidade Humana) Sport-confidence indicates the conviction he or she will obtain success in sport. Sources of sport- confidence relate to the things that an athlete considers important to gain self-confidence. Aim:This research aimed to adapt Sources of Sport-Confidence Questionnaire – SSCQ (VEALEY et al., 1998) to Brazilian Portuguese idiom and to investigate its preliminary evidences of semantic validity.
The back translation method was realized in the first stage of the process. SSCQ was translated by three Brazilian experts that domain fluently the English idiom. After that, the resultant version was translated to the original idiom.
It was noticed that the back translated version and the original one were similar. But the experts related difficulty to translate items what refereed idiomatic expressions. Specific adjusts were made by researchers to adequate the questionnaire language to Brazilian athletes and their context.
Semantic validity evidences were reached by expert analysis and a pilot study. Experts suggested that the instructions and items were clear, relevant and adequate to the dimensionality of the construct. In the pilot study, athletes with different ages, academic levels and sports were consulted.
They indicated that instructions, items and scale were clear. The results suggest that the procedures and adjusts were essential to develop the questionnaire in the Brazilian context. Future studies should improve validity and reliability evidences of the instrument.
Keywords: self-confidence, sport-confidence, psychometry, scales Testing a full theoretical model of parental involvement in sport: Preliminary results Pedro Teques (School of Social Sciences, Education and Sport, Polytechnic Institute of Maia), Sidónio Serpa (Faculty of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon), Luis Calmeiro (Abertay University, School of Social and Health Sciences.), António Fernando Rosado (Faculty of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon), Carlos Silva (Sports Science School of Rio Maior, Polytechnic Institute of Santarem) Parental involvement in children’s sport has long been associated with a range of youth athletes’ psychological outcomes (Holt & Knight, 2014). Much of this work, however, is atheoretical and fail to explain why parents get involved and how their involvement improves young athletes’ outcomes in sport. Teques and Serpa (2013) proposed a theoretical model of the parental involvement process.
In the present work, we want to develop an empirical test of this model in full. We use data from the Parental Involvement Project (Teques & Serpa, 2009) which contain a normative archive sample of 1620 parents (M = 891, F = 729) and their 1620 youth athletes aged 10-18 years (M = 13,66, SD = 3,29) from the north, centre, and south coastal region of Portugal. Whereas much of the data were collected between 2009 and 2013, the most recent were collected in 2015.
First, confirmatory factor analysis confirmed the measurement model [χ2(3110) = 5522.81, CFI = 0.921, TLI = 0.914, RMSEA = 0.040 (CI = 0.038, 0.042), SRMR = 0.058]. All factors also show reliability (values ranging from 0.74 to 0.92), and most part of them show convergent (Average Variance Extracted values from 0.42 to 0.76) and discriminant validity. Second, structural equation modelling analysis supported the model in which (1) parents’ get involved in their children’s sports due to their role beliefs, sense of self-efficacy, perceptions of invitations from others, self-perceived time and energy, and knowledge and skills, and (2) athletes’ perceptions of their parents’ behaviours concerning encouragement, reinforcement, instruction, and modelling, were associated with the child’s intrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, social self-efficacy in relating to the coach, and self-regulation [χ2(3238) = 5931.23, CFI = 0.912, TLI = 0.908, RMSEA = 0.041 (CI = 0.040, 0.043), SRMR = 0.061].
Grounded in a review of parental involvement this model presented current knowledge for why parents get involved. Keywords: theoretical model, parental involvement, structural equation modelling, youth sport 338Symposia Friday July 14th Sports psychology for the best performance Chair: Marcelo Roffé Different types of intervention in Latin America are presented, in different contexts, from Cuba to Argentina, through Mexico and Colombia. As well, as different fields and sports: soccer, baseball, coaches and even different sports psychologists.
Coping strategies will be presented to test the relationship between Resilience and Coping Mechanisms in Cuban youth baseball players. As well as the styles that are most related to resilient processes. A three-year professional experience with the Colombian National Team is presented, both in the qualifying period and in the 2014 Soccer World Cup itself, ending in the Copa America 2015.
Remaining in the field of soccer, it is presented how cohesion influences the psychological and sports development of teens between the ages of 15 and 17 years in a football team. In this field, a two-year intervention program is shared, with coaches who work with children and youth to increase their psychological skills and improve their training styles. Finally, a paper is presented that seeks to identify what an athlete prioritizes and what motivates him to include a Sports Psychologist in their preparation process and, on the other hand, what areas and variables the Psychologist considers that primarily orient his work with the athlete.
Keywords: stress, baseball, soccer, mental training, cohesion, perception Influence of group cohesion in psychological development and sports development of teenager football players Shirley Jatcee Malo Barriga (SOLCPAD) The theme aims to present how group cohesion influences the psychological development and sports development of teenager’s part of a soccer team, men between the ages of 15 and 17 years. Based on the fact that during adolescence, boys and girls tend to dedicate much of their free time to sports. The sport has a special attention, and it is important to point out that through its practice the teenager finds the opportunity to enter the world of adults and even compete within it on equal terms, thus having the sensation of having exceeded their own age.
The term group cohesion is used to define the methods that make people in a group continue to be united. One of the functions of sport is integration and for many educators, sports activities contribute to fostering the spirit of union between young people from very different backgrounds and cultures, and the more often sports are practiced, especially in teams, such as football, the more likely this integration happens. Keywords: teenagers, group cohesion, psychological development, sports development, and soccer team Program of psychological skills for children and youth soccer football trainers Ada Sarai Albarran Carbajal (ISSP/Solcpad/AMPDAF) This study presents a program of psychological intervention aimed to the acquisition of psychological skills which is focused on the development and transmission of positive values in initiation sports.
This program emphasizes the importance and responsibility of sports psychologists and coaches when it comes to working with these formative ages. It also underlines the awareness that the paradigm shift with respect to the training styles is currently taking place in Mexico. This change includes the introduction of psychological skills for coaches and sports initiation contexts such as: increased effectiveness in the communication between coaches and players; Improvement of their strategies of reinforcement in the trainings and matches; The establishment of individual and team goals, and lastly, the use of cooperative games as an effective strategy addressed to increase the willingness to collaborate within teams for both kids and young adults.
Keywords: skills, ethics, values, cooperatives games, goals, communication 339Symposia Friday July 14th Psychological resilience and the coping mechanism for stress on young baseball athletes Yoan Hoyos Martinez, Francisco Garcia Ucha (SOLCPAD) In order to verify the relationship between Resilience and the methods of coping with stress, 27 young Cuban baseball players in a competitive stage were evaluated by means of: Resilience Scale (Wagner and Young 1993) and Stress Coping Questionnaire (Sandin and Chorot, 2002) applied before and after the main competition, the data were analyzed using the Sign Test and Wilcoxon to obtain the significant differences between the two measurements. The results of the instruments showed the validity of the null hypothesis being interpreted that there were no significant changes between the measurements before and after both tests, with a significance of 0.05 in the statistical scale. The Stress Coping Methods most closely related to the resilient processes are: Focusing on the solution Positive reevaluation Search for social support And those who relate the least: Negative auto focalization Open Emotional Expression Avoidance Religion In a group, they have a high level of adaptation to the circumstances they face, learning from them.
Keywords: world cup, psychological intervention, sport psychologist, interdisciplinary Sport psychology and its contribution to the development of the career in sports. analysis of perceptions psychologist - athlete Natalia Maria Dancuart Allende (SOLCPAD), Bryan Mora Flores This paper presents an analysis and relationship of the perception of athletes and psychologists in terms of psychology as a tool to contribute to the development of the sports career. The methodology is descriptive and uses a questionnaire as a data-collecting tool.
The sample is made up of 100 athletes and 50 sports psychologists from Latin America. It is intended to identify what prioritizes an athlete to include a Sports Psychologist in their preparation process and, on the other hand, what areas and variables the Psychologist considers that primarily guide their work with the athlete. Likewise, we try to determine those perceptions in common and in contrast to the variables related to: beginning, maintenance and / or abandonment of psychological accompaniment and mental training.
In this sense, an attempt is made to present an explanatory model produced by the analysis, exposing useful information so that it is used to work in which the expectations of the psychologist and the athlete are similar, eliminating biases, myths and influences that have permeated the role of Sports psychology for many years. Keywords: relationship, perception, athletes, psychologists, development, sports The psychological preparation of the National Absolute National Team of Colombia for the Soccer World Cup 2014 Marcelo Roffé (SOLCPAD) There are few professional experiences of the sports psychologist in Absolute Football Selections and even more, in a World Cup. The objective of the present work is to present a professional experience of three years working with the Absolute Selection of Colombia, both in the qualifying period and in the Soccer World Cup itself, finishing in the Copa America 2015.
The psychological intervention is focused primarily on setting goals, developing cohesion, strengthening the players' minds (in the areas of pressure management, attention focus and self-confidence primarily) and generating a winning mentality in the framework of an interdisciplinary work led by the head coach. After three World Cups without participating, Colombia qualifies and finishes the tournament in 5th place. Position among 32 participating teams.
From a specialized work of the sports psychologist inserted in a work team, the work done and the limitations of the intervention are discussed, emphasizing the need to adapt to the intervention context (concentrations), the duration of the 340Symposia Friday July 14th intervention, the periodicity between each one of them, and the intervention in the World Cup, maximum possible step to which a soccer player and a sport psychologist can aspire. Keywords: Colombia, soccer, World Cup, intervention Motor control and learning enhancement in individual sports Chair: Francesco Di Gruttola (University of Pisa) Our contributions will consider mainly athletes and coaches of individual disciplines (judo, golf, cycling and precision sports), discussing the brain basis of motor control and giving a special focus on imagery and observation use in motor learning. We will move from the assessment to the intervention, presenting the latest neuro-physiological (EEG, ECG, EMG, etc.) and psychological (questionnaires, mental chronometry, self- evaluations, etc.) procedures.
Special features mediating the relation between mental training and performance, as athlete's motor experience and current psycho-physiological state will be considered. Firstly, we will discuss the link between cognitive functions and manual action control by means of neuro-physiological procedures. The focus will shift on imagery and action observation.
We will present how in judo coaches imagery is related with their subjective perception of coaching and anticipation abilities; then, we will propose an evidence-based protocol to assess motor imagery in athletes of different motor experiences; and finally, we will discuss how an imagery and observation practice can improve mental representation development of golf putt in long-term memory. Lastly, we will propose the Multi Action Plan (MAP), an integrated model of psycho- physiological monitoring and performance enhancement. Keywords: motor control, imagery, motor imagery assessment, observation, motor learning, map model Motor imagery assessment in research and professional practice: An evidence-based protocol.
Francesco Di Gruttola, Danilo Menicucci (Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa), Elisa Menardo (Department of Philosophy, Education and Psychology, University of Verona), Oriana Incognito, Laura Sebastiani (Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa) Motor imagery (MI) is a dynamic state during which the mental representation of a motor action is internally rehearsed within working memory without produce a visible motor output. The “functional equivalence hypothesis” states that MI and motor performance may be linked, both showing a speed-accuracy trade off and activating brain's motor circuit and autonomic nervous system. MI assessment is not always evidence-based and properly carried out in research and professional practice.
The awareness of what is detected is critical to choose the best instrument. According to the functional equivalence hypothesis, we also have to take into account participant's motor experience and its current psycho-physiological state. We measured with high-density EEG if assess MI objectively and subjectively showed different brain activation profiles.
The objective index was the time comparison between executing and imagining three movements in a visual internal and a kinesthetic modality. The subjective one was the Movement Imagery Questionnaire–3, a self-assessment about the facility to imagine. We showed that these index were not interchangeable, because only the objective score was positively related with motor areas activation.
Moreover, we studied with Recovery-Stress Questionnaire for Athletes–76 how actively play out recovery strategies related to daily life (e.g. somatic relaxation), modify not-athletes' MI quality. Conversely, nor stress, neither recovery would affect MI quality in competitive and not-competitive sportsmen.
We used the Vividness of Movement Imagery Questionnaire-2 as assessment tool, that used motor gestures related to various sports (e.g. run) and everyday activities (e.g. walk) imagined in different modalities (visual external, internal and kinesthetic) rating their 341Symposia Friday July 14th vividness.
In not-athletes' alongside a MI assessment we have to measure daily life recovery strategies. Finally, we will suggest a low-cost MI assessment protocol based on these evidences. Keywords: motor imagery, movement imagery Questionnaire-3, chronometry, EEG, Vividness of Movement Imagery Questionnaire–2, Motor experience Cognitive and biological aspects of controlling complex movements Thomas Schack, Dirk Koester (Exzellenzcluster Kognitive Interaktionstechnologie <CITEC>, Universität Bielefeld) Motor control is influenced from bottom-up (e.g.
sensory) and top-down (cognitive) information. Cognitive influences are of particular interest in manual action, for example, in climbing. Embedded within a cognitive architecture of action control, we present latest research on manual action control, partly evaluating cognitive processing by means of event-related potentials (ERP, based on electroencephalogram; EEG).
Regarding manual control in grasping, the literature and our work point to slow brain potentials which are suggested to reflect anticipatory effects. We note that while there is some consistency in the findings, there remains also some controversies regarding the nature of the ERP effects. Our own work also suggests that action (planning) itself has a strong influence on cognitive processing which suggests a strong action task dependence of cognitive processing.
It is argued that neurophysiological research can inform cognitive models of movement control and extend them to a biological level. Keywords: motor memory, cognition, movement architecture, brain basis The relationship between imagery ability, experience and perceived coaching ability among judo coaches Itay Basevitch (Anglia Ruskin University), Rebeka Prosoli (Univesity of Zagreb), Dagmara Budnik-Przybylska (University of Gdansk), Patrick Swain, Bob Challis, Katrina McDonald (Anglia Ruskin University) The use of imagery among athletes has been studied extensively (e.g., Bhasavanija et al., 2011). Findings pertaining to differences among skill level indicate that higher level athletes have better imagery ability skills than lower level athletes (Williams & Cumming, 2011).
Surprisingly, scant research has been conducted on imagery use among coaches even though coaches have reported imagery use across sports such as basketball and gymnastics (Short et al., 2005). Furthermore, in many sports coaches need to provide instructions to players by understanding what happened and predicting what will happen next (Ford et al., 2009; Grundel et al., 2013). Thus, the purpose of the current study was to examine imagery ability (e.g., vividness, duration) and use (e.g., perspective) among judo coaches of various experience and perceived coaching ability.
Sixty five judo coaches from a European country who have been coaching from 1 – 39 years (M = 11.74, SD = 10.27) and have competed for 1 – 45 years (M = 13.57, SD = 7.73) participated in the study. Coaches reported imagery use and ability during coaching on a 7 item imagery questionnaire (Razon et el., 2010). In addition, coaches reported their subjective coaching ability and anticipation ability.
Findings indicated experience was not related to imagery ability and use. However, perceived coaching ability was significantly positively correlated with vividness (r = .43, p <.001), control (r = .47, p <.001) and engagement (r = .42, p<.001). Furthermore, anticipation ability was significantly correlated with vividness (r = .42, p <.001), control (r = .47, p <.001), engagement (r = .35, p <.01), ease (r = -.28, p <.05), and duration (r = -.28, p <.05).
Findings indicate that coaches’ subjective perception is a better predictor of imagery ability compared to experience. Future studies should examine the relationship between objective coaching abilities and imagery use. Keywords: imagery, coaches, judo, anticipation, instruction 342Symposia Friday July 14th The influence of mental types of practice on the performance and the mental representation structure of the golf putt Cornelia Frank, Taeho Kim, Thomas Schack (Exzellenzcluster Kognitive Interaktionstechnologie <CITEC>, Universität Bielefeld) To date, it is commonly agreed that physical practice as well as mental types of practice have the potential to bring about performance improvements and to induce motor learning (Driskell, Copper, & Moran, 1994; Shea, Wulf, White, & Whitacre, 2000), each activating and inducing changes within the motor system (Jeannerod, 2001).
Learning might, however, differ as a function of the state of action used for practice. As a result, learning by way of different states of action is predicted to result in differential changes on perceptual- cognitive and motor levels of the motor action system. To date, the differential influence of physical and mental types of practice on underlying perceptual-cognitive representations of a motor action is still being debated.
In this talk, we present research that systematically compares the influence of mental types of practice and physical practice on the performance and the representation of the golf putt. Each of the studies being presented consisted of three test sessions (pre-, post- and retention-test) and a practice phase of three days. Novices were assigned to mental practice (MP; observation or imagery), physical practice (PP), combined practice (CP), or no practice (NP).
Putting performance improved similar to the pattern of changes reported from previous research (CP > PP > MP > NP; Driskell et al., 1992; Shea et al., 2000) in each of the studies. Most elaborate representation structures were evident for the groups involving observation or imagery whilst practicing. Findings indicate that practice by way of observation or imagery may particularly promote the development of representational frameworks of complex action, and thus action-related order formation in long-term memory, pointing toward a differential effect of observational practice (Ong, Larssen, & Hodges, 2012) and imagery practice (Ryan & Simons, 1983) as compared to physical practice on different levels of the motor system.
Keywords: observation, imagery, states of action, simulation theory Performance monitoring and improvement: a psychophysiological approach Selenia Di Fronso, Laura Bortoli, Claudio Robazza, Maurizio Bertollo (BIND-Behavioral Imaging and Neural Dynamics Center, Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, “G. d'Annunzio” University of Chieti-Pescara) In the last 20 years, there was a growing interest in the study of the theoretical and applied issues surrounding psychophysiological processes underlying performance. The psychophysiological monitoring, which enables the study of these processes, consists in the assessment of the activation and functional level of the organism using a multidisciplinary approach.
In the sporting domain, it can be used to attain a better understanding of the processes underlying performance and to improve athletic performance. The most frequently used ecological techniques include electromyography (EMG), electrocardiography (ECG), electroencephalography (EEG), and the assessment of electrodermal activity and breathing rhythm. The purpose of this presentation is to offer an overview of the use of these techniques in applied interventions in sport.
In particular, we will discuss a psychophysiological approach in the framework of the multi-action plan (MAP) model (Bortoli et al.,2012; Robazza et al., 2016). This model is based on empirical evidence that different performance levels are associated with unique behavioral, psychophysiological, and neurological patterns (Bertollo et al., 2013, 2016; di Fronso et al., 2016; Filho et al., 2015). Study findings with dart-throwing, shooting, and cycling athletes will be presented.
Keywords: performance monitoring, psychophysiological approach, MAP Model, sports 343POSTERS 344Posters Tuesday July 11th TUESDAY JULY 11TH Posters Session 1. (9:30-10:30) Prototypicality ratings of acts for achievement motivated behavior of young competitive athletes by coaches and sport psychologists Zuber Claudia (University of Bern) Achievement motivation has proved to be an important talent criterion for young athletes (Zuber et al., 2015). However, the evaluation of achievement motivation by means of self-assessment instruments entails the risk of social desired answers.
In addition, it would make sense to assess the observable achievement motivated behavior from coaches' reports. One possibility to construct an observation grid, is based on the Act- Frequency Approach (Buss & Craik, 1983) that relies on the definitions of characteristics elaborated by psychological laypersons. In the first step, coaches are asked about manifest achievement motivated behavior in concrete situations (acts).
In the next phase, these acts are then assessed with respect to their prototypicality for the construct to be examined. Thereby, the question arises as to whether the concept of "achievement-motivated behavior" of youth coaches - who usually have no well-founded knowledge in sports psychology - is consistent with that of sports psychologists. In the first phase of the project 58 acts were created by 20 coaches.
These acts were then evaluated by 21 further coaches and 26 sports psychologists with regard to their prototypicality for achievement-motivated behavior in young athletes on a 5-step scale. It turns out that the assessment of the coaches does not differ fundamentally from those of the sport psychologists across all acts (d=0.0; ICCunjust=.76) and that the overall assessment with M=3.75 (SD=.99) in both groups goes towards "fairly prototypical". At the level of the individual acts, the group judgments differ in nine acts with a large (d>.8) or moderate effect (d>.5).
Of these, seven acts were regarded as more prototypical by the sports psychologists. In terms of content, a trend became apparent, that behavior pointing to the concept of task orientation, are regarded as more prototypical for achievement-motivated behavior by the sports psychologists than by the coaches. Keywords: talent identification, motivation, behavior, coach, sport psychologist Strategies used by elite athletes to maintain and manage their athletic identity Zoe Poucher, Katherine Tamminen (University of Toronto) The purpose of this study was to explore how athletes maintain and manage their athletic identity (AI) and the challenges associated with having a strong AI.
Thirteen elite athletes were individually interviewed on two occasions. Participants were asked questions regarding their AI, successes and failures in sport, and how their feelings of self-worth were related to their athletic achievements. Transcripts were thematically analyzed to identify relevant themes in the data (Braun, Clarke, & Weate, 2016).
Athletes conceived of their identity in several ways, identifying as athletes, students, and professionals. However, athletes also reported that their AI changed throughout the season. Athletes engaged in strategies that maintained their AIs, including compartmentalizing aspects of their identities, setting sport-related goals, making external attributions for failures, and maintaining social relationships with other athletes.
Aspects of the sport and social environment that contributed to the maintenance of an AI were also identified, including the structure of training, the daily tasks associated with being an athlete, and receiving attention from others based on athletic achievements. Athletes reported challenges associated with experiencing a strong AI: primarily, athletes stated that their 345Posters Tuesday July 11th feelings of self-worth were contingent upon their success in sport. Some athletes also viewed having a strong AI as a burden and felt they had few relationships with others outside of sport.
The findings expand this body of literature by exploring the various strategies athletes use to support their AI and suggest that an athlete’s self-worth may be dependent on their performances, particularly among athletes with a strong AI. This may be potentially debilitative for athletes experiencing failures in sport. Future research could identify ways to assist athletes who experience failure in sport to maintain higher levels of self-worth.
Keywords: athletic identity, elite athletes, contingent self-worth Study on decision-making of penalty-kick direction from the perspective of theory of mind Zipeng Yang (University of York), Tianxue Cui (University of Macau), Jie Li (Beijing Sport University) In modern football,it’s common to collect opponents’ information.After knowing opponents’ information and/or knowing own information has been collected by opponents,players’ mental states may alter,which may affect their behavioral decisions.This can be understood as a reification of Theory of Mind(ToM),which refers to the ability to attribute mental states to oneself and others and to understand others have intentions and preferences that are different from one's own.From the perspective of ToM,this study explored how participants’ decisions in penalty kicks is affected by knowing opponents’ preferences and having own preferences being known.A serial of three experiments were conducted.Exp1 simulated penalty situation in lab by presenting sentences&pictures on screen.Exp2 adopted a video game to simulate penalty situation.Exp3 was conducted on real pitch with participants making penalty kicks.In Exp1&2,different college students were recruited and randomly assigned as keepers/shooters.In Exp3, experts&amateur football players were recruited.We manipulated the participants’ levels of knowing opponents according to the rationale of ToM,and the results were largely consistent throughout the experiments.When knowing nothing, both shooters and keepers had evidently own preferred directions.After keeper knew shooter’s preferred direction,keeper biased towards shooter’s preference and away from his own.Shooters showed the same and inclined to shoot to his non-preferred direction.After keeper knew shooter had known the keeper knew about him,keeper biased further away from both his and shooter’s original preference,and turned to almost random guess but slightly biased to shooter’s preferred direction.The results indicate the levels of ToM influence the players’ direction decision-making in penalty kicks.Players reduce their own direction preference when they know the opponents’ preferred direction,and deliberately avoid direction preference when they are known by opponents.
Keywords: theory of mind, sport decision-making, penalty-kick direction, internal adjustment, external adjustment Performance failure appraisal, optimism and coping among athletes Zahra Jafari (University of Panjab, India) The improvement in sports performance is linked with using failure as a tool. Prior research has focused a lot on fear of failure and coping styles used by athletes but very few researchers have examined the difference among these variables between individual sport and team sport athletes The present study examined Performance Failure Appraisal, Optimism and coping among athletes. The sample included 200 players in the age range of 20-35 years (50 individual female, 50 individual male, 50 team sports female and 50 team sports male athletes).
The tests used were the Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory, The Life Orientation Test - Revised and Coping strategies inventory. F- ratio for Performance failure appraisal on group was found to be significant and for gender and interaction effect was found insignificant. Optimism on gender was found to be significant and for group and interaction effect was found to be insignificant.
F-ratios for engagement coping on gender and interaction effect were found to be significant and for group was found insignificant. F-ratio for 346Posters Tuesday July 11th disengagement coping was also found to be insignificant for group and gender and interaction effect emerged significant. The results have implications for specificity in training.
F- ratio for optimism on gender were found to be significant and for interaction effect was found to be insignificant. F-ratios for engagement coping on gender and interaction effect were found to be significant. F-ratio for disengagement coping was also found to be significant.
The results have implications for specificity in training. The study can useful for both groups to achieve the goals and be success. Keywords: performance failure appraisal, optimism, coping, athletes, gender differences Where do people look during drop landing?
Yusuke Sato (Nihon University) Although the role of vision during drop landing has been studied in many previous works, there has been little study into how people collect visual information while naturally directing their gaze. In general, people look at task-relevant objects or locations needed to adequately control movement of the whole body. Assuming that there are multiple strategies governing where individuals direct their gaze during drop landing, there is the possibility that gaze behavior is related to not only gathering of visual information, but also motor behavior at landing.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to reveal where people direct their gaze during drop landing and the relationship between the gaze strategies and landing posture, such as neck flexion angle, at foot contact. Participants were 19 healthy male and female university students. Participants were instructed to land from an 0.8-m step with both feet as cleanly as possible.
All participants wore mobile eye tracking glasses (Tobii Pro Glasses 2; Tobii Tech., Stockholm, Sweden) and none reported discomfort with the glasses during the trials. Results showed that , two participants directed their gaze to the front wall without looking at floor, seven participants directed it to a soft mat (1.8 × 1.8 × 0.02 m) located just in front of the step, and 10 participants looked at the floor between the wall and the mat. Neck flexion angle and trunk tilt angle in the participants looking down at the mat were significantly different from these angles in the participants looking at the floor.
These results indicate that when individuals perform the drop landing, they have a few options as to where to direct their gaze, and their gaze behavior during the aerial phase is associated with posture at landing. Keywords: aerial phase, eye movement, gaze behavior, vision The relationship between the use of music in sports and trait anxiety, burnout, and emotional instability among Japanese college athletes Yuma Hayashi, Airi Naoi (Kindai University) Previous studies have examined the use of music in sports; however, research regarding the psychological effects of music on Japanese athletes is limited. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between the use of music, competitive trait anxiety, burnout, and emotional instability among college athletes in Japan.
An additional objective was to elucidate the reasons for the use of music, and the specific situations in which it was used. In total, 154 college athletes from Japan participated in this study. The athletes completed the Trait Anxiety Inventory for Sports (TAIS), the Neuroticism category of the Big Five personality traits model, and the Burnout Scale for University Athletes (BOSA).
Additionally, we assessed the tempo and genre of the preferred music. Among the 154 athletes, 98 athletes (65.8%) reported that they listen to music before competitions, and 51 athletes (34.2%) reported that they do not. There were no significant differences in trait anxiety and burnout between the athletes who listen to music before competitions and those who do not.
The athletes who listen to music before competitions reported lower emotional instability as compared with the athletes who do not (t = 2.22, p < .05). Situations in which the athletes listened to music included before a competition (49 athletes), before and during practice (33 athletes), and during commuting time (29 athletes). 347Posters Tuesday July 11th Furthermore, athletes reported that increasing positive affect, calming down, and sharpening focus were the most common reasons for listening to music.
Since the athletes who listen to music before competitions scored lower on emotional instability than the athletes who do not, athletes with low emotional instability may use music to increase their motivation and excitement before competitions. Furthermore, athletes with high emotional instability might be able to enhance positive affects by listening to music before competitions. Keywords: music, emotional instability, burnout Sport psychology as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroot sports José Carlos Jaenes (U.
Pablo de Olavide), Jaume Cruz (UAB), Ladislav Petrovic (ICCE), Pedro Velazquez (ICSS), José Viñas (Sevilla Football Club), Vladison Reis (FARE), Andreas Ivarsson (Halmstad University) PsyTool project is a collaborative partnership that allows a group of stakeholders from different sport backgrounds to collaborate in the establishment of a network to take full advantage from the implementation of the Sport Psychology as a strategic tool to promote integrity and to tackle violence, discrimination, intolerance and match-fixing among young practitioners of grassroots sports. PsyTool is based theoretically on the concept of youth development through the practice of sport in positive and safe environments (Cruz et al 2016, Weiss et al. 2008).
The specific objectives of PsyTool project are: a) obtain more objective data on the impact of violence, discrimination, intolerance among young practitioners of grassroots sports; b) create educational and innovative tools based on sport psychology to promote integrity and to tackle these harmful factors; c) Train “Agents of change” for recognizing potential dangerous situations and for reacting in an adequate way and d) Prove this new approach and test its results on the field through a pilot experience and disseminate, the new tools developed. Therefore, PsyTool takes account of the social, educational and cultural functions inherent in sport and it looks for to complement the European policies (such as Developing the European Dimension in Sport, 2011) in this field, bringing innovative approaches for promoting integrity among young practitioners of sports, thanks to the use of Sport Psychology as a strategic tool of high value for promoting sportspersonship. *This research was funded by the Erasmus+ project (Nº567199-EPP-1-2015-2-ES- SPO-SCP) “PsyTool: Sport as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroots sports” Keywords: sportspersonship, agents of change, violence, discrimination Cheating and gamesmanship in young soccer players Marta Borrueco, Jaume Cruz (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) Sport is considered a valid context to achieve personal and moral development in young people but it is also known that nowadays sport can be linked to negative aspects of moral reasoning such as violence, gamesmanship and the lack of sportspersonship (Cruz, Ramis & Torregrossa, 2016).
It is important to know which aspects influence positively and negatively in moral development to try to enhance or diminish them. The main objective of this research is to study the level of predisposition to gamesmanship and cheating in football. Participants were 147 young players (117 males and 30 females) from a club based in Barcelona, aged between 13 and 19 years old (M= 15.3, SD= 1.7).
We have administered the Predisposition to Cheating in Sports (CDED) developed by Ponseti, et al (2012), a six-item questionnaire that measures predisposition to acceptance of cheating (3 items) and predisposition to acceptance of gamesmanship in sport (3 items). The initial findings suggest that players score low in the overall rating of the questionnaire (mean of results under 3 in most of the players). In addition, gamesmanship is more accepted than cheating, players score higher in gamesmanship (M=3.18, SD=1.1) (i.e: Sometimes I waste time to unsettle the opposition) than in cheating (M=2.4, SD=1.2) (i.e: I would cheat if I thought it would help the team win).
Further research with other sports and ages could be useful for a better understanding of the role of the acceptance of cheating and gamesmanship in the moral development in young athletes. *This research was funded by the Erasmus+ 348Posters Tuesday July 11th project (Nº567199-EPP-1-2015-2-ES-SPO-SCP) “PsyTool: Sport as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroots sports” Keywords: gamesmanship, football, young players, sportspersonship, fair play Fair play, cheating and gamesmanship in grassroots sports F. Javier Ponseti Verdaguer, P.
Antoni Borrás Rotger, Jaume Cantallops Ramón, Alexandre Garcia-Mas (Universidad Illes Balears) The aim of this study was to analyse the attitudes towards fair play, victory, enjoyment, playing foul/hard, and the acceptability of teams’ antisocial behaviour, such as cheating and gamesmanship, in the context of grassroots sports teams. The sample included 48 different teams of basket, football, handball, volleyball and rugby, including 1333 adolescents (1013 boys and 320 girls) with a mean age of 12.50 years (Range: 10-15 years; SD = 2.09 years). In order to study these psychological variables, the athletes answered the Spanish- adapted version of the “Predisposition to Cheating in Sports” (CDED, Ponseti et al., 2012).
This tool consists of six items grouped in two factors (Ponseti, et al., 2012) to have two factors: the player’s predisposition to acceptance of cheating, and the predisposition to acceptance of gamesmanship. Also, they received the “Fair play attitudes scale“ (EAF, Boixadós, 1998). It consists of 22 items, which assesses the players’ attitudes regarding several football matches situations.
The player’s has to answer reporting their degree of agreement and/or disagreement regarding each specific situation and the attitude proposed. Once analysed, EAF showed the existence of three factors: factors, variables are generated: looking for the victory, enjoyment and playing foul/hard. Results showed the importance of the enjoyment in all sports studied, and a large amount of acceptance to gamesmanship and cheating in among the masculine team players.
There are significant differences in all studied items regarding the sport practiced and the players’ sex. Considering overall the results obtained regarding the negative attitudes to fair play, gamesmanship is somehow accepted by team player’s while the cheating is not generally accepted but refused. Therefore, it will have to consider the gamemanship correctly regarding the players’ perception of the concept of fair play.
Keywords: fair play, cheating, gamesmanship, team sports, grassroots sports Impulsivity and inhibitory executive functioning in adolescents with online game addiction Yujin Kim, Jingu Kim (Kyungpook National University) This study aims to investigate the influence of online game addiction on impulsivity and inhibitory executive functioning abilities in adolescents. Participants were 42 male middle school students aged 13-15 years. Based on the online game addiction scale scores, participants were divided into addiction group, potential risk group and control group.
The participants were asked to perform the color-word Stroop task which consisted of neutral, congruent, and incongruent cue types in randomized order. During the experiment, reaction time, response accuracy, the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS), and event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured. In order to examine the differences of amplitude and latency of N400 at C3, C4, Cz, P3, P4, and Pz, areas known to be related to inhibition control and information processing, the ERP data were collected and analyzed by three-way ANOVA.
In the analysis of BIS, the addiction group showed higher non-planning impulsivity and higher motor impulsivity relative to the control group. In the ERP analysis, the addiction and risk groups exhibited smaller N400 amplitude than the control group. The N400 latency was shorter in the addiction and risk groups than in the control group.
It was also found that the addiction and risk groups showed faster reaction time than the control group in the congruent tasks, while reaction time was faster in the neutral task relative to the congruent task. In terms of response accuracy, the risk group showed better accuracy than the addiction and control groups. Over all, this study provides neurophysiological evidence which shows that 349Posters Tuesday July 11th addiction to online games may cause decline in impulse control and information processing, having negative impact on inhibitory executive functioning.
Keywords: online game addiction, e-sport, executive function, impulsivity, inhibition control, N400, ERP Re-examining ego involvement in sport: A qualitative exploration of its bright and dark side Yuhui Chiu (Taipei College of Maritime Technology, Taiwan), Frank J.H. Lu (Chinese Culture University, Taiwan), Erica Ting-Wen Wang (Feng Chia University, Taiwan) Literature suggested that ego - involvement with perceived low ability leads to maladaptive behavior such as reducing efforts, cheating, low sportspersonship , and anxity ( Duda , 2002; Kavussanu et al., 2003; Harwood et al., 2015 ) . However , very few studies examin ed elite athletes with high ego - i nvolvement and their psychologi cal experiences.
Seven elite athlete s participated in in - depth interview. Personal docu ments and media reports were also collected. Strauss and Corbin (1997) ground ed theory was used to analyze data.
Further , we used Douglas (1976) triangulation method to increase trustworthiness of the study. Ego involved elite athletes exhibited both negative and positive psychological experiences . Negative experiences support most literature such as being anxious during competition, easily give up when no opportunity to win, low sportspersonship and cheating behavior.
However, high ego involvement als o exhibited many psychological strengths such as high competitiveness, confidence, fighting spirit, pers er varan ce during training, and never give up when having opportunity to win. Ego involvement is not necessarily all disadvantageous to elite athletes . M any unexplored psychological strength s are worthy of further investigation by both qualitative and quantitative studies in the future.
Keywords: achievement goal theory, psychology of sport excellence, grounded theory Implicit ability of expert baseball batters for distinguishing subtle changes in pitchers’ arm movements in computer animations Yufu M. Tanaka (Kindai University), Tomoyuki Matsuo (Osaka University), Yoshifumi Tanaka (Mukogawa Women's University) Expert baseball players might be able to implicitly perceive subtle changes in a pitcher’s motion. However, there is no experimental evidence to support this contention.
Therefore, implicit abilities of expert baseball players to distinguish subtle changes in shoulder abduction angle of pitchers were investigated. Expert batters (N = 8) and novices at baseball (N = 9) participated in this study that used computer graphic movies of baseball pitchers with ten types of motions having different shoulder abduction angles from the original pitcher (standard stimulus). Each participant performed randomized 400 trails (40 for each type).
In each trial, just after watching a movie the participant was requested to judge and verbally indicate whether the displacement of the pitching arm was higher or lower than that of the standard stimulus. Furthermore, the participant in each trial was requested to indicate the degree of confidence regarding their judgement. Results indicated that the point of subjective equality of experts was significantly closer to the standard stimulus than that of novices.
Also, experts indicated a significantly narrower interval of uncertainty than novices. Moreover, the degree of confidence in judgements made by experts and novices was significantly lower than the degree of correct judgements in verbal responses. These results suggest that the correct discrimination of imperceptible changes in arm movements during baseball pitching was conducted implicitly.
This tendency was typical for expert players. Keywords: point of subjective equality (PSE), discrimination ability, CG, baseball 350Posters Tuesday July 11th Sport moral disengagement and college athletes’ aggressive behavior Yuede Chu, Yanru Li (Beijing Sport University) Scientists had done a lot of researches based on Bandura's social cognitive theory to explore the relationship between moral disengagement and unethical behavior. Plenty of results show that the moral disengagement is a predictor of individual's unethical behavior (aggression, antisocial behavior, drug abuse,crime, child and adolescent bullying behavior, etc.); the higher individual moral disengagement level is, the more unethical behavior there could be.
Recent years, researchers start to pay close attention to moral disengagement that predicts the aggressive behavior in different situations. Athletes use more moral disengagement mechanism in sport environment（Bredemeier & Shields, 1984) than in everyday life. We developed three studies to explore how sport moral disengagement impacts specific attacks in different moral pressure situation.
In the first study, taking the Boardley’s sport moral disengagement measure as the basis, we developed questionnaire in Chinese for athletes. The results support a model that is best fitted college athletes in China. The data of the model has 8 first-order factors that could be represented by 1 second-order factor.
In the second study, we used hierarchical regression method to explore what kind of role moral identity plays between moral disengagement in sport and college athletes' aggression. The results show that moral identity played the moderating role between moral disengagement in sport and college athletes' aggression. Furthermore, we reached out whether sport moral disengagement is associated with a specific act of laboratory-based aggression.
Results show that the prediction for aggression only works in the low pressure situation and the medium pressure situation, but not in the high pressure situation. Keywords: sport moral disengagement,aggression,moral situational pressure,athletes The skill necessary for a good play of the circumstantial judgment in the soccer Yudai Ura (Seinan Gakuin University) The purpose of this study was to determine the difference of the ability of the circumstantial judgment paid attention to sight information in the soccer. The experimental conditions were to classify 12 members of soccer club of University A in a circumstantial judgment evaluation high group and the low group from the evaluation of supervision and the coach, and to divide phases four.
(1) A simplicity reaction problem. (2) A choice reaction problem (fortunetelling). (3) A choice reaction problem (difficulty).
(4) The semi-structured interview and tested it. The discrimination time was measured by a mat switch in (1), (2) and (3). Stimulation of this study was (1) A green circle, (2) A green circle and two red circles and (3) Pictures of a variety of scenes of soccer game; the situation that I make three sets of pairs of defense and the offence, and situation that one set is easy to go along a pass, two sets are hard to go along a pass.
The experiment procedure of this study was (1) is the participant passed after the stimulation presentation immediately, (2) is the participant passed the goal under a green circle after the stimulation presentation, (3) is the participant passed the goal under the member whom a pass is more likely to go along. The results of this study were that the significant difference was not seen by the simple reaction problem and choice reaction problem (fortunetelling), but significant difference was seen by a choice reaction problem (difficulty). And it became clear that high group of circumstantial judgment had the clue of a concrete judgment.
It suggested that the circumstantial judgment was affected by difference of the ability of the sight information processing and the ability of the sight information processing affected the ability of the information processing had the clue of the judgment. Keywords: circumstantial judgment 351Posters Tuesday July 11th Disadvantageous height perception by high jumpers before the run under psychological pressure Yoshifumi Tanaka (Mukogawa Women's University), Joyo Sasaki (Japan Institute of Sports Sciences), Kenta Karakida, Kana Goto (Mukogawa Women's University), Yufu Tanaka (Kindai University), Takayuki Murayama (Kanazawa University) Most athletes feel subjective changes in their perception of the environment during sports competitions. These changes include alterations in spatial, temporal, and kinematic information about the opponent.
However, such changes under psychological pressure have not been experimentally investigated just prior to task execution in sports contexts. Therefore, effects of psychological pressure on perceiving the height of a jump bar, just before starting a high jump run was investigated. University students (N = 14, 7 women and 7 men) training for a high jump event participated in this study.
They performed 15 trials (3 practice, 6 non- pressure, and 6 pressure) in counterbalanced order in their daily practice environment with a partner. The height of the bar in pressure and non-pressure conditions was set to -25, -22, -19, -16, -13, -10 cm of participant’s personal best height. Participants were requested to verbally state the height of the bar in centimeters before starting the run.
A combination of pressures, including reward, penalty, and social stress for the partner, was used in the pressure condition. Significant increases in subjective pressure and mental effort assessed by using the visual analog scale indicated that stress responses were successfully induced under pressure. Results indicated that the height of the bar was judged as significantly higher in the pressure compared to the non-pressure condition.
Additionally, a regression analysis indicated that participants reporting increased subjective pressure under pressure, judged the bar to be higher. There was no significant difference between pressure and non-pressure conditions in the performance index defined as the success rate in the six trials. This study provides the first evidence that psychological pressure prior to executing a motor task changes environmental perceptions in a direction disadvantageous for task performance.
Keywords: stress, choking, perception, affordance Assessment of team coordination in sport: A scoping review York-Peter Klöppel, Dieter Hackfort (University FAF Munich) Since its early days, sport psychology research has predominantly focused on individuals. Many researchers, however, highlight the need for more research to be conducted on teams (Carron et al., 2012). The aim of this systematic review of the social-cognitive research literature on teams in sport is to identify common features for an objective, validated and reliable tool for the assessment of team coordination.
The methodologically rigorous scoping review approach (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005) is used to fulfil the aims of this study. A systematic search of empirical studies and book chapters is carried out in the data bases using relevant keywords (e.g. team coordination, coordination, cooperation, interindividual, etc.).
The inclusion criteria are (a) written in English or German, (b) relevant to the topic, and (c) published in peer reviewed journals, conference papers, or book chapters. Furthermore, the references are explored and key journals are hand-searched to identify additional contributions. Key characteristics for a definition of team coordination based on an analysis across available relevant literature are provided.
Furthermore, the concept of an objective measurement of team coordination applicable to a broad scope of team sports is proposed. Despite an increasing number of articles concerning the social characteristics of sports teams (Eccles & Tenenbaum, 2004), the literature on cognitive aspects is scarce and there is no objective, reliable and validated measurement. Moreover, the computer-based system, which is conceptualised based on an action theory framework, can be used not only to test but also to train interindividual coordination, communication and effectiveness in teams.
Keywords: team coordination, interindividual coordination, teamwork, scoping review, sport teams, social- cognitive 352Posters Tuesday July 11th The psychological effect of virtual exercise system on university students Yongtao Yang, Yanlin Sun (Tianjin Sport University) Virtual reality (VR) is a new technology for exercise. Studies have investigated the psychological effect of VR exercise in adults and senior citizens. However, most of those studies did not consider the impact on exercise intensity when using the VR exercise system.
In other words, whether the psychological effect was coming from the VR environments or the exercise, was still unknown. Therefore, we simulated a VR exercise system in which the exercise intensity was controlled by an Ergoline cycle ergometer to compare the psychological effects among moderate-intensity exercise in VR (condition 1), non-VR (condition 2), and pedaling without workload (very low intensity) in VR (condition 3). The VR environment was outdoor with water, hill, trees, and so on.
The display speed of VR environment was proportional to the participant’s pedaling speed. Thirty university students participated in the study and all of them cycled 40 minutes with or without moderate intensity workload. The profile of mood states (POMS) and exercise-induced feeling inventory (EFI) was used before and after the exercise.
Rate of perceived exertion (RPE) was also measured every 5min from the 10thmin during cycling. The exercise intensity was monitored by POLAR RS400. Results showed large positive effects on POMS and EFI in both condition 1 and 2, and condition 1 showed more positive than condition2 (lower fatigue and RPE level).
However, pedaling with no workload in VR only showed a little positive effect on POMS and EFI. The results suggest that VR without exercise intensity may have little positive effect on psychological state. Moderate intensity exercise in VR may augment the psychological benefit on exercisers.
It will be necessary to discuss the psychological effects of different exercise intensities in VR for adults or other people in the future. Keywords: Virtual reality (VR), exercise, Profile of Mood States (POMS), exercise-induced feeling inventory (EFI), Rate of perceived exertion (RPE) The prediction of empowering and disempowering motivational climate on subjective vitality among youth athletes: The mediating effects of basic psychological needs Yi-Ting Tsai, Mei-Yen Chen (National Taiwan Normal University) Recently, more and more research interest has focused on examining coach-related factors influence athletes’ well-being and health. Duda (2013) considered that empowering climate will satisfy athletes’ basic needs and then enhance their health.
Vitality is an important aspect of health and refers to a dynamic aspect of well-being indexed by the subjective experience of energy and positive aliveness (Ryan & Frederick, 1997). Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the meditating effects of basic psychological needs between empowering, disempowering motivational climate and subjective vitality among youth athletes. The participants were 81 youth athletes (58 males and 23 females) recruited from four high schools.
After received the informed consent, participants completed Empowering and Disempowering Motivational Climates Questionnaire, Basic Psychological Need Satisfaction Scale, and Subjective Vitality Scale. The results of Bootstrap mediated analyses indicated that empowering motivational climate positively predicted subjective vitality and were meditated by autonomy and relatedness. On the other hand, disempowering motivational climate negatively predicted subjective vitality and were meditated by autonomy, competence and relatedness.
The findings of current study suggest that coaches should create empowering climate to satisfy young athletes’ perceptions of autonomy and relatedness and then promote their subjective vitality. In contrast, Creating disempowering climate thwart psychological needs and then reduce athletes’ subjective vitality. Keywords: well-being, autonomy, bootstrapping 353Posters Tuesday July 11th Research on influential factors of rehabilitation exercises in consumer psychology perspective Ying Liu (Chengdu Sport Institute) This study aimed to explore the individual difference of rehabilitation exercises as consumers from all over China by a questionnaire.
The reliability of the questionnaire is 0.747 and the validity is acceptable. This study focused on influential individual factors of rehabilitation exercise, which are age, gender, exercise preference, and cognition level of rehabilitation exercises. Data have inputted into SPSS 12.0.
The results were gotten by covariance analysis method and showed as followed: Motivation level was obviously different between subjects of exercise preference and no exercise preference. The subjects of exercise preference were more willing to do rehabilitation exercise. The cognition level of rehabilitation exercises was related positively with rehabilitation exercises obviously and so does age.
Although there was no difference between male and female subjects, the interaction of gender and age influenced rehabilitation exercises obviously (p Keywords: exercise, rehabilitation exercise, exercise preference Self-talk and motor skill performance: Moderating effects of mindfulness Yi-Hsiang Chiu, Frank Jing-Horng Lu, Ko-Hsin Chang Recently, it has been found mindfulness influences motor performance (e.g., Kaufman et al., 2009; Kee et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2016). Also, it has been found self-talk is an effective cognitive strategy in enhancing motor performance (e.g., Kolovelonis et al., 2011; Chang et al., 2014). However, very few studies examine how the role mindfulness in influencing self-talk-motor performance relationship.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the moderating effects of mindfulness on self-talk-motor performance relationship. Forty-nine college students (Mage=18.96±1.08) sampled from 121 college students with high/low mindfulness (high=23; low=26) and were instructed to perform a gross motor skill (i.e., stand long jump) and a fine motor skill (i.e., tracking task) under instructional, motivational and unrelated self-talk by a counter-balance order. By a 3 (self-talk type) X 2 (high/low mindfulness) X 2 (gross/fine motor skill) repeated MANOVA analyses we found both instructional and motivational self-talk had better performance than unrelated self-talk on standing long jump and tracking test.
Also, it was found mindfulness interacted with self-talk on tracking test. Results partially support the task-matching hypothesis of self-talk. Limitations, future research directions, and practical implication were discussed.
Keywords: cognitive strategies, attention disposition, motor skill performance The psychological benefits of grunting on tennis court: A qualitative exploration Yi-Chen Peng, Chu-Min Liao (National Taiwan Sport University) Many tennis players grunt loudly while hitting shots. Previous researches, from a physical perspective, have suggested that grunting might increase power and speed on motor tasks (Callison et al., 2014; O’Connell et al., 2014; Welch and Tschampl, 2012). The psychological mechanism and the effects of grunting in tennis, however, has not yet been systematically studied.
The purpose of this study was to explore the perceived psychological effects of grunting of elite tennis players and coaches by adopting a qualitative approach. We purposefully selected 12 elite Taiwanese tennis players who usually grunted while playing (including 2 professional and 1 retired players, 9 males and 3 females, mean age=21.4, mean tennis experience= 9.01years) and 5 tennis coaches (4 males and 1 female, mean coaching year= 15.4.) and interviewed them either individually or in a focus-group (4 players). The interviews were semi-structured and conducted following an interview guide with probing questions regarding how the interviewees felt and believed about grunting.
Interview data was analyzed according to the grounded theory protocol. Content analysis generated thirty-two 354Posters Tuesday July 11th sub-themes and five higher-order themes (physical, technical, psychological, emotional and other aspects) of the perceived effects of grunting of the interviewees. The interviewees believed that grunting helped tennis players to generate more power, pump up energy, establish hitting rhythms, gain confidence, stay focus, regulate emotional levels, and cope with psychological stress more effectively.
These results are in line with the underlying psychological mechanism of performance-enhancing strategies suggested in the literature relating to self-efficacy, arousal regulation, and attentional control. More research is warranted to shed more light on the mechanism of grunting and make it a more effective strategy on the court. Keywords: rhythms, confidence, regulate emotional The global integrated methodology for the development of specific behaviours in football: examples and applied proposals Miguel Morilla, Santiago Rivera Matiz, Juan Martín Tassi This work proposes integrated analytical and global integrated methodologies as a means for training in football (Morilla, Rivera & Tassi, 2017) and presents various examples of drills where the psychological component is emphasized in specific game situations at the pitch.
Each method complement the other to favor the sports behavior, from reduced situations (i.e. integrated analytical) to more complex global game situations (i.e. global integrated).
They are used to design tasks with the following characteristics: 1) reinforce individual and collective behaviors associated with repeated actions vs. complex collective situations; 2) are carried out in small vs. wide spaces (e.g.
field sectors, specific game positions vs. one or more sectors of the field); 3) the amount of interactions between players is limited vs. the number of players and their interactions are extended (e.g.
defensive or offensive blocks); 4) present an increased number of specific repetitions vs. a smaller number of repetitions with greater collective involvement; 5) include the presence of some vs. all the structural parameters of the game; and 6) they focus on specific or simple game situations that do not address the overall game, unlike to analytical integrated tasks.
Therefore integrated analytical methodology favours the development of sports behaviours that in the same task pursue specific goals for each performance component (e.g. tactical and psychological), individually (i.e. demands of the playing position) or collectively (i.e., game model).
On the other hand, global integrated methodology fosters the development of collective game intelligence. The tasks associated with both of the methodological proposals can emphasize the psychological variables present in any situation and will be evaluated through quantitative and qualitative observation in future works. Keywords: complexity, sports behavior, global integrated, collective interaction, psychology, football Psychology of sport and mental health: An experience with body practices Rodrigo Salomão, Telma Matos, Adriele Ishimoto, Luiza Figueiredo, Karoline Michalski, Cristiano Barreira (University of São Paulo) When reflecting on the relationship between mental health and quality of life, it is possible to consider benefits in several dimensions, such as physical, psychological and social rehabilitation, general improvement of physical fitness, valuable gains of independence and self-confidence by the realization of daily life activities, in addition to improve the self-concept and self-esteem of the practitioners.
Taking into account mental health and quality of life, the regular practice of physical activity for psychiatric patients is much relevant. The purpose of this intervention was to offer corporal practices, based on a phenomenological perspective in Psychopathology and Sport Psychology, as a promotion and health resource aligned to the therapeutic proposal of the Community Group of Mental Health of the Day Hospital (HD) of Clinical Hospital of the Medical School of Ribeirão Preto – University of São Paulo. The patients are usually sedentary and complain about the side effects of the medication, such as muscle stiffness and weight gain.
Phenomenological studies on the 355Posters Tuesday July 11th corporeality in the varied psychopathological conditions should favor the recognition of the experiences to be unfold by these practices, aiming an integral improvement of the patients. Intervention activities occurred over 12 months, attending on average 16 psychiatric patients of the HD. A Physical Education professional (PE) taught the practical activities, also followed by three monitors (PE), and a Sport Psychologist.
A phenomenological perspective in Psychopathology and Sport Psychology guided the methodological procedures. Aligned with a therapeutic work, these corporal practices seek to favor social support and inclusion, and the activities are surrounded by the valorization of subjectivity, mental health and personal experience. Keywords: body practices, psychology, phenomenology, sport psychology Cooperation on sports: Measurement in categories of basic soccer football forces Yesica Jimenez Arcos, Claudia Alicia Rivas Garza, Alexandre Garcia-Mas (ISSP/SOLCPAD/AMPDAF) Today, different authors such as Garcia-Mas, A.
and Rivas, C talk about teamwork, group cohesion, and more specifically the influence of cooperation on sports on performance results in any team sport. Cooperation on sports, understood as the decision of at least two people, acting together to achieve a goal, comes up to make an effort in order to clarify the different interactions that are established between the players of a team in the competition, and the Decision-making process in which players choose to collaborate with their teammates in solving the different moves of the game (García-Mas, 2001). This investigation parts of the meaning of identifying the level of cooperation on sports in the categories of the basic forces of a football club, overall and by factors; Later it makes an analysis of the global cooperation on sports of the categories all together according to the age of the players and the time that they have been inside the club.
The poster shows the punctual way that cooperation on sports and the factors it makes up. It points out the methodology of research used and ends with schemes that exemplify the obtained results. Keywords: cooperation, cohesion, soccer, young, sport, global The role of coach-athlete relationships and achievement goals in determining motivational orientation of adolescent athletes Yesim Karaç (General Directorate of Sport), Atahan Altintas (Baskent University Faculty of Health Science) Achievement goal theory (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Elliot, 2005; Nicholls, 1984) is one of the most established theories in the study of competence motivation.
In this context it was recently suggested that more sport research is warranted concerning the theoretically expected links between achievement goals and coach- athlete relationships and motivation (Conroy et al., 2007; Adie & Jowett, 2010). The aim of this study was to investigate the motivation of adolescents athletes with regard to coach-athlete relationship and achievement goal orientations. Sixty three females (Mage=14.17±0.77), 182 males (Mage=14.11±0.79) totally 245 athletes (Mage=14.13±0.79) voluntarily participated in this study.
The Coach Athlete Relationships Questionnaire (CART-Q), The Perception of Success Questionnaire (Child Version) and Sport Motivation Scale (Child Version) were used to participants. Stepwise Multiple Regression Analysis was used to assess the relationship between coach athlete relationship, achievement goal and motivational orientation. Analysis results indicated that the commitment subscale was significant predictors of the intrinsic motivation (R=0.14; R2=0.02; p<0.05).
Also, closeness subscale was negative predictor of intrinsic motivation (R=0.09; R2=0.03; p<0.05). Another results showed that task orientation was significant predictors of amotivation as negatively (R=0.28; R2=0.08; p<0.05). In conclusion, coach-athlete relationship and achievement goal orientation effects motivational orientations of adolescent athletes.
In other words, the athletes who maintain their coach-athlete relationship over time have high level intrinsic motivation. On the other hand, when the coach and athlete feel emotionally close to each other in the relationship, athletes’ intrinsic motivation level decreased. 356Posters Tuesday July 11th Keywords: coach athlete relationship, motivation, achievement goal Athletic identity and career behaviors - the moderating effects of self-identity status and self-complexity Yawen Hsu (National Chiayi University) Career development and transition of athletes has received considerable attention in sport.
Previous literature proposed that athletes with an exclusive athletic identity was found to be more vulnerable to negative influences of career transitions. However, strong athletic identity is essential for outstanding sport performance and athletic training. Based on literature, the qualitative and quantitative aspects of athletic identity - self-identity status (Marcia, 1980) and self-complexity (Linville, 1985) - were discussed in this research.
The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between athletic identity and career development behaviors, and to test the moderating effects of self-identity status and self-complexity. 256 college students majoring in physical education and sport-related programs in Taiwan participated in the present study. Research measurements included Athletic Identity Measurement Scale (AIMS), Objective Measure of Ego Identity Status (OMEIS-2), self-complexity measurement, and Career Development Survey (CDS).
Product-moment correlation and hierarchical regression were employed to conduct statistical analysis. The results from correlation analysis indicated that college students’ athletic identity was negatively related to “Identity-diffusion” and was positively associated with their “Identity-achievement”. On the other hand, athletic identity was negatively related to their perceived “Identity-achievement” from peers.
Furthermore, the moderating effects of “Identity-achievement” and perceived “Identity-diffusion” were significant. The findings confirmed that the use of the qualitative and quantitative aspects interpreted athletic identity more effectively, and provided better understanding of the effects of athletic identity and its association with self-identity status, self-complexity, and career behaviors. A conclusion of the findings obtained in this paper and suggestions for future research were proposed.
Keywords: identity-diffusion, foreclosure, proactive career behaviors, career transition, buffer coping The adaptation of psychological support in Japanese ski jumping men’s national team from 2006 to 2014 Yasuhisa Tachiya (Japan Institute of Sports Sciences) The purpose of this case study was to enhance performance of ski jumpers in Japanese men’s national team by providing psychological support to prepare them for big games such as the Olympic Games and the World Champions. The intervention has been conducted since May 2006 (after the Torino Olympic Games) until the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympic Games. Before the intervention start, I deeply discussed the psychological support for the team with the coaches.
After that I mapped out our support line. This support method was based on JISS team psychological support method (2002). JISS psychological group have supported many Japanese Olympic teams and athletes since 2002.
This intervention consists of two sessions: MT seminars and one-on-one sessions. First, MT seminars were held several times in training camps. The contents of MT seminars were divided into two parts: teaching MT techniques and making own philosophy of athletic life.
The athletes acquired MT techniques such as relaxation training, imagery and others. They used to some MT techniques in trainings and competitions. In addition, one of the most essential works was to guide them to be aware of important mental factors for the jumpers in athletic life, in turn, to make their own philosophy of athletic life.
Second, the main purpose of one-on-one sessions was to listen to athletes’ individual issues and to provide advice for the athletes. After the one-on-one sessions, athletes could make a set for their mind prior to competitions. These support continued also in the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympic Games.
During the 2014 Sochi, I stayed at outside athletes’ villages in Sochi, visiting formal trainings and competitions and listening and 357Posters Tuesday July 11th advising the jumpers about psychological conditions. The team was great performances especially in the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympic Games. Keywords: psychological support, ski jumping, national team A study on the color preferences and aggressive behaviors in college students Yan Shi It is generally known that the color brings a tremendous affect to human’s cognition.
The relationship between colors and psychological functioning has always been paid dramatic attention to for a long history. Color preference is a favorite color which people mentally like or preferentially choose. On the basis of summary and analysis, this study made a thorough inquiry about the relationship between color preferences and aggressive behaviors of college students.
The Buss-Perry aggression questionnaire and a self-designed questionnaire of color preference were used to measure the color preferences and aggression behaviors among Chinese college students. A total of 227 college students were investigated, the result shows that: (1) The order of undergraduates’ color preference is that : Red, blue, purple, orange, green, yellow. The color preference has definitely significant differences and there is a dichotomy between male’s and female’s preferences about red and yellow.
Keywords: color preference, aggressive behavior,college student Perfectionistic strivings and concerns on the emotional experience of young athletes Yago Ramis, Miquel Torregrossa (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Alexander T. Latinjak (Escola Universitaria de la Salut i de l'Esport (EUSES) Universitat de Girona) Perfectionism has been considered a maladaptive trait in general population (e.g., Burns, 1980). However, recent trends on the field of sport suggest that some types of perfectionism can be beneficial for performance and sport competition in particular (e.g., Stoeber & Otto, 2006).
The paradox of Flett & Hewitt (2005) specifically posits that, although negative consequences are expected from perfectionistic athletes, in elite sports, almost absolute perfection is required. Alleviating this position, current researchers on perfectionism subdivide two types of perfectionism with differing effects on well-being, motivation and emotional experiences: perfectionistic strivings refer to the setting of exceedingly high standards in sport whereas perfectionistic concerns refer to negative reactions to imperfection. In this research, 225 young athletes (Mage= 14.29; SD = 2.62) practicing basketball, water polo and synchronised swimming, answered the Spanish versions of the Personal Standards and Concern Over Mistakes subscales of the Sport MPS2 (Gotwals, Dunn, Causgrove Dunn, & Gamache, 2010), Sport Emotion Questionnaire (Jones, Lane, Bray, Uphill, & Catlin, 2005), Sport Anxiety Scale-2 (Smith, Smoll, Cumming, & Grossbard, 2006) and the Self-Confidence Scale of the CSAI-2 (Cox, Martens, & Russell, 2003).
Results show that measures of anxiety both from SAS-2 and SEQ, as well as negatively toned emotions were positively predicted by perfectionistic concerns (β = .42 to 82; p<.001) whereas, perfectionistic strivings positively predicted happiness and self-confidence (β = .40 and β = .56 respectively; p<.001) which were also negatively predicted by perfectionistic concerns (β = -.58 and β = -.80 respectively; p<.001). Our study suggests that although both forms of perfectionism seem to be two sides of the same coin (r = .68) when focusing in perfectionistic strivings instead of in concerns on imperfection more positive emotional experiences are expected in young athletes. Keywords: emotions, perfectionism, structural equation modelling, anxiety 358Posters Tuesday July 11th The prediction of 3 × 2 achievement goal on the subjective well-being among youth athletes: The mediating effects of psychological needs Xin-Yu Hsieh, Mei-Yen Chen (National Taiwan Normal University) Previous research concerned with the role that achievement goals may play in facilitating the psychological well-being in the academic setting.
Specifically, task goals were related to positive psychological well-being, and ego goals were related to negative psychological well-being (Kaplan & Maehr, 1999). However, few studies have been conducted to examine the possible mechanism. Recently, Elliot, Murayama, and Pekrun (2011) proposed a 3 × 2 achievement goal model.
The purpose of this study was to examine the mediating effects of psychological needs on association between 3 × 2 achievement goals and subjective well-being in youth sport. Participants were 123 high school student-athletes (78 males and 45 females) recruited from Taipei and New Taipei city. Their average age was 16.49 year, and the average training year was 5.83.
After received the informed consent, participants were asked to complete 3 × 2 Achievement Goal Questionnaire (AGQ), Subjective Well-being Questionnaire and Psychological Needs Questionnaire. The data was then analyzed by the descriptive statistics, product-moment correlation and Bootstrap mediation analysis. The results of Bootstrap mediation analyses indicated that autonomy played as mediators in the prediction of all the approach goals (Self-Approach Goal, Other-Approach Goal, and Task-Approach Goal) on subjective well- being.
Moreover, Task-Avoidance Goal positively predicted youth athletes’ autonomy and then positively predicted their subjective well-being. Base on the findings, the implications and applications of this study are discussed. Keywords: self-avoidance, self-approach, other- avoidance, other- approach, task- avoidance, task- approach The effect of tennis expertise on motion-in-depth perception: An event-related potential study Xiaona Wei, Changzhu Qi, Xia Xu, Xiaobin Hong (Wuhan Sports University) Visual information is used continuously to guide and modify the hitting action in fast interceptive sport, and motion-in-depth perception is important for the athletes to gain visual information.
Many studies have confirmed athletes’ expertise advantage in information processing, while results of praxeology experiments have not reached consensus. The present study investigated the effect of tennis expertise on motion-in-depth perception by event-related potential (ERP). The study includes 19 sport university students majoring in tennis (national athletes’ technical certificate Level Two, training period ≥ five years) as experts and 19 college students without tennis experience as novices.
ERPs were recorded when participants were discriminating direction of motion in depth. ERP data from five midline electrode sites was selected for further statistical analysis: PO7 and PO8 for P1 and N180, Oz for P2, CPz and Pz for P300. Expertise group (experts vs.
novices) × direction (toward vs. away) × rotation pattern (rotating vs. non-rotating) analysis of repeated variance analysis (rANOVA) were conducted on the amplitudes and latencies.
Three main expert-novice differences are found in the current study. First, the tennis expert group shows a significant advantage in accuracy rate comparing to the novice group. Second, for the novice group, the latency of occipitotemporal P1 in the “toward” condition was significantly longer in response to the “away” condition, but the tennis expert group shows no difference in the two conditions.
Third, for the tennis expert group, the latency of occipital P2 in the “toward” condition was significantly longer in response to the “away” condition; however, no significant difference is found in the novice group. The present study indicates that tennis expertise has an advantage on motion-in-depth perception. The occipital P2 is the potential biomarker for the assessment of athletes’ perceptual skills training effect in interceptive sports.
Keywords: expertise, motion-in-depth perception, event-related potential 359Posters Tuesday July 11th Research on implicit cognitive attitude of red attire among wrestlers in wrestle game Xiaobin Hong (Wuhan Sports University) Previous studys found that athletes with red uniform have competitive advantage in combat game(Hill,2005). However, participants’ attitude on athletes with red uniform were examined by explicit measure among the most of previous study(Little,2007;Feltman,2011). Thus, the present study tried to explore athletes’ cognitive attitude on red uniform from the perspective of implicit.
36 college wrestlers and 38 college students to participate in the study. The traditional Implicit Association Test was used to measure participants’ implicit cognitive attitude on the competitive uniforms’ color. The present study used competition pictures as concept dimension material, and used character as attribution dimension material.In total, original 8 pictures from training context were collected, which consists of four group of 2 wrestlers in each group.
we using Adobe photoshop CS.6 Color manipulation to modify the hue of the 8 pictures, which one wrestle was changed into shadow in each picture. Thus, we got 16 pictures for the present study. Attribution dimension material include 16 words, which involved 8 aggressive words(4 positive and 4 negative) and non-aggressive words(4 positive and 4 negative).
For college students, their average reaction time to the picture of athlete with red uniform + aggressive words is significantly shorter than the picture of athlete with red uniform + non-aggressive words(p<0.001). In the compatible task, wrestlers’ average reaction time is significantly than college students (p<0.05). In the incompatible task, wrestlers’ reaction time is significantly longer than college students, but there is no significant difference.
From the perspective of implicit, both wrestlers and college students have the attitude that colour red is more aggressive. Keywords: competition attire, red effects, implicit cognition,IAT Changes in sleep quality and mental health following the physical activity program administered to civil sanitation workers Won-Min Choi, Ye-Lim Choi (Sungkyunkwan University) Numerous existing studies showed the positive effects of regular exercise on mental health and sleep quality. However, it is not clear whether such effects would be applicable to the population with poor vocational and overnight working conditions.
Also, because of the intense physical demands of overnight street cleaning duties, exercise participation is the last option for after-work activities among the Korean civil sanitation workers. In this study, we hypothesized that regular exercise activity would help them to improve sleep quality and mental health. A total of 18 sanitation workers were randomly assigned to either an experimental group (n=9) or a control group (n=9).
Then, a 12 weeks of physical activity program was applied to the experimental group. Participants from both groups completed Sleep quality (Lee, 2005), Concise Measure of Subjective Well Being (Suh & Koo, 2011), and Depression-Anxiety-Stress Scale (Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995) questionnaires before and after the 12 week period. The result could be summarized as follows.
First, sleep quality and mental health showed significant differences between the pre- and the post- test periods. Next, this pre-post difference was significantly greater among the workers who participated the physical activity programs. Regular physical activity was, again, shown to be an effective intervention for quality of sleep and mental health.
Further, this beneficial aspect of physical activity could be applied to the people working in demanding and harsh conditions such as civil sanitation workers or other public caretakers. Keywords: physical activity program, quality of sleep, mental health, cleaning worker 360Posters Tuesday July 11th Measuring individual hierarchy of anxiety invoking sports related activities: development and validation of the Photographic Series of Sports Activities for Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction (PHOSA-ACLR) Wim van Lankveld (HAN University of Applied Sciences) Fear of harm (FoH) after Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction (ACLR) hampers return to sports. Fear for specific movements can be addressed using graded exposure.
Assessing an individual hierarchy in fear eliciting activities is a prerequisite for exposure(1). This study describes measurement properties of the first instrument to measure FoH that allows to determine such a hierarchy of sports related fear inducing activities specific for ACLR. ACLR experts selected 12 sports situations invoking FAH in ACLR.
Photographic representations of these situations were included in the Photograph Series of Sports Activities for ACLR (PHOSA-ACLR). Internal consistency and structural validity are assessed in 109 patients. In 58 patients criterion validity is assessed by calculating pearson correlations with the Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia (TSK).
Correlations with self-reported knee function (KOOS and Lysholm score), and Knee Self-efficacy Scale (K-SES) were computed for hypothesis testing. Test-retest reliability was determined in a group of 55 patients, assessed twice within 1 week. Responsiveness to change was assessed in 10 patients shortly after reconstruction, with four assessments with a time interval of 3 weeks.
The resulting 10 items PHOSA-ACLR showed excellent internal consistency (Cronbach’s Alpha is .95), with large correlation with TSK (r = .59). Test- retest correlation was excellent (ICC = .86), and the PHOSA-ACLR was responsive to chance. A priori formulated hypothesis are confirmed.
An important limitation of the study is the small number of patients for responsivenes. The PHOSA-ACLR showed excellent measurement properties. The PHOSA-ACLR gives specific information about fear invoking sports situations that are not measured by other kinesophobia measures.
Therefore, the PHOSA-ACLR might be a valuable additional tool in rehabilitation of ACLR patients. Keywords: anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR), kinesiophobia, fear of harm/movement/injury, validation Athlete’s envy: Appraisal patterns, benign envy and malicious envy Wan-Un Chung (Research Centre of Sports Psychology in Wuhan Sports University), Chu-Min Liao (National Taiwan Sport University) Envy, the feeling that oneself is inferior to others, is an emotion that athletes experience often since social comparison with others (rivals and/or teammates) is inevitable in sport. According to Pila et al.
(2014), envy can be either benign or malicious. Benign envy makes individuals to improve themselves while malicious envy drives people to attempt to drag others down. This study examined the effect of athletes’ perceived deservingness of teammate’s superiority and perceived control potential of changing the inferior situation on both benign and malicious envy.
Participants were 202 student athletes from Taiwan (130 males; 72 females) and were randomly assigned to one of the four conditions in a 2 (Undeserved vs. Deserved) by 2 (Low control vs. High control) experimental design.
Participants read a story script regarding a fictional athlete losing his starting position to a teammate and then report how they would feel if they had been the athlete. The levels of perceived deservingness and control in the story scripts were manipulated according to the experimental condition. Between-groups ANOVAs showed that both Deserved with High control condition and Deserved with Low control condition had a higher level of benign envy than Undeserved with High control condition (p = .004; p = .044, respectively).
In addition, Deserved with High control condition had a lower level of malicious envy than both Underserved with High control condition (p = .036) and Undeserved with Low control condition (p = .027). These results support the notion of Pila et al. (2014) and suggest that coaches should pay attention to athletes’ feelings of envy since envy can lead to a more adaptive response if athletes feel that other people’s superiority is deserved and the current situation can be changed.
361Posters Tuesday July 11th Keywords: benign envy, malicious envy, appraisal patterns Competition result and its influence on the motivation score of athletic handball players Vinicius Freitas, Cristina Melo, Tatiana Boletini, Franco Noce (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais) Motivation can be defined as factors that determine the actualization of forms of behavior directed to a specific goal, depending on the interaction of personal (intrinsic) and environmental (extrinsic) factors. Intrinsic motivation refers to the pleasure an athlete has in performing a task. Extrinsic motivation corresponds to behaviors performed for the purpose of obtaining a material or social reward, or to avoid some form of punishment.
The objective of the study was to verify the influence of the competition result on the motivation score of athletic handball players. The hypothesis is that a bad result in a competition can alter the motivation of the athletes, causing demotivation and even dropout. The sample was composed by 8 teams, making a total of 89 athletes participating in the School Games of Minas Gerais (JEMG).
The profile of the sample is composed by handball athletes from public and private schools, aged 15 to 17 years. Data were collected through the Sports Motivation Scale (SMS), an instrument that measures 7 different motivation scales through 28 questions on a likert scale of seven values, in which 1 corresponds to nothing and 7 corresponds exactly. The application occurred one hour before the start of the first game and after the last game.
To analyze the data, a descriptive statistic was used, composed of mean, standard deviation and frequency distribution. To compare the moments before and after the competition in each dimension, the Paired Samples Test (t-test) was used, the level of significance adopted was p<0.05. These data were observed using a overall of all teams and per team.
The results also show that the most affected dimensions were "intrinsic motivation to know" and "demotivation". The winning team (7), presented favorable results in relation to the others when comparing the score of motivation before and after the competition. It can be concluded that the result of the competition had a significant influence on motivation score.
Keywords: motivation, handball, competition Analysis of depression, anxiety and stress among professional students at collegiate level Vineet Kumar Sharma, Nibu R. Krishna (lnipe Gwalior, m.p., India) Academic stress, anxiety and depression among college students are a cause of concern. Research survey on college student’s reports there will be 10 to 20 % of students suffering from psychological problems like Stress, Anxiety & Depression (Narasappa, 2013).
The purpose of the study is to examine the current status of depression, anxiety and stress of different professional students. A group of male-female mix of 180 (N=60 each) from medical, engineering and physical education profession, of 18-25 years with mean and SD of 21.20+2.35 were selected randomly. Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS) by Lovibond (1995) questionnaire was used as an instrument.
Descriptive statistics such as mean and standard deviation and comparative statistical technique (one way ANOVA) and Post HOC test LSD were used and level of significance was set at 0.05, where the mean and SD for the three groups, medical, engineering and physical education for depression are 11.23+7.23, 9.50+9.62 and 14.97+7.21; for anxiety are 11.77+6.05, 10.35+8.3 and 16.62+6.84 and for Stress 14.05+6.13, 10.15¬+8.4 and 16.8+6.47 respectively. F-value is significant as the calculated f values 7.14 for depression, 12.77 for anxiety and 13.39 for stress were found to be greater than the tabulated f value = 3.04 with 2, 177 df at 0.05 level of significance. Post HOC test analysis reveals a significant difference in depression among physical education and engineering students and among physical education and medical students.
Further, there is significant difference in anxiety among physical education and engineering students and among physical education and medical students. Lastly, there is significant difference in stress among physical education, engineering and medical students. As, Aerobic exercise training has antidepressant and 362Posters Tuesday July 11th anxiolytic effects and protects against harmful consequences of stress Peter Salmon (2001).
These results may be due to, physical education students involves mostly in sports. Keywords: depression, anxiety and stress Teaching life skills through soccer to inmates of a juvenile offenders institute Victor Souza (University of São Paulo) One of the principles of educational sport is to transmit positive values of life to those who practice it. A main factor that contribute to this learning is the link between student and coach through the use of an appropriate language within a systematized method of teaching sports and life skills.
Juvenile offenders present some psychosocial demands and complaints about the absence of good examples of life, difficulty setting goals for the professional carrer, assessing their capabilities in general and drawing up strategies for entry into the labour market . The objective is to present the results of a social project implemented in the CASA Foundation (Brazilian detention center for the youth) at Sertãozinho, São Paulo State, Brazil. The project served 110 students from 12 to 18 years.
The educational sports methodology was adapted from the Street Soccer Skills method, developed by Street Soccer USA - HELP USA. The method comprises an interaction between soccer skills and life skills, drawing a lesson from the relationship between them. Thus, the skills are divided in four dimensions: basic, specific, group and strategic.
During the trainings, the exercises proposed by the coach have a direct relationship with life skills. Thus, in the same way the hability of ball control and and ball driving are basic conditions for the practice of football, secutity, health and housing are fundamental to a person daily life, for example. Of this, it is taken a lession caled Strees Soccer Skill as "show up" and "play with heart".
In this way, specific training for each skill was planned over 4 months. A group of 25 boys was selected to participate in focus groups that discussed the themes of soccer and life skills, related to the method. The results showed that the students who participated in the group had an improvement in the discipline in the institution, they played a leadership role in the group and all received the release in the trial to leave the institution.
Keywords: sport for development, life skills, soccer The relationship between sport-grit, temporal state anxiety and performance in track and field athletes Vicky Price, James Rumbold (Sheffield Hallam University, UK) Growth mindset theory of learning (Dweck, 2000) suggests that grit enables individuals to successfully attain long-term performance goals (Duckworth et al., 2007, p.1087). This is because grit requires passion and perseverance towards completing tasks despite encountering obstacles. Although recent research in sport has evaluated cross-sectional relationships between grit and performance (Larkin, O’Connor, & Williams, 2015), research has neglected to consider the role that grit may play in predicting athletes’ anxiety perceptions, which may mediate the relationship between grit and performance (Duckworth, Kirby, Tsukayama, Berstein, & Ericsson, 2011).
Furthermore, future research should examine these relationships episodically and employ domain-specific measures of grit, to more reliably test these relationships within specific life contexts (Duckworth & Gross, 2014). The purpose of this study was to examine whether sport-grit was associated with temporal pre-competition anxiety and performance. Using an experience sampling methodology (Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 2007), 30 collegiate track and field athletes (Mage = 21.21, SD = 2.31 years) completed a sport version of the grit scale (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009) a week prior to competing.
Following this, participants completed the competitive state anxiety inventory-2 (Jones & Swain, 1992; Swain & Jones, 1993) at three time points (2 days, 1 day, 2 hours) before three competitions. Objective performance was also measured following competition. Regression analyses revealed that sport-grit was associated with cognitive 363Posters Tuesday July 11th anxiety intensity (inversely) and performance across all time points and competitions.
Additionally, grit was negatively associated with somatic anxiety intensity at 2 days (B = -3.00, p = .02) and 1 day (B = -3.40, p =.03) but not 2 hours before competition. Athletes should be coached to persevere towards the attainment of their goals despite experiencing anxiety symptoms prior to competition. Keywords: grit, longitudinal, personality, state anxiety, track and field The moderating role of disability in the effect of Athletic Identity and Satisfaction with life Vicente Javier Prado Gascó (Universitat Valencia), Gabriel Martínez Rico, Carlos Pérez Campos, Jose Manuel Boquera Navarrete (Universidad Católica de Valencia) Sport practice seems to positively affect the quality of life and well-being of individuals.
Also, Athletic Identity of athletes can play a very important role in their well-being and quality of life, however, this type of studies are scarce especially considering professional athletes and more when we focus on the field of adaptative sports. In those athletes, features of disability such as origin (since birth or acquired) or severity, could act as moderating variables for the effect of Athletic Identity on their well-being. After an exhaustive reviewing of the literature, we have not been able to observe studies that have analyzed these aspects.
Therefore, the objective of this study is the assessment of the impact of the Athletic Identity on Satisfaction with the life for athletes with disabilities, while analyzing the moderating role of the origin and severity of the disability. This analyses was performed using the PROCESS macro (Hayes, 2013), designed for testing the moderation by directly assessing the significance of the indirect effect of the independent variable (X; Athletic Identity) on the dependent variable (Y; SWLS) through two moderators: Origin (M) and severity (W). The Moderation effect (with n= 5,000 bootstrap re-samples) is demonstrated when the bias-corrected confidence interval (95%) of the indirect effect does not include zero (Hayes, 2013).
The sample of the present study consisted of 231 athletes with disabilities who participated in 14 sports competitions during the seasons 2013- 2014 and 2014-2015. The range age of the participants goes from 18 to 62 years old, with an average of 30.2 (±10.7). 74% are men.
The results obtained suggest that the Athletic Identity accounts for 15% of Satisfaction with life of athletes with disabilities, and also a moderating effect of severity but not the origin of the disability. Keywords: satisfaction with life, athletic identity, disability, athlete, moderation Adaptation of the Bernese Motive and Goal Inventory in leisure and health sports for people in adolescence and young adulthood (BMZI-JFEA) Vanessa Gut, Julia Schmid (Institute of Sport Science, University of Bern) For tailored promotion of physical exercise in adolescence and young adulthood, an appropriate questionnaire is needed to assess sport-related motives and goals. One proven German questionnaire eliciting motives and goals is the Bernese Motive and Goal Inventory (BMZI) for people from 35 to 64 years in middle adulthood.
However, based on developmental-psychological considerations the found motives and goals in middle adulthood can not be transferred to adolescence and young adulthood without any adaptations. For this reason, the aim of the study is (1) to develop an appropriate questionnaire to assess the sport-related motives and goals of adolescents and young adults from 14 to 34 years (BMZI-JFEA) and (2) to validate the psychometric criteria of the inventory. The sample consists of 717 Swiss adolescents and young adults (Mage = 20, 63% female).
Focusing on construct validity, an exploratory structural equation modeling (ESEM) was carried out using Mplus 7. In addition, for further validation bivariate correlation analyses were conducted to investigate the relationship between motives and goals and sport-related self-concordance. Using ESEM eight factors (CFI = .986, TLI = .969, SRMR = .013, RMSEA = .036) were found consisting 26 items: contact, competition/performance, distraction/catharsis, body/appearance, fitness, health, aesthetics and risk/suspense.
As assumed, purposed-centred motives and goals show negative correlations with intrinsic 364Posters Tuesday July 11th motivation (e.g. body/appearance) whereas activity-centred motives and goals are characterised through positive correlations with intrinsic motivation (e.g. aesthetics).
A first validation indicates that the BMZI-JFEA is an economic and age-specific inventory meeting psychometric validity requirements. However, a cross- validation is necessary to confirm the factorial structure of the sport-related motives and goals. Furthermore, examining measurement invariance of age, gender and exercise behaviour is intended.
Keywords: physical exercise, sport-related motives, adolescence, young adulthood, questionnaire Psychological training for inclusion of persons with disabilities to participate in sports Valerii Malkin, Ekaterina Gilyazetdinova, Liudmila Rogaleva, Koibagarova Dayana (Ural Federal University) Understanding the importance of positive influence of adaptive sports leads to search of ways of involvement of persons with limited possibilities of health into adaptive sports. The purpose of our research was development and implementation of psychological training program to involve persons with limited possibilities of health into adaptive sports. In the framework of research were used the methods of questionnaire, survey.
Into research were involved 35 specialists in adaptive physical culture, 22 persons with limited possibilities of health, 25 sportsmen involved in adaptive sports. In the first stage of study a questionnaire was conducted aimed at identifying the social-psychological factors influencing on involvement of persons with limited possibilities of health into adaptive sports. The questionnaire revealed that The main difficulties for persons with limited possibilities of health in involvement them into sports are the following: not readiness to handle the load; difficult to do sport due to progressing disease; no choice in kinds of sport; financial difficulties.
The second stage was focused on the development and realization of social-psychological training on involvement of persons with limited possibilities of health into adaptive sports. The training was held in mixed group together with people not involved in sports, sportsmen involved in adaptive sports and instructors of adaptive physical culture. In the framework of this stage we developed mini-lectures, organized analysis of video about sportsmen-paralympians, interview with sportsmen involved in adaptive sports.
Also we had a dialogue and a discussion of difficulties and perspectives arising at doing adaptive sports, etc. Were created the situations which develop reflection, stimulate the need of self-development, formation of motivation to the process and result of activity, development of the need of self-knowledge and surrounding reality. Keywords: persons with disabilities , sport, psychological training The mediating role of self-esteem on perfectionism-creativity relationship in college dancers Tzu-Wen Lin, Jui-Fu Chen (National Taiwan Normal University), Yi-Hsiang Chiu (National Taiwan Sports University) Recently, there is an increasing interest on the influence of perfectionism on creativity and self-esteem (e.g., Moghadam, Beheshtifar & Sefidi ,2012), and self-esteem affects creativity (e.g.,Goldsmith & Matherly, 2001), but no study has examined the role of self-esteem on the perfectionism-creativity relationship.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the mediating role of self-esteem on perfectionism- creativity relationship in college dancers. Four hundred and one college student-dancers (Mage=19.5; SD=+0.63) completed multidimensional perfectionism scale of Frost (Frost et al., 1990), Rosenberg self-esteem scale (Rosenberg, 1965), and creative thinking test (Wu et al., 1998). SEM was used to analyze mediate effect of self-esteem.
Results indicated that both positive and negative self-esteem fully mediated the relationship between perfectionism and creative. It is indicated that perfectionism leaded to more creativity via higher self- esteem. We suggest dance instructors and practitioners should pay attention to dancers’ esteem because 365Posters Tuesday July 11th esteem is an important mechanism between perfectionism and creativity.
Future research directions and intervention strategies were also discussed. Keywords: creative verbal, creative figural, dancer students 3 × 2 achievement goal profiles in table tennis players Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu, Tao Zhang, JoonYoung Lee (University of North Texas) The recently developed 3 × 2 achievement goal theory (AGT; Elliot et al., 2011) differentiates achievement goals as task-based, self-based, and other-based in definition as well as approach and avoidance in valence. Although previous studies have examined achievement goal profiles based on the dichotomous AGT (Nicholls, 1989) and the 2 × 2 AGT (Elliot, 1999), little research has studied the 3 × 2 model in sports (Mascret et al., 2015).
Thus, this study aimed to examine table tennis players’ achievement goal profiles using the 3 × 2 AGT as a framework. Two hundred and nine table tennis players (Mage = 39.91 ± 18.02 years), mostly from the United States (n = 150) and China (n = 46), completed a validated online survey assessing 3 × 2 achievement goals and table tennis experiences. A hierarchical cluster analysis was used as a preliminary step to examine the possible cluster solutions, which were then validated using nonhierarchical (k-means) procedures.
The agglomeration schedule from the hierarchical cluster analysis demonstrated a large increase in the clustering coefficient from seven- to six-cluster solution (15.8%), and from four- to three-cluster solution (21.5%). Inspection of the dendogram indicated a four- or six-cluster solution, thus concluding four clusters as the best solution. Using the cluster means from the hierarchical cluster analysis as seed points, k-means procedures produced four new clusters that possessed similar cluster means and sizes.
These analyses revealed four types of goal profile, namely, “high approach-high avoidance” (n = 84), “moderate approach-low avoidance goals” (n = 34), “low approach-moderate avoidance” (n = 15), and “low approach-low avoidance” (n = 76). Results suggest that among table tennis players, a high approach-high avoidance goal profile is the most common, followed by a low approach-low avoidance goal profile. This highlights the need for assessing and improving players’ goal profile for motivational interventions.
Keywords: achievement goals, motivation, table tennis, cluster analysis An exploration study on strategies that professional baseball player use in coping with an increasing number of games Tsung-Yi Wu, Sheng- Hsien Fang (National Taiwan Sport University), Yi-Chieh Chang (Chung Shan Medical University) The purpose of this study was to explore the coping strategies that professional baseball players have adopted for dealing with the stress brought on by an additional number of seasonal games played. A purposive sampling was used to select four of the best baseball players (age was 30 + 1.0) in the Chinese Professional Baseball League. At the start and end of the season, the researchers conducted semi-structured interviews with these players.
In order to verify the validity of these interviews, at the end of the season, researchers additionally conducted in-depth interviews with the team's coach and trainer. The four dimensions covered were the coaches’ knowledge and team management skills (positive vs. negative for each).
Content analysis was performed in order to analyze the qualitative data of transcribed verbatim statements obtained through individual face-to-face interviews that lasted about 60 minutes. The results revealed that stress influences players because of: a) certain negative factors in coaches; b) other team personnel without enough professional knowledge; and c) not enough trainers being available during the season. Players would then take countermeasures against these negative factors by seeking outside support, including purchasing nutritional supplements, visiting medical centers, and finding their own short-term trainers.
Adjusted self-training strategies, including increasing cardio training, weight training, and reducing the time spent on specific 366Posters Tuesday July 11th technical training, were developed as ways of dealing with the stress of an extended schedule. Their findings suggest that baseball players held a positive attitude when facing increased competition screenings. They used existing resources of the team and also external resources, so as to enhance their competitive strength, and tend to think that such practices are a form of self-investment.
Keywords: professional baseball, trainer, self-training, coach Development of athletic injury emotion regulation behavior scale Tomonori Tatsumi (Kio University) Injuries are known to have negative effects on various physiological aspects of athletes. Injuries can also be detrimental to the psychosocial functioning of athletes because they engender anxiety concerning the ability to continue doing sports, or about the loss of position in the team hierarchy, or a future role. In order to examine effective coping to emotional problems of athletes resulting from injury, it is necessary to develop a scale for assessing emotion regulation that injured athletes used.
The purpose of this study was to develop an “Athletic Injury Emotion Regulation Behavior Scale” (AIERB-S) to assess emotion regulation that injured athletes used. Athletes (N = 180) that had experienced an athletic injury (Mean age = 20.27 years, SD = 1.02; Mean days required for complete cure = 66.58 days, SD = 87.13) participated in this study. They were asked to complete a provisional version of the AIERB-S that was developed based on studies of Nozaki (2013) and Kashimura & Iwamitsu (2007).
The three factors in the provisional scale that were identified by Confirmatory factor analysis included, “Emotional Suppression (4 items)”, “Positive Reappraisal (4 items)” and “Emotional Expression (4 items)”. The three-factor model had a goodness of fit indicated by χ2 (51) = 114.362 (p = .000), GFI = .909, AGFI = .861, CFI = .918, and RMSEA = .083. The Cronbach’s alpha was used to assess the internal consistency of the scale, which confirmed the reliability of the scale (α = .75―.82).
AIERB-S is a reliable and valid scale composed of three subscales. Keywords: injured athletes, athletic injury emotion regulation behavior scale (AIERB-S), reliability, validity Gaining entry in sport psychology consulting: A critical review of consultant characteristics and future research directions Toby Woolway (Loughborough University) The sport psychology consultant’s (SPC) first impression and rapport building with potential clients is vital to ‘gaining entry’ – the precursor to subsequent service provision (Coumbe-Lilley, 2011; Human, Sandstrom, Biesanz, & Dunn, 2012). Understanding those characteristics of the consultant that influence the clients’ preference and likelihood to seek psychological services contributes to the development of educational training programs for neophyte practitioners, and marketing tools for the field as a whole (Van Raalte, Brewer, Matheson, & Brewer, 1996; Woolway & Harwood, 2015).
This poster presents a critical review of studies that have investigated the preferred characteristics of SPCs in term of likelihood to seek services. A computerised literature search of PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, PubMed, and SPORTDiscus was conducted using the search terms consult* (for consultant, consultation, and consulting) and either charact* (for characteristic and character), preference, perception, or effectiveness. A hand search of major sport and exercise psychology journals (i.e.
Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, and Psychology of Sport and Exercise) was conducted to identify any papers missed during the computerised search. Papers were included if they (1) were published in an English language journal (2) specifically regarded the characteristics of consultants and their effectiveness (3) specifically focused on the SPC. The search identified 18 studies representing a total of 3350 participants.
The most preferred SPC was of the same gender, race and age of the client with a high athletic background, sport-specific knowledge, and interpersonal skills. Such a consultant was lean and athletically built, physically active, possessed either an advanced degree or was certified and had 367Posters Tuesday July 11th experience working with diverse populations. SPCs and governing bodies are encouraged to consider these findings for training and marketing purposes.
Keywords: gaining entry, consultant characteristic, preferences The effect of perceived peer relationship on expectancy and value beliefs in physical education: the moderating effect of gender Ting-Chih Huang, Hsiu-Tin Wu According to the expectancy-value theory of achievement motivation (Eccles, 1983; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000), expectancy and value beliefs are two important determinants of students’ motivation related behaviors in both academic and physical activity domains. Expectancy and value beliefs are affected by individual’s socialization agents (e.g., peers) as well as personal characteristics (e.g., gender). The purpose of this study was to examine the influence of perceived peer relationship on expectancy and value beliefs in physical education of junior high school students and the possible moderating effect of the student’s gender on this influence.
Participants were 190 junior high school students from Taiwan, including 90 eighth graders and 100 ninth graders (88 males and 102 females). They filled in a set of questionnaires regarding their perceived levels of positive and negative peer relationship as well as expectancy and value beliefs in physical education. Hierarchical multi-regression analyses found both significant positive peer relationship and gender main effects (p<.05 and p <.001, respectively) and a significant interaction on value belief (p <.01).
Simple main effects showed that when perceived level of positive peer relationship was high, there was no gender difference in value belief. While perceived level of positive peer relationship was low, females’ value belief was significantly lower than males’. A main effect of negative peer relationship (but no interaction with gender) was also found on value belief (p <.05).
The higher the perceived level of negative peer relationship, the lower the value belief. No main effects or interactions of peer relationship and gender on expectancy belief were found. In general, these findings suggest that peer relationship may influence adolescents’ value belief, though not expectancy belief, in physical education, especially for females.
Keywords: expectancy-value theory, peer relations, sports participation Response biases and strategies in sport data: An item response theory perspective Till Utesch, Bernd Strauss (University of Muenster, Germany), Dirk Büsch (University of Oldenburg, Germany), Henk Erik Meier (University of Muenster, Germany) In sports, questionnaires and behavioral assessments are often conducted across disciplines. Data can be biased, because participants might use certain strategies to solve sport tasks or use different styles to respond on rating scales. Response biases can for instance be a tendency to middle categories or a favor of extremes.
These styles can result in specific response patterns and participants with the same real (latent) level of the measurement can differ at the observed level only due to their response bias. Without identifying those response styles, a successful testing of hypotheses can be affected (Eid & Zickar, 2007; Bockenholt & Meiser, 2017). Therefore, an identification and correction for response biases can be necessary and tested.
Occasionally, it can be appropriate to exclude response patterns if they violate model assumptions from further content-related considerations. The study objective is to demonstrate how response biases can be identified in a large dataset within the item response theory framework (IRT, i.e., the Mixed-Rasch model, MRM, Rost, 1990). As a data example the German fan identification scale is used.
It consists of seven questions (5-point Likert-scale; Strauss, 1995; Wann & Branscombe, 1993). Fan identification with the German national soccer team was assessed from a total of 12,333 people in the context of the soccer world championships 2002-2014 every day of the event for one hour in public in Muenster, Germany. Unidimensionality of the scale was hypothesized.
However, the one-dimensional polynomous Rasch model did not adequately fit the whole data. 368Posters Tuesday July 11th Modeling revealed two latent classes with different response styles: Class 1 (66.5%) fitted to the assumed one- dimensional model of identification using a holistic response style. Class 2 (33.5%) revealed a response style in favor of crossing extreme values, which violated scale validity.
This study demonstrates practical solutions for handling potential response bias in sports data. Keywords: rasch, IRT, statistics, fan identification, identification Socio-moral reasoning, Social Identity and Social Justice among adolescents in Physical Education Areti Paraskevi Maragkou, Aralambos Tsorbatzoudis The purpose of the study was to investigate adolescents’ evaluation of interracial inclusion in Physical Education context, based on a theoretical perspective that integrates social domain theory, social identity theory and theory of planned behavior. Specifically, the study aimed to investigate how adolescents’ socio- moral reasoning and social identity affect their evaluation of interracial inclusion in Physical Education and their attitudes towards social justice.
The sample consisted of 325 adolescents (170 boys and 155 girls) 12-18 years. To assess the moral judgments of participants a scenario was presented depicting interracial peer exclusion occurring in physical education setting. Social Justice Scale was used to measure the components of Ajzen’s model whereas a four item scale was used to assess adolescents’ social identity.
The results indicated that the majority of participants utilized moral reasoning when explaining race-based exclusion. Exclusion was rated as least acceptable by the students who used moral judgments and most acceptable by the students who used socio-conventional judgments and stereotypic justifications. In addition, lower social identity was related to more inclusive evaluations and to higher levels of social justice.
Stronger social identity commitment was related to more exclusive evaluations and to lower scores in social justice’s four subscales (attitudes, perceived behavioral control, subjective norms, and intentions). Interactions between socio-moral reasoning and social identity were found to affect social justice attitudes and intentions. The results could be interpreted in light of current theories and illustrate the importance of them being further examined.
Future interventions should focus on promoting factors as intergroup contact and participation in sports, as in this study were found to be positively correlated with evaluations of interracial inclusion in PE. Keywords: socio-moral reasoning, social identity, cultural inclusion, social justice, physical education Is there a difference on reaction time, movement time and response time between U18 and U21 categories of the Brazilian judo team? Thiago Ferreira, Varley Costa (UFMG) Response time is composed of reaction time (RT) and movement time (MT), and are important variables in martial arts sports.
The Judokas define their strategies of attack or counterattack during the fight, and must react appropriately depending on their speed´s response after the presented stimulus (Cojocariu & Abalasel, 2014). However, in judo, little is known about the behavior of these variables between categories U18 and U21. The objective of this study was to compare the reaction time, movement time and response time between elite judo athletes on U18 and U21 categories in simple reaction time task.
Seventy one male athletes from the Brazilian Judo Team participated in the study. Thirty seven elite athletes for U18 (M age= 15.5 years, SD=0.05) and thirty four elite athletes from U21 (M age= 18.42 years, SD=0.75). The reaction time, movement time and response time were analyzed with the RT test (S1 version/simple reaction time task), by the Vienna Test System SPORTS®, and the results were given in milliseconds (ms).
The statistic procedures adopted were: Mean (M) and standard deviation (SD), the Shapiro Wilk and Mann-Whitney tests (p<0.05). The following values were found: U18: RT (M=286.91ms, SD=39.52), MT (M=132.25ms, SD=33.64) and response time (M=406.5ms, SD=65.23); U21: RT (M=279.64ms, SD=39.28), MT (M=124.62ms, SD=24.75) and response time (M =402.54ms, 369Posters Tuesday July 11th SD=50.57). After analysis, no statistical differences were found for both variables, with values of RT (p=.63), MT (p=.48) and response time (p=.77) between the U-18 and U-21 categories of the Brazilian Judo Team evaluate.
This study concluded that no significant differences were found for the reaction time, movement time and response time between on U18 and U21 categories of the Brazilian Judo Team. It´s possible that the variables of simple reaction time may not be a good fit to establish parameters of performance differences between judo categories. Keywords: reaction time, judo, sport, elite athletes Career adapt-abilities scale—dual career form (CAAS-DC): Psychometric properties and initial validation in high school student-athletes Tatiana V.
Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland), Chun-Qing Zhang (Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China), Zhijian Huang (Hong Kong Sports Institute, Hong Kong, China), Kaisa Aunola (University of Jyvaskyla, Finland) Talented adolescent athletes often face multiple risks to sustain their academic and vocational training alongside increasing demands of their athletic career, which subsequently may hinder young people’s employability and adaptation to life after elite sport. Therefore, it is necessary to better understand the specific competencies that youth athletes can draw upon to successfully combine sport and education into a dual career pathway. Building on the existing Career Adapt-Abilities Scale (Savickas & Porfeli, 2012), we developed a Dual Career Form of the Career Adapt-Abilities Scale (CAAS-DC) for the use with adolescent student athletes.
A sample of 391 Finnish-speaking athletes completed the CAAS-DC at the beginning of their freshman year in sport high school. Adequate factorial validity of the CAAS-DC and internal consistency reliabilities of its five subscales were demonstrated in both exploratory structural equation modelling (ESEM) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). Concurrent validity of the CAAS-DC was revealed with positive and significant associations with self-esteem, sport task values, school task values, and career construction; and negative association with school and sport burnout.
Finally, partial strong measurement invariance was also demonstrated across males and females. The evidence from this study suggests that the CAAS-DC is a promising self-report inventory that can be used by researchers and applied practitioners to assess young athletes’ self-regulation capacities in dual career pursuits. Keywords: dual career, student athletes, adolescence, scale validation Perfectionism and goal orientation with sports shooting athletes Victoria Ivancheva (National Sports Academy) Perfectionism is an important psychological variable.
It influences the way the cognitive, affective, and behavioristic characteristics of the athlete function. Perfectionism is connected with orientation towards higher goals and more successful performance (Bradham, 2000). According to the Achievement Goal Theory (Duda, 1989) when we have high task orientation, success is a result of the improvement of skills, self-development, and hard work and leads to positive and adaptive behavior directed to achievements.
Ego-orientation is connected with a type of behavior directed to domination, superiority, obedience and comparison of one’s personal abilities with those of the others. The aim of the present study is to reveal the peculiarities of Perfectionism and Goal orientation with sports shooting athletes depending on their qualification, kind of weapon and gender, as well as the interrelations between the researched indexes. In order to fulfill the aim of the study we used: 1) Multidimensional Perfectionism Scales (Frost-MPS), by Frost, Marten, Lahart & Rosenblate (1990); 2) Task and Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire– TEOSQ, Duda&Nicholls, 1992.
The research was done among 99 sports shooting athletes from different clubs in Bulgaria aged between 18 and 50. The researched individuals were divided into two groups –medalists from international and national 370Posters Tuesday July 11th competitions – 62, and average athletes – 37. The results reveal significant differences in the ego orientation depending on the qualification.
There are significant differences depending on the kind of weapon (Concern over Mistakes, Parental Expectations and Organization) and age (Concern over Mistakes, Parental Expectations). The specific interrelations between the researched indexes have been revealed with the medalists and the average athletes. The important role of the parents on building the researched parameters have been pointed out.
Keywords: perfectionism, goal orientation, task orientation, ego-orientation, sports shooting Research on the two-way relationship between adolescent short track speed skating skaters' self - consciousness and personality Tao Li (Harbin Engineering University, China) Research on the two-way Relationship between adolescent short track speed skating Skaters' Self - consciousness and Personality LI Tao1 SU Qing-fu1 YuTao1 YueXiu1 （1.Physical Educational Department of Harbin Engineering University,Harbin 150001) Abstract: Thirty-six teenage short track skaters were tested with the Piers-Harris Child Self-Consciousness Scale (PHCSS) and Eysenck Personality Questionnaire Junior (EPQ) to explore the relationship between self-awareness and personality characteristics of juvenile athletes in short track speed skating. The results showed that the scores of self-consciousness of male athletes were significantly lower than that of Chinese norm. There was no significant difference in self-consciousness factors in athletes of any gender, but female athletes had higher scores than male athletes.
The six factors of adolescent athletes' self-consciousness are positively relevant to extroversion but are negatively relevant to neuroticism and psychoticism, identifying that self-consciousness and personality had a mutual influence and restriction on each other in the process of development. Body attributes, anxiety and behavior were the dominant factors of influencing extroversion, neuroticism and psychoticism respectively. Extroversion and mental quality are the most important personality traits that affect the development of self-consciousness.
Keywords: adolescent, athletes self,consciousness, personality Effects of psychological pressure intentionally generated during practice Takuya Endo, Hiroshi Sekiya (Hiroshima University) The purpose of this study was to determine the most experienced types of psychological pressure intentionally generated during practice, and to identify which types of psychological pressure are thought to be effective in improving practice session quality and in acclimating to match pressure. Seventy-nine athletes [55 Male, 24 Female; mean age = 18.91 ± 0.87 years; 14 sports (23 soccer, 13 baseball, 12 basketball, 8 volleyball, 8 track and field, 4 tennis, 2 table tennis, 2 dance, 2 rugby, 1 handball, 1 mixed martial arts, 1 badminton, 1 sailing, and 1 Japanese art of fencing players)] completed a questionnaire of closed-ended questions assessing their experience of each pressure type. For each type of pressure answered “experienced,” participants further reported their subjective efficacy of the pressure type using a five-point Likert-type scale from 1 = “strongly disagree” to 5 = “strongly agree.” Descriptive statistics revealed that the most commonly experienced types of psychological pressure intentionally generated during practice were “having practice in a match format” (86%), “concentrating on one’s each trial” (86%), and “thinking of the need to perform as usual” (83%).
Moreover, high rates of the subjective efficacy for improving training quality were reported for “imaging match circumstances” (Mean = 4.83 ± 0.86), “reminding players of their goals” (Mean = 4.54 ± 0.60), and “having practice in a match format” (Mean = 4.50 ± 0.77). The subjective efficacy for acclimating to match pressure was offered by “having training partners with characteristics similar to the opponents” (Mean = 4.61 ± 0.50), “practicing at the match venue” (Mean = 4.53 ± 0.60), and “putting pressure on oneself” (Mean = 4.46 ± 0.59). 371Posters Tuesday July 11th These results show that most athletes have experienced practice with added psychological pressures.
In particular, most of added pressures were related to making players experience situations close to real matches. Keywords: effective training, anxiety, survey Visual search strategies of soccer players in offensive situation of soccer: Combining eye movement and retrospective verbal protocol data Takayuki Natsuhara (Tokyo Seitoku University), Takahiro Matsutake (University of Tsukuba), Takaaki Kato (Keio University), Masao Nakayama, Takeshi Asai (University of Tsukuba) This study aimed to examine visual search strategies in simulated attacking situations in soccer by using eye movement measurement and verbal reports of soccer players with different skill levels. Participants were 18 experts who had experience of playing at the national-level competition, and 18 sub-experts who had experience of playing only at the local level.
The task was to accurately perform a one-touch pass to a player who the participant considered the best pass choice during a 4-on-4 attacking play. The eye movements during the task were measured and verbal reports were collected immediately after each trial in order to examine how the situation was captured. Experts exhibited better at reproducibility and accuracy of decision-making than the sub-experts did.
The eye-movement data demonstrated that the soccer players maintained a longer gaze on the free attacker, defender, free space, and attacker who was marked by defenders. Further, before receiving the ball, they maintained their line of sight on the ball and on the attacker who aimed to pass. These strategies are considered as representative of soccer players.
In addition, differences based on the level of competition in eye movements were observed. Specifically, experts maintained a longer gaze on attacker, defenders, and the attacker who aimed to pass. In the verbal reports, experts generated more information on the defender as compared to the sub-experts.
Further, the verbal data, showed that experts observed the situation as a larger chunk by combining information on the attacker and defender, or more specifically on the attacker, defender, and space. The present findings imply that effective strategies of experts included recognizing a wide perspective centered on the attacker and defender and then directing the line of sight to the attacker who aimed to pass, in order to make appropriate decisions. Keywords: decision-making, soccer player, perceptual-cognitive expertise Effects of quiet eye training on learning of perceptual-motor skills Takayuki Murayama, Takashi Yamazaki (Kanazawa University, Japan) Effects of Quiet Eye Training (QET) on the accuracy of spatial perception during motor tasks and learning of motor skills were examined.
Participants (N=24) were classified into three groups: the QET group that learned an elite volleyball player’s gaze behaviors well, the Non-QET group that learned basic motion skills, and a Control group that received no instructions. All three group conducted a volleyball task in which participants were required to serve a floater towards a wider space between three virtual receivers projected on a wall. This study consisted of practice (60 trials) and test (10 trials) conditions.
In practice condition, QET group viewed a video of an elite volleyball player displaying the optimal gaze control. Then, the researcher asked them to note any features of the player’s gaze control. Finally, QET group received four specific features of the player’s gaze control.
Under the practice condition, the central receiver was moved to the right or left by 0.5- 5.0cm. Moreover, under the test condition, the central receiver was shifted right or left by 0.5-2.5cm. Performance assessed by the success rate, accuracy of perception assessed by the rate of correct responses about the wider area, and self-confidence about perception and gaze behaviors assessed by gaze fixation time during tasks implementing were recorded.
Results indicated that the performance, accuracy of perception and self-confidence about perception in the QET group were significantly higher than in the Non-QET, or the Control group, even for small shifts conditions. Furthermore, the percentage of gaze fixation time at the center 372Posters Tuesday July 11th of the image in the 0.5 cm and 1.0 cm conditions when implementing perceptual judgments, and the percentage of gaze fixation time on the ball from toss to impact in the QET group were significantly higher than in the Non-QET, or the Control group. The above results suggest that QET improves both the accuracy of spatial perception and motor performance.
Keywords: spatial perception, gaze training, motor learning Visual search strategies in female college basketball players Takamasa Sakabe, Hideaki Takai, Hitomi Okubo (Nippon Sports Science University) There are no completely identical situations in the competition scene, but similar situations can occur many times. Therefore, it is important to clarify how the visual search of the athlete is performed against similar situations that are repeatedly occurring. The aim of this study was to clarify the temporal changes of visual search strategies in college women's basketball players.
The participants were 12 female athletes belonging to the college basketball club. The experimental task was to push the button with the thumb of the right hand when judging that dribble cut is possible while watching dribble videos of four types (1 low - slow, 2 low - fast, 3 high - slow, 4 high - fast). The number of trials was repeated 10 times for each dribble videos (40 trials in total).
As a result, there was no significant difference in response time to dribble cut in session (1st and 10th), height, tempo. From the results of gaze point, it was shown that many visual lines are directed "around the dribble arm (perimeter range from the right shoulder to the right hand of the model)" and "on the ball orbit (perimeter range from the ground to the ball's highest reach point)" in all dribble conditions. In addition, as a result of analysis by gaze area, the proportion of gaze that was aiming for "ball's highest reach point (The highest point of the ball that bounced the ground)" from 1st to 10th time increased significantly.
Furthermore, although the difference was not significant, the proportion of the line of sight directed to "on the ball orbit" decreased from the first time to the tenth time. In other words, it is suggested that experts are using a more efficient visual search strategies while directing the line of sight to a consistent specific area. Keywords: eye movements, visual search strategies, dribble cut Reaction time of Japanese expert football players during decision making Takahiro Matsutake (University of Tsukuba), Takayuki Natsuhara (Tokyo Seitoku University), Masaaki Koido, Kensuke Suzuki, Yusuke Tabei, Masao Nakayama, Takeshi Asai (University of Tsukuba) In soccer, there are many situations in which decision making for instantaneous judgments is required.
The purpose of this study was to elucidate the features of information processing in the brains of skilled soccer players during selective reaction challenges under simulated playing conditions. Indicators used in this study were the electromyography reaction time (EMG-RT), and reaction time (RT). For the expert group, we recruited 13 collegiate soccer players who had previously won the All Japan University Championships.
For the sub- expert group, we recruited 13 collegiate soccer players who had never competed at the national level and never been selected in prefectural or regional teams. We conducted 3vs1 and 4vs2 ball possession tasks under simulated playing conditions wherein situation assessment was required. As a result of EMG-RT and RT in the expert group were significantly shorter than those in the sub-expert group.
This result suggests that differences between the expert and sub-expert groups in terms of information processing by the brain during situation assessment depends on whether fast accurate movements/reactions can be executed. Based on the above findings, it was concluded that a feature of information processing in the brains of expert soccer players is their ability to perform faster information processing and react or move faster during situation assessment. This is because skilled players are assumed to execute reactions by information processing using fewer nerve resources.
Players should try reducing the burden on their central nervous system to more effectively move their own body. This approach may help becoming an advanced or expert athlete. 373Posters Tuesday July 11th Keywords: central nervous system, electromyography reaction time Visual search strategies of baseball players in the simulated infield defensive situation Takaaki Kato (Keio University) In the sport of baseball, the shortstop who is considered to be among the most demanding defensive positions and must have the best fielding skills of any fielder.
Successful field the balls requires not just catch the ball, but also perception skills in order to predict the direction in which the ball would be hit by the batter, and to respond to the batter’s movement pattern as early as possible, and moreover pitcher’s movements and the thrown ball as well. However, little has been reported on baseball infielder’s perceptual skills. In this study, we analyzed visual search activities of experts who are playing college baseball league and novices, and their reactions in the simulated baseball fielding situation.
Nineteen collegiate players participated in this study and divided into four groups: infielders, outfielders, pitchers and novices, and their visual search behaviors and reactions were examined in the laboratory setting. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) comparing the reaction times revealed significant differences among groups, F(2, 1133) = 24.77, p < .001. A post hoc Tukey test showed that infielders (mean ± ms: 303.39 ± 112.84 ms) responded faster than outfielders (355.46 ± 183.96 ms) (p < .001), pitchers (354.15 ± 133.93 ms) (p < .044) and novices (407.93 ± 130.64 ms) (p < .001), but there is no significant difference between outfielders and pitchers.
In addition, the results indicated differences in visual search strategies between players even though within groups. Infielders tended to set their lines of sight on the batter's body before the ball released from the pitcher in order to predict where the ball would be hit by the batter, on the other hands, it seems like outfielders pursued the ball the whole time. Findings are discussed from empirical and coaching perspectives.
Keywords: eye movements, baseball, visual search strategies, infield Influence of psychological competitive ability on the emotional intelligence of canoe players Taiyo Fujimoto (Nippon Sport Science) The relationship between diagnostic inventory of psychological competitive ability for athletes (DIPCA.3) and the emotional intelligence scale (EQS) has already been studied in the sport of an open skill sport. However, the relationship between DIPCA.3 and EQS has not been clarified in closed skill sports. Thus, this study aimed to clarify the relationship between the DIPCA.3 and the EQS of practitioners of the sport of canoe, which is a closed skill sport.
The hypothesis for this study with regards to the relationship between DIPCA.3 and EQS was that DIPCA.3 affects EQS, as per Takagi et al.’s research. The subjects of the survey were 35 practitioners of the sport of canoe, The method of analysis was partial correlation analysis of the 12 DIPCA.3 scales and the 9 EQS factors, and multiple regression analysis. In addition, in order to understand the characteristics of the canoe, a t-test was carried out in which the two groups (the high group, which was the above average total scores of the DIPCA.3 and the low group, which was the below average scores).The results showed that there were positive correlations between the EQS (self-insight factor, self-motivating factor, self- control factor and leadership factor) and DIPCA.3 (perseverance scale, fighting spirit scale, concentration scale, confidence scales and cooperativity scale).The results of multiple regression analysis showed that the EQS self- motivating factor received a significant positive influence from DIPCA.3’s fighting spirit scale, and the EQS self- control factor received a significant positive influence from DIPCA.3’s fighting spirit and concentration scales.
The results of the t test showed that the high group showed higher scores than the low group for the EQS situational judgement factor. From the above, it is clear that there is a relationship between DIPCA.3 and EQS for canoeists, and furthermore that the DIPCA.3 has a positive influence on the EQS. 374Posters Tuesday July 11th Keywords: diagnostic inventory of psychological competitive ability for athletes, emotional intelligence scale, closed skill, canoe players, human quality The effect of acute exercise on the planning aspect of executive function among preterm children Tai-Sheng Chen, Jui-Ti Nien, Tai-Fen Song, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Acute exercise is positively affects cognitive performance in children, and its benefits are even demonstrated on children with clinical conditions.
Preterm children have been associated with lower executive functions, and whether the beneficial effects from acute exercise would extend to Preterm children is yet to be known. This present study was conducted in order to explore the effects of acute exercise on executive function in Preterm children, specifically; the planning aspect of executive function was assessed. Twenty children (mean age =10.05, SD = 2.33 years), with a gestation period of less 37 weeks, and a birth weight of less 2700g, were recruited.
All children were involved in two treatments, control and experimental respectively, in a counterbalanced order. The exercise treatment involved a single bout of ergometer exercise, done at a 65-70% heart rate reserve for 30 minutes; whereas the control treatment required the test subjects to watch cartoons for 30 minutes. A Tower of London (TOL) Task, one of the main neuropsychological assessments for measuring planning, was employed following each bout of acute intervention.
The indices of the TOL included a move score, a correct score, an initiation time, an execution time, and a problem-solving time score. The results indicated that those undergoing the exercise treatment displayed a better performance on the TOL task, in terms of the move score, execution time and problem-solving time score. These findings of the decrease in the number of the total move score suggested an enhanced planning capacity.
The better performances regarding execution time and problem-solving time represented that Preterm children could increase their planning efficiency by doing acute exercise. These findings suggest that acute exercise is positively associated with planning among Preterm children, and therefore should be considered as a basis for conducting further studies among this population. Keywords: acute aerobic exercise, tower of london task, preterm children, executive function Cognitive awareness of the Müller-Lyer illusion influenced the grip size estimation Tai-Seok Chang, Ji-Hang Lee, Jae-Moo Lee (Sungkyunkwan University) During the visual perception process, visual information first encoded in the primary visual areas is divided into dorsal and ventral streams.
Previous researches suggested, while each of these streams has its own function in visual perception, neurophysiological and functional interactions between the dorsal and the ventral streams exist. Such segregation of visual perception mechanism has often been behaviorally reflected by the Müller-Lyer Illusion paradigm. Most previous studies all assumed the subjects were naïve to the illusion effect.
However, because this illusion effect are well-conceived by general public, subjects may understand the nature of the illusion. Although the illusion effect on perception is powerful regardless of the pre-existing awareness of the paradigm, no previous study directly investigated the effects of subjects’ awareness regarding the presented stimuli on the action consequences. Therefore, in this study, we have provided a visual feedback that can establish the cognitive awareness of the actual stimuli length to subjects, and investigated the changes in their matching action responses.
A total of 32 young and healthy subjects were randomly divided into two groups. Subjects were asked to match the stimulus size with their index fingers and thumbs. Initially, three different visual stimuli were randomly presented 60 times and the grip sizes were recorded using the Liberty Motion Analysis System.
Then, video clips of two lines merging each other were presented as feedbacks. Post- test protocol was identical to the pre-test protocol. The data were analyzed using the 3-way ANOVA with one RM factor.
Results showed a significant 2-way interaction effect. Post-hoc results showed significant interaction 375Posters Tuesday July 11th between stimulus shape and pre/post-tests only in the experimental group. Overall, current results indicates that, while visual illusion can affect the action, the provision of visual feedback can establish the awareness of actual stimulus size.
Keywords: müller-lyer illusion, visual perception, cognitive awareness, dorsal stream, ventral stream The association of cardiovascular fitness, obesity, and executive function: An ERP study of Task-switching Tai-Fen Song, Chien-Heng Chu, Jen-Hao Liu (National Taiwan Sport University), Lin Chi (Ta Hwa University of Science and Technology), Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) The purpose of this study was to compare different levels of cardiovascular fitness (CF) between young adults with obese and non-obese status, in relation to task-switching. 104 young adults aged 18-25 years were categorized into four groups (n = 26 for each): obese with high CF (OH) and low CF (OL); non-obese with high CF (NH) and low CF (NL). The N1 and P3 event-related potential components were recorded while performing the task-switching task.
The task included two indices: global switch (i.e., heterogeneous and homogeneous block) and local switch (i.e., switch and non-switch trials). Results revealed that the higher CF groups, regardless of their obesity status, exhibited shorter response times on the task-switching task, for both global and local switches. In addition, the effect of facilitation on the global switch declined for the NH group, relative to the OL group, and significantly the local switch indicated a reduction difference between the OH and the OL group.
Furthermore, the ERP analysis of the P3 component revealed that the NH group had an increased P3 amplitude, relative to the other three groups in the global and local switches, but no group differences were observed for the N1 indices across the four groups. Collectively, the OL young adults may reflect stronger associations with poorer ability for modulating their cognitive flexibility; particularly these adverse effects were observed when they were faced with greater task demands. The present study provides evidence that CF and obesity provided parallel results, while CF may act as a moderator of the relationship, in reducing the detrimental effects on executive function, and the obese population seems to demonstrate less sensitivity in this regard than does the non-obese population.
While the cross-sectional comparison may be limited for casual effect, intervention would be warranted for future research. Keywords: obesity, fitness, executive function, task-switching, working memory Contextual interference effect in sport skill learning: systematic review and meta-analysis Taewon Kim (Texas A&M University), Judith Jimenez (University of Costa Rica) Previous studies have reached conflicting conclusions regarding the contextual interference (CI) effects of learning sport skills. We aimed to summarize the efficacy of a random practice (RP) versus block practice (BP) schedule for improved sport skills acquisition and retention.
PubMed and Web of Science were searched for published articles up to January 2017. Cross referencing and expert reviews were performed for randomized trials of BP versus RP in sports skill acquisition. Studies were selected and extracted by the two authors.
Risk of bias was assessed using three items from TESTEX Scale (maximum points = 3). Random effects models using the standardized mean difference (between-group analysis) and effect size (ES) were used to pooled results. Heterogeneity was examined using the Q statistic and inconsistency using I2.
An alpha value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. A total of 20 studies were included, representing 1047 males and females and up to 28 ES. Risk of bias was M + SD = 2.17± 0.38 (scale 1 to 3).
The BP group had no statistically different compared to RP schedule group in the acquisition phase (ES = 0.015, CI95%= -0.13 to 0.16; n = 28; Q= 43.34, p= 0.02, I2= 37%). There were also no statistical differences between-group during the retention phase (ES = 0.08, CI95%= -0.09 to 0.26; n = 28; Q= 54.49, p= 0.001, I2= 50%). For the transfer test the RP outperformed the BP 376Posters Tuesday July 11th (ES = 0.46, CI95%= 0.14 to 0.77; n = 12; Q= 27.92, p= 0.003, I2= 60%).
The overall results suggest that CI effects extend to acquired sport skills practice only for the transfer test. Keywords: contextual interference, motor learning, meta-analysis Accomplishment motivational level and personality characters of Basketball Players and Non-sportsmen-An Analytical study Syed Ibrahim (King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals) The main aim of the existing investigation was to assess the accomplishment motivational level and personality characters of basketball players and non-sportsman. Method: The study piloted on a sample size of 360 subjects which consisted of 120 college level players (low) 120 university level players (high) and 120 non- players from different colleges and universities.
Accomplishment motivational level data was acquired through sports achievement motivation test and the personality traits were achieved by administering the Eysenck Personality Inventory (EPI) on two dimensions of personality i.e. extraversion and neurotic. The Scheffe’s multi comparison test was applied to calculate the significance of differences amongst the three groups.
The level significance was fixed at 0.01. Result: The outcomes of the study specified that the higher level performance group was more extravert than the low performance group and the non-sportsmen (p < 0.01), while non- sportsmen were more neurotic than the high and low performer groups (p < 0.01). As far as the achievement motivational level was concerned the high and low performer groups showed significant differences than the non-sportsmen ((p < 0.01) and there was no significant difference between the high and low performer groups.
Conclusion: It was concluded that the high performer basketball group were more emphatic persons and better in the achievement motivational level than their counter parts. Keywords: motivational level, personality character, non-sportsmen Everything is cool when you're part of a team? Interdependence and cognitions, emotions, and performance under pressure Svenja A.
Wolf (University of Amsterdam), Katharina Geukes (University of Münster), Jessica van Geemen, Dave van Schie (University of Amsterdam), Felix Heldmann, Oliver Schulz (German Sport University Cologne) Pressure is an innate characteristic of competitive sports and can change how athletes think, feel, and perform (e.g., choking under pressure; Mesagno & Hill, 2013). Most research on performance under pressure has focused on individual, independent tasks. However, competitive sports often involve interdependent team- tasks and it is yet unsolved whether athletes on such teams perceive the same pressure, respond with the same emotions, and suffer the same performance consequences as their independent counterparts.
In the present study, we aimed to provide first answers to these questions by assigning 72 Handball players (24 years of age, 51% male) to either an individual (i.e., performance scored individually) or an interdependent (i.e., performance scored additively) dyad. As part of these dyads, each athlete completed a throwing accuracy task (i.e. penalty shot) under low pressure and high pressure (e.g., monetary incentives, presence of an audience) conditions.
Directly prior to completing these tasks, athletes reported their perceptions of pressure (single item) and anxiety (Sport Emotion Questionnaire; Jones et al., 2005). Whereas all athletes perceived more pressure (f = .69) and anxiety (f = .65) under high pressure conditions, athletes in the interdependent dyads indicated less of an increase than athletes in the independent dyads (f = .24 and .28). Interdependent athletes also generally responded with less anxiety (f = .28).
Yet, despite these effects, dyads did not differ nor did they show any pressure-induced changes with regard to performance. Thus, it remains unknown which consequences the observed cognitive and emotional differences entail. Similarly, it needs to be investigated whether they are a function of shared responsibility (Brawley et al., 1987), diffusion of evaluation (Carron et al., 377Posters Tuesday July 11th 1999), or other mechanisms.
Nonetheless, these differences indicate that being part of a team alters athletes' perceptions of and responses to competitive pressure. Keywords: precompetitive anxiety, group dynamics, emotions, team, social loafing An exploration of the relationship among female adolescent athletes’ perceptions of the motivational climate, goal orientation, refocusing, and peaking ability Susumu Iwasaki (Fort Lewis College), Mary Fry (University of Kansas) Sport psychology research in achievement motivation has consistently revealed evidence that young athletes reported positive psychological and behavioral responses with a caring/task-involving climate and task orientation (Harwood et al., 2015; Roberts & Treasure, 2012). The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship among athletes’ perceptions of the motivational climate, goal orientations, refocusing, and peaking ability.
Athletes (N = 190, Mage = 15.59, SD = 1.15) volunteered to complete a survey that consists of caring (CCS; Newton et al., 2007), task- and ego-involving climates (PMCSQ; Seifriz et al., 1992), task and ego orientations (TEOSQ; Duda et al., 1995), refocusing (subscale of MIS; Thienot et al., 2014), and peaking ability (subscale of ACSI-28; Smith et al., 1995). Descriptive statistics and correlation coefficients were computed and reliability coefficients for each scale demonstrated adequacy (alphas range from .72 to .90). Before Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) analyses, a measurement model was established (factor loadings range from .572 to .897 for all the latent variables).
A final SEM result (Fit indices: Chi-square/df = 388.485/237, RMSEA = .058, CFI = .932, TLI = .921, and SRMR = .088) revealed a significant full mediation path (ab=.141, 99% CI [.038, .362]) that athletes’ reported refocusing ability mediated the relationship between task orientation and peaking ability after controlling correlations among independent variables: caring, task-, and ego-involving climates, task and ego orientations. In summary, overall results indicate that creating a caring/task-involving climate and fostering athletes’ task orientation may be key for assisting young athletes to maintain their refocusing ability, and in turn, which enhances their perceived ability to peak under pressure. Future research should examine with objectively measured peaking performance such as time record for important races and scores at clutch times in ball games.
Keywords: motivational climate, goal orientations, refocusing, peaking under pressure A study on relationship of lifestyle and socio-economic status with obesity in indian children Sushma Ghildyal (Banaras Hindu University, India), Sanjay Singh (Harishchand p.g College,u.p.,India), Alka Naik (Rdvv, Jabalpur,m.p., India), Shialja Mohan (lnipe, Trivendrum,t.n, India) The purpose of the study was to understand relationship of lifestyle and Socio-Economic status with child obesity among 1000 boys aged from 16 to 18 years of Varanasi District of Uttar Pradesh State in India. The study was conducted in both urban and rural area of the District. Ten schools i.e.
five from urban area and five from rural area were selected by using purposive sampling. Healthy boys of class 10th, 11th and 12th were taken as subjects for the study. Anthropometric measurements taken were Standing Height, Weight, Biceps skin folds, Triceps skin folds, Sub-scapular skin folds and Supra-iliac skin folds.Skinfols were taken by Lange’s skin fold caliper.
Lifestyle and Socio-Economic Status were obtained by questionnaires. In order to assess the BMI, Body fat %, Lifestyle and Socio-Economic Status; descriptive analyses were done. To find out the significant association of obesity with lifestyle and Socio-Economic Status Chi-square test was used.
To find out significant difference between obesity of Urban and Rural children t-test was applied. Level of significance was set at 0.05 level. The result showed that in urban area Varanasi District 25.4% were in above average level adaptive lifestyle.
In rural area Varanasi District 24.8% children were in average level adaptive lifestyle. In urban area 30.2% were in middle class Socio-Economic Status. In rural area 51.6% were in middle class Socio- 378Posters Tuesday July 11th Economic Status.
In urban area 21.2% children of 16-18 years were obese. In rural area 0.2% children of 16-18 years were obese. In overall Varanasi District 10.7% children of 16-18 years were obese.
There was no significant relationship of obesity with Lifestyle of urban area children .There was significant relationship of obesity with Socio-Economic Status of urban and rural area children. Results showed significant difference between urban and rural area children of 16-18 years in respect to obesity of Varanasi District of Uttar Pradesh. Keywords: lifestyle, obesity, socio-economic status, rural area, urban area Change in proprioceptive perception after the prolonged tendon vibration treatment Sungmin Oh, Seo-Jin Yoon, Ji-Hang Lee (Sungkyunkwan University) Possibilities of improving proprioception by training have been implicated in the clinical rehabilitation for some time.
However, the changes elicited by so-called ‘proprioceptive training’ lacks experimental supports. The purpose of this study was to investigate the changes in proprioceptive perception when prolonged tendon vibration was introduced to the joint. Further, two different experimental techniques (ipsilateral joint position matching and psychophysical threshold methods) evaluating the changes in proprioceptive perception were compared.
A total of 24 subjects was randomly divided into an experimental and a control groups. Each subject in the experimental group received the tendon vibration treatment (15 seconds X 12 times) on the non- dominant wrist joint for 4 days of training period. Before and after the training, abovementioned protocols were performed to evaluate the proprioceptive sensitivity.
The Liberty Motion Analysis System (Polhemus Co., America) was used to collect angular kinematic data, and the repetitive measure 2-way (2X4) ANOVA were performed for data analyses. The tendon vibration applied subjects (experimental group, n=12) showed immediate perceptual improvements after the treatment (F(3,48)=2.861, p=.046) and significant retention effect was present with the joint position matching method during the training (F(3,48)=5.386, p=.003). Also consolidation effects were observed; however, overall training effect of tendon vibration was not verified.
Psychophysical threshold method did not reveal the overall effect of tendon vibration while retention effect was observed during the training period (F(3,48)=2.992, p=.040). Meanwhile, there was no consolidation effect. Current results showed that tendon vibration as a passive training technique induced the proprioceptive improvement implicating the possibility of clinical application.
Significant retention effect further expands the possibility of practical use of tendon vibration training. Keywords: proprioception, tendon vibration, joint position matching, psychophysical threshold Examining the relationship between moral values and moral behaviour among adolescent athletes and non-athletes Sukys Sukys, Enrika Kromerova (Lithuanian Sports University) Relatively little knowledge is available about moral values and behaviour among adolescents. As participation in sports activities may contribute to positive youth development, this study aims to examine associations between adolescents’ value and prosocial behaviour depending on their participation in sports activities.
Study sample included 694 adolescents (331 girls, M age =14.7, SD =1.21). Among research participants, 33.6% participated in different sports for an average of 3.71 (SD = 1.22) years. The internalisation of moral values was assessed using the 24-item adolescent-report Moral Values Internalisation Questionnaire.
The revised Prosocial Tendencies Measure (PTM-R) was used to measure prosocial behaviour. Four forms of value regulation (external, introjected, identified and integrated) and four forms of prosocial behaviour (altruism, public, anonymity and help in emergency) were measured. Regression analyses were performed to assess relationship between moral value regulation and prosocial behaviours in athlete and non-athlete samples.
Results showed that for adolescent athletes’ altruistic behaviour only introjected regulation was significant predictor (β = 0.38, p<.01), while for non-athletes identified regulation (β = 0.19, p<.05). Adolescent 379Posters Tuesday July 11th athletes’ public prosocial behaviour was positively associated with introjected value regulation (β = 0.50, p<.001), while for non-athletes with integrated value regulation (β = 0.21, p<.01). Identified regulation was positively associated with adolescent athletes’ intention to help in emergency (β = 0.29, p<.05).
For non- athletes’ intention to help in emergency, significant predictors were identified (β = 0.16, p<.05) and integrated regulation (β = 0.17, p<.05). Moral value regulation was not related to anonymous prosocial behaviour. This study suggests that internalisation of moral values plays different roles in the prosocial behaviour depending on adolescent involvement in sports activities.
Keywords: adolescents, participation in sport activities, internalization of moral values, moral behaviour Testing for causality in exercise psychology: Applying the Bradford Hill criteria Stuart Biddle (University of Southern Queensland) Exercise psychology is concerned with the psychology of physical activity, exercise, sedentary behaviour and health. It contributes psychological knowledge to measurement, correlates, intervention design and delivery, and mental health outcomes of physical activity and sedentary behaviour. It draws on evidence from cross-sectional, longitudinal/prospective, and experimental designs, as well as from qualitative studies.
In epidemiology, evidence is often appraised for ‘causality’, yet this is rare in exercise psychology. The aim of this conceptual presentation is to outline the well-established ‘Bradford Hill criteria’ for establishing causality for behavioural risk factors on health outcomes. The methods adopted include presentation of data from existing reviews of evidence.
Key criteria for exercise psychologists to consider are strength of association, temporal sequencing, consistency, coherence and plausibility, dose-response effects, and experimental evidence. A case will be made for considering these factors, and exemplars will be presented from research on sedentary behaviour and health outcomes, specifically obesity in young people and adults, as well as all-cause mortality. Keywords: causality, Bradford Hill criteria, exercise psychology What researchers develop is sometimes not what counseling sport-psychologists need: How long should a questionnaire be?
Stephan Horvath, Philipp Röthlin, Gareth Morgan, Daniel Birrer (Swiss Federal Institute of Sport Magglingen, Switzerland) Questionnaires are important tools to measure sport-psychological concepts. When a new questionnaire is developed, it has to show good psychometric properties (i.e., high reliability and validity). Both indicators improve with the number of items.
However, this comes at the cost of its usability in everyday counseling. Athletes often complain about long questionnaires and similarly formulated items. Thus, short questionnaires are what counseling sport-psychologists need, but not what research develops.
As a consequence some sport- psychologists do not use questionnaires, or they use short not-validated self-created measures. We suggest that validation of short questionnaires in applied research should focus more on usability and appropriate indicators of reliability (e.g., inter-item correlations) and validity (e.g., predictive validity). To demonstrate that shortened questionnaires are equally valuable, we reduced the 20-item Self-Determination-Index (SDI-20; Lonsdale, Hodges, & Rose, 2009), which is based on five weighted components (i.e., external, introjected, identified, and integrated regulation, as well as intrinsic motivation) to a 5-items version (SDI-5) by selecting one item of each relevant concept.
Based on the data of 331 female soccer players (Mage = 18.0, SDage = 3.9) we calculate the original SDI-20 as well as the new SDI-5. The two indices were highly correlated (r = .86), and the required simplex structure was found for both indices. In addition, both indices showed expected divergent and convergent validities, e.g., they correlated with persistence, self-standards, and self-discipline, but were uncorrelated with status motivation and competitiveness.
The SDI-5 was again completed by 200 of the players half a year later (retest-reliability r = .45). We conclude that the SDI-5 is a very economical tool to measure self- 380Posters Tuesday July 11th determination. In general, we think that short questionnaires should enjoy a higher status in applied sport- psychological research.
Keywords: questionnaires, applied research, self-determination Physical self perception profile of adults participating in zumba aerobic programs Stella Rokka, George Mavridis, Dimitrios Goulimaris (School of Physical Education & Sport, Democritus University of Thrace,Greece) Scientific research supports that participating in organized physical activity programs affects the increase of physical abilities and, as a result, the improvement of the perceptive physical ability and simultaneously the improvement global physical self value. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the level of physical self perception of adults participating in Zumba aerobic programs and investigate any differences concerning gender and years of participating. The sample was consisted of 167 participants (61 men & 106 women; age 27.8 ± 6.4) who took part in group Zumba aerobic programs in private clubs of Komotini.
For the data collection, the questionnaire used was the Physical Self-Perception Profile, PSPP; Fox & Corbin, 1989, adjusted for the Greek population by Vlachopoulos, Leptokaridou and Fox (2014). This concise version includes 15 questions in 5 factors. For the needs of the research, the sample was divided according to the years of participation a) up to 1 year (n=49), b) 2 to 3 years (n=52) and c) 4 years or more (n=66).
The internal cohesion indicators fluctuated on satisfactory levels. The descriptive statistics analyses showed high means in all five factors, the highest being physical self value (Μ=5.48) and body attractiveness perception (Μ=5.29). The fluctuation analyses showed statistically significant differences in gender, concerning the strength perception factor(p<.001), with the men showing a statistically higher mean.
Additionally, in relation to the years of participation, there were statistically significant differences in the factors perception of physical condition (p<.001), body attractiveness (p<.05) and physical self-value (p<.01), with those participating for the first year presenting lower means. The results of the study show that participating in Zumba aerobic programs has an important effect on the improvement of physical self-perception. Keywords: physical self-perception, years of participation, zumba aerobic Development of the Arabic version of the Trait Sport Confidence Inventory Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, UK), Jaime Díaz-Ocejo (ASPIRE Academy for Sports Excellence, Qatar) The validation of questionnaires is an integral part of sport psychological research to quantitatively assess and corroborate theoretical and conceptual models.
There is a lack of quantitative studies outside of English speaking countries that affects cross-cultural research and the confirmation of the universality of sport-specific constructs. The aim of this study is the development and cross-cultural assessment of the Arabic Trait Sport Confidence Inventory (A-TSCI). The A-TSCI item pool was based on the original items of the TSCI (Vealey, 1986).
Five official translators and sport psychologists, who are bilingual in English and Arabic, were involved in the translation process. Two persons independently translated the original into the Arabic version, and two additional persons back-translated the A-TSCI into English. Any discrepancies in item meaning were discussed with a bilingual sport psychologist, bilingual coaches and athletes.
Following ethics approval the final 13-item version was completed by 86 junior athletes between 12 and 18 years of age. Cronbach’s alpha for the A-TSCI was .95. The one-factor model revealed item loadings between .67 and .84.
Confirmatory factor analysis showed strong scores for indices of Chi-square / df = 1.493, CFI = .958, TLI = .950, and RMSEA = .078. The preliminary results indicated that no item modification or deletion is required. The A-TSCI significantly correlates with the Arabic version of the POMS, r = -.31, p < .01.
To compare the original with the Arabic version a multi-group CFA confirmed small CFI differences between the original TSCI (completed by 261 381Posters Tuesday July 11th Australian junior athletes) and the Arabic version (∆CFI = .000 between unconstrained and measurement weights model). The preliminary findings on the A-TSCI are encouraging and need to be examined in greater depth including a bigger sample and additional reliability and validity testing. Keywords: Arabic scale, TSCI, reliability, CFA Does the use of an audio-imagery intervention affect pre-competition anxiety and increase self-confidence in female collegiate soccer players?
Andrew Tunnicliffe, Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, UK) Research suggests that anxiety and self-confidence are considered to be two important psychological factors influencing an athlete’s performance in competitive sports (Martens, Vealey, Burton, 1990). Imagery has been applied as one of the main intervention techniques in sport psychology (Morris, Spittle, Watt, 2005). The current study used a single-case design in conjunction with an audio-imagery intervention.
Three female NAIA Division One athletes completed the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory-2 four times in the week (4 days, 2 days, 1 day, 3 hours) prior to competitive collegiate soccer games. Following a baseline phase, the imagery intervention was introduced with the aim to decrease anxiety and increase self-confidence. Baseline data was collected over five matches (= five weeks) collecting pre-competitive CSAI-2 data.
Individualized audio-imagery scripts were designed describing environmental cues, information and opportunities specific to each players’ role/position in the team. The post-intervention phase lasted for four matches (= four weeks). The results for the three participants showed that self-confidence, cognitive anxiety, and somatic anxiety remained fairly stable in the lead up to competition (eg.
4 days, 3 days, 1 day before performance) for the baseline and post-intervention phases. Data inspection also showed that immediately before competition (ie. 3 hours prior) self-confidence increased from pre- to post-testing, and a substantial decrease in cognitive anxiety, and a decrease in somatic anxiety.
The results are encouraging, combining a methodology used in multidimensional anxiety research (eg. Craft et al., 2003) with a case-study imagery intervention. Particularly, the effect of imagery on self-confidence and anxiety in the lead-up to competition is helpful for competitive athletes, as well as practitioners, coaches, and applied researchers.
Keywords: anxiety, confidence, imagery, intervention Swimming for people with disabilities x motor development tests: Project of the University of Santa Cruz do Sul - RS - Brazil Sandra Mara Mayer, Heloisa Elesbão (UNISC), Laudemiro Volmar da Cunha Trindade (APAE / UNISC) Swimming for People with Disabilities X Motor Development Tests: Project of the University of Santa Cruz do Sul - RS - Brazil Sandra Mara Mayer - Project Coordinator Piracema Laudemiro Volmar da Cunha Trindade - Co-counselor Heloisa Elesbão - Scholarship PROBEX smmayer@unisc.br University of Santa Cruz do Sul - UNISC, RS, Brazil Motor development is a process that occurs sequentially, being that the development of the disabled has restrictions, such as the decrease in the execution of movements. Swimming is indicated in these cases, as it facilitates the execution of the movements. The "Piracema Project" is a partnership between the University of Santa Cruz do Sul (UNISC) and the Association of Parents and Friends of the Exceptional (APAE).
Its team is made up of professors and scholars of the Physical Education, physiotherapists and psychologists. To compare the General Motor Age (IMG) and Negative Age (IN) of the participants of the pre-test (May 2016) with the post-test (November 2016. The sample consisted of 14 individuals, 6 males and 8 females, aged 108.0 months (9 years) and 616.0 months (51 years and 3 months).
The IMG was evaluated through the Rosa Neto Motor Development Scale, being the result of the sum of the positive results of all the tests, divided by six, expressed in months. IN is obtained through the difference between the Chronological Age (IC) and IMG. The analysis was performed with SPSS 22.0 program (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
In the pre-test the mean of IMG was 38,8±41,0 382Posters Tuesday July 11th months, when we compared it with the mean of 333,2±306,0 months, we found that they had an IN of 289,4±283,0 months. In the post-test the mean IMG was 42,6±31,2 months, and the mean of IC was 256,3±168,0, and then IN 204,2 ± 160,8 months. There was improvement in the pre-test and post-test results, taking into account that individuals have physical and / or mental limitations.
The work should be emphasized in the skills that they have the greatest difficulty. Keywords: motor development, water activities, disabled people Aquatics activities associated with the process of well-being and quality of life - Piracema Project Heloisa Elesbão, Sandra Mara Mayer, Laudemiro Volmar da Cunha Trindade (UNISC) People with disabilities seek to combat the practice of social exclusion to which they have been subjected. They idealize a more integrated and dignified society for all, with the same opportunities to learn and develop their capacities to achieve social and psychological independence, and to be able to integrate community life.
The objective of this work is to report the experiences of an project of the University of Santa Cruz do Sul (Brazil). In addition to sharing experiences of the development of aquatic recreational activities with the disabled, socio-affective attitudes and experiences in the aquatic environment that aim at the well-being. The methodology of the project is given by the execution of sessions three times a week: Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays lasting fifty minutes.
The project serves twenty-five students, aged between 9 and 51 years, divided into three classes, according to age and physiological development and psychomotor impairment. In the first class, students are more independent. In the second to third class the students are accompanied by the parents and perform activities oriented.
Participants' motor development assessments are performed through the Rosa Neto scale. The team is comprised of Physical Education teachers and scholars, physiotherapists and psychologists. The results obtained with the evaluations show a significant improvement in the motor aspects, taking into account that they have numerous limitations.
There have been improvements mainly in the affective and social relations aspects. It can then be concluded that there was an evolution in the development of the motor, cognitive and affective partner aspects. Therefore, the importance of aquatic activities, serving as a leisure activity, enable them to become citizens of an inclusive society, enabling them to become citizens of an inclusive society.
Keywords: disability, swimming, motor development Exploration on recognition and satisfaction of learners and instructors regarding the feedback utilizing dance image analysis Siwan Han, Sungje Park (Chung-Ang University) Quantitative identification of physical behaviors done by psychological approach is a desirable method to measure and analyze movements (Crane, 2009). Traditional experiments on dance required much time to check the experiment results. Therefore, it was difficult to provide learners with information immediately.
Also, teaching dance orally by a professional instructor in a studio was hard to provide intuitive information to learners. There are restrictions in using oral teaching as an educational material for practical correction of postures, more intuitive and effective instruction method is required. The purpose of this study is to explore recognition and satisfaction of learners and instructors on the feedback utilizing real-time image feedback.
For the purpose, we conducted classes with a program that consisted of 7 ballet majors of university students and 1 instructor. The feedback utilizing image analysis on the recorded animated image was suggested by using DARTFISH Version 5.5. Also, in-depth interview by individual was implemented with semi-structured interview questionnaire to explore recognition and satisfaction of learners and instructors.
As an analysis result of inductive contents, it was found that the feedback utilizing image analysis improved performance of learners 383Posters Tuesday July 11th and decreased conflicts between individuals by forming trust on instructors. It also had positive influence on the recognition and satisfaction on the feedback utilizing image analysis. These results were discussed in the relational aspects of interactions between dance instructors and learners.
Keywords: dance, image analysis, feedback Relationship between motor abilities and behaviors in children with ADHD Sin-Chi Liu (National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan), Chung-Ju Huang (University of Taipei, Taiwan), Tsung-Min Hung, Yu-Jung Tsai (National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan) Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been described as high prevalent behavioral disorder in children which leads to poorer behaviors and motor abilities. The incidence of ADHD amongst genders has been debated. Boys and girls with ADHD also exhibit different comorbidity profiles; boys are more likely to exhibit comorbid disruptive behavior disorders, while girls are more likely to exhibit comorbid internalizing disorders during adolescence.
The objective of this study was to investigate the association between motor abilities and behaviors in children with ADHD and compare the gender difference. We hypothesized that poor motor abilities might correlate with poor behaviors. In addition, such effects by child sex will be examined.
Movement Assessment Battery for Children - Second Edition (MABC) and Achenbach Children's behavior scale (CBCL) were evaluated in 81 children (73 boys and 8 girls) aged between 7 years and 13 years. In the ADHD group, nine (11%) children had significant motor impairments and seven (89%) were borderline cases. Normally, males had lower scores than females on the internalizing problems [male M(SD) = 61.28(10.05); female M(SD) = 61.04(4.01)], had more scores than females on externalizing problems[male M(SD) =64.28(8.52); female M(SD) = 65.57 (5.77)] and total CBCL[male M(SD) = 67.85(7.37); female M(SD) = 68.14 (2.91)] scores than females.
As the aforementioned, we got the debate. Finally, the results indicated that MABC in manual dexterity was correlated with CBCL subscale in internalizing problems (r = -.28, p = .01), MABC in balance was correlated with CBCL total T scores (r = -.23, p = .04) and MABC total scores was correlated with CBCL total T scores (r = -.26, p = .02). These findings support the association of motor ability and behavioral problems in children with ADHD, which may shed light on possible physical activity or exercise interventions aiming to improve motor abilities then improve poor behavior.
Keywords: motor development, children, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, social The hidden and disclosed messages of motivational pre-game videos and their influence on soccer players’ performance Sima Zach (The Academic College at Wingate, Israel) The hidden and disclosed messages of motivational pre-game videos and their influence on soccer players’ performance Mental preparation for sport events in elite sport is imperative. Coaches and sport psychologists do their best to adopt the worthiest approach for their team performance enhancement. One innovative approach is motivational pre-game video clips.
The aim of the current study was to examine the relationship between pre-game motivational video clips and performance among elite soccer players. Twenty- six pre-game video clips were produced by a soccer teams’ performance enhancement consultant, within two consecutive seasons. Duration of the clips ranged from 2-4 minutes.
In the first season, the team was portrayed as the underdog, and in the second season as the top dog. Two researchers separately analyzed the clips’ hidden and disclosed content. Analysis revealed substantial differences between the messages that were conveyed to the players in the first season and those conveyed in the second.
Video clips can be used as a powerful mental technique for performance enhancement among elite soccer players. Keywords: video clips, pre-game, mental preparation 384Posters Tuesday July 11th A mindfulness-based intervention for the rehabilitation of an injured sportist: A case study in professional soccer Silvia Sole (Universitat de Lleida) The big number of sport injuries, especially in soccer, is becoming an important problem for the professionals who work with these players. Every year injuries in soccer causes a big amount of economic losses and they have a great emotional impact on the teams and the players.
Sport injuries’ causes are frequently classified into external and internal ones, and requires the engagement of the whole multidisciplinary teams of professionals surrounding the group. The study of sport’s injuries epidemiology and the complexity of the variables that are present in the athletes’ rehabilitation process creates us the necessity of incorporating new intervention techniques in order to improve the rehabilitation and return to play process. In this case a mindfulness-based intervention is proposed as a complement to rehabilitation of an injured soccer player, after an anterior cruciate operation on left knee.
Theoretical and practical aspects of mindfulness and stress management were explained and practiced and psychological and physiological variables were evaluated before, during and after the intervention. These variables were Heart Rate (HR), Heart Rate Variability (HRV), Blood Pressure (BP), Emotional Mood, Mindfulness levels and socio-sportive items. The return to play is also observed and studied carefully.
After the intervention we can say that there is an improvement in the player state’s perception and in the cardiac coherence among other variables. So we can find subjective and objective changes in the player. After these good results and being conscious of the limitations of a single case study like this, we can suggest that this kind of interventions can be useful in future programs of rehabilitation of injured players.
More studies, with bigger samples and objective variables are needed to confirm these preliminary results. Keywords: sport injury, sport psychology, soccer, mindfulness, rehabilitation Influences of physical attributes on visual analysis and athletic performance Shuzhi Chang Visual analysis plays an important role in the performance of athletes in competitive situation. A recent study shows that the relationship between the visual analysis process and the athletic performance of athlete can be evaluated by "consistency" and "effectiveness", and the expert's visual information search results were consistent with their athletic performance, which was more effective than novice(Hu Yue, 2015).Why is the novice's consistency and effectiveness lower?
What factors affect visual analysis and athletic performance in the development of skills? What kind of visual strategy can be the most effective to make novice train into an expert? The purpose of this study is to explore these core issues.
Actually, there are many factors affecting novices’ performance, the athlete's physical quality has been noticed for a long time. But few people discuss the relationship between athlete's physical quality and visual analysis ability, and its impact on the development of sports skills. 12 rock climbers and 25 non-climbers participated two experiments.
Portable eye tracking system (SMI) was used to track the eye movement. Four indexes were used to evaluate physical qualities of rock climbers: strength, aerobic endurance, agility and coordination, balance and flexibility (Gao Feng, 2009). The climbers and non-climbers in different physical qualities developed different types of visual analysis course.
The climbers in good physical qualities can predict its visual analysis process more accurate than non-climbers do. Feedback on rock climbing skills can improve visual analysis abilities and physical qualities of non-climbers. Visual analysis course of climbers and non-climbers can develop different visual analysis types due to personal physical qualities, and use relative visual analysis strategy.
Personalized visual analysis strategy and the effective feedback on skill performance can help athletes to achieve the best performance in skills. Keywords: visual analysis, physical quality, rock climber 385Posters Tuesday July 11th Gymnastics exercise facilitates visuo-spatial working memory in children Shu-Shih Hsieh A growing body of evidence has indicated the positive effects of physical exercise on cognition in children. Recent studies have also investigated the cognitive benefits of exercise regimens that target cognitive-motor interaction, such as gymnastics.
Accordingly, the purpose of this study was to examine the effect of a 8-week gymnastics exercise regimen on visuo-spatial working memory (VSWM) in children. Forty-four voluntarily participants between the ages of 7 to 10 were recruited. Children in the experimental group (EX) (n = 20; mean age = 8.7 ± 1.1 years) were recruited from Yilan County, Taiwan; children in the control group (CTL) (n = 24; mean age = 8.6 ± 1.1 years) were recruited from Taipei City, Taiwan.
Children in EX underwent 8 weeks of a gymnastics exercise regimen (2 sessions/week, 90 minutes/session); whereas children in CTL received no intervention but were instructed to maintain their routine daily activities. Measures on physical fitness, motor ability, and VSWM were taken before and after intervention. The results revealed that motor ability, not physical fitness, was improved in the EX (pre: 83.7 percentile; post: 94.1 percentile; p<.05).
For VSWM, response accuracy was improved in EX (pre: 63.7%; post: 70.2%; p <.05) regardless of WM demands; whereas no accuracy change was found in CTL. Regarding reaction times, there was no performance change for either group. Taken together, our findings suggest that 8 weeks of gymnastics exercise has a general benefit to VSWM in children between the ages of 7 to 10, which highlights the importance of exercise on cognitive-motor interaction in stimulating cognitive development during childhood.
However, our results should be interpreted with caution given the selection bias of participants. Keywords: fitness, motor ability, cognitive-motor interaction An evaluation of time movement anticipation among female athletes of various sports Shubhda Bhosle, Jayashree Acharya, Sanchita Baruah (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) Anticipation in sport is the ability of the athlete to make decisions and to act ahead of time (Surkov, 1982). (Taylor 2016) noted that expert advantage in utilising informative cues for anticipation remains stable across sports, the cues that are most important or relevant for effective anticipation varies depending on the type of sport.
Zhu ( 2012) mentioned that there is great potential in using technology-based assessment to overcome the limitations of traditional measurement methods. The Vienna Test System (VTS) developed by Schuh-fried GmbH (Moedling, Austria) is one such computerized system that is able to analyse many different sport psychology-related constructs. ZBA (Time/ Movement Anticipation Test) that measures time and movement anticipation ability, in which a green ball moves at a certain trajectory and suddenly disappears after a while.
Participants are required to indicate where the ball hits the target line and the point on the target line where the ball will pass. The present study focused of highlighting possible differences in time and movement anticipation of visual stimuli movement. For this 45 university female athletes aged between 19 to 24 years with a mean and SD of 22.73± 2.14 of various sports (i.e.
cricket, football and hockey; N=15 from each), ZBA was measured for mean deviation time (MDT)-slow and mean deviation time (MDT)-fast. ANOVA results revealed no significant difference among female athletes of different sports when considered on the score of MDT-slow (F(2,42)= 2.99, p= .061). But in MDT-fast significant differences was found (F(2,42)= 6.98, p= .002).
Post-hoc test of Tukey HSD reveals significant difference in time movement anticipation between football and hockey group, also in football and cricket group. Keywords: movement anticipation, time anticipation, vienna test system, movement perception 386Posters Tuesday July 11th Effect of Mindfulness-based Cognitive intervention on the stress-related psychological indexes of elite athletes Shu Yang (Chengdu Sport Institute), Zhongqiu Zhang (China Institue of Sport Science) This study was to investigate effectiveness of the Mindfulness-based cognitive intervention (MBCI) on related psychology parameters of elite athletes with stress-coping problems. Four essential components of MBCI in this study were: (1) correct understanding of stress-coping problems and mindfulness; (2) focus and cognitive reconstruction; (3) acceptance; (4) value-driven behavior.
The methodology of the study used a single—case multiple—baseline design model. Four athletes received a five-week MBCI， once a week for 90 minutes．The TH-FX Psychological evaluator for Athlete, the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire(FFMQ), the Self-generated Physiological Coherence System(SPCS), the State Anxiety Inventory(S-AI), and the Profile Of Mood States(POMS) were adopted as measurements． Among these measurements, the data of The TH-FX Psychological evaluator for Athlete and FFMQ were collected before and after intervention; the data of SPCS, S- AI and POMS were collected weekly． The results were showed as followed：From the figures, after the MBCI, athletes` score of FFMQ increased; the scores of SPCS increased, especially the dimensionality of psychological adjustment ability and psychological stability; the peak of a combination score of breath, respiratory and pulse rates, skin resistance, a motion sensor, which was scored by TH-FX Psychological evaluator for Athlete, and the score of S-AI and TMD of POMS were decreased. These results showed that Mindfulness—based cognitive intervention (MBCI) can effectively improve athletes` mindfulness as well as improve their adjustment ability to cope with certain pressure 、lower anxiety and improve mood.
Keywords: psychological intervention, mindfulness training, psychological indexes, Stress coping, elite athlete,the Dual-Factor Model of mental health (DFM) Characteristics and physical activity intentions of women taking part in a mass participation charity event Zoe Mcvinnie, Carlolyn Plateau, Clare Stevinson (Loughborough University) Mass participation charity events have been identified as having untapped potential for public health by encouraging physical activity through charitable and social participation motives. This study examined the characteristics of women taking part in a charity 5km run and their intentions to increase physical activity post- event. Adult women taking part in a Cancer Research UK women-only Race for Life 5km event (n=226) completed an online questionnaire just before or just after the event.
Information on current physical activity (PA), future intentions, motivation, and wellbeing were collected. Additional measures included training habits and mode of completion for the event (walk or run). Mean age of participants was 42.8 years (SD = 12.0; range = 18-71), with 47.2% classed as overweight or obese.
Current training habits indicated that while 39.6% trained year-round, a further 40.1% had specifically trained in preparation for the event. Compared with women who ran the event, those that walked reported significantly lower PA, self-efficacy for exercise, autonomous motivation and psychological wellbeing, and significantly higher social physique anxiety. They were also less likely to state intentions to be exercising beyond minimum recommended levels 3 months later.
These results suggest that Race for Life may contribute to greater levels of physical activity for some women through training for the event. Those choosing to walk such events may particularly benefit from support in their race preparation to increase confidence, motivation, and wellbeing outcomes. Keywords: mass participation, physical activity, public health, motivation, self-efficacy, wellbeing 387Posters Tuesday July 11th Brain mechanism of the effect of physical activity on physical self information processing of adolescence Yanlin Sun, Jinling Fan Physical self is the individual cognition and evaluation of the body.
It relates to appearance, personality, physique and physical ability, and other aspects, it is the most basic part of the self-concept, and also the first germination composition of the individual self-consciousness. Therefore, how to improve the adolescents’ understanding of physical self has become a hot topic in the field of contemporary psychology research. Based on the cognitive neuroscience, this paper aims on the effect of the physical exercise on the neurophysiological basis of physical self.
According to the standard of sports population, we selected 10 students who exercise and 10 students who don't exercise. The experimenters choose depicting adjectives as stimulus material, and use Event Related Potential (ERP) to collect the teenagers’ brain waves in the process of Self-cognitive and judgment facing the stimulation materials. The results showed that in the aspect of sports ability, the exercise group and non-exercise group in the late 400 ms - 1000 ms slow-wave (LPP) are different.
The waveform of the exercise group tends to positive. And when the individuals evaluate physical self, the activation degree of the forehead - central region of the exercise group is larger than the non-exercise group. In the aspect of self- esteem, the exercise group and non-exercise group have significant difference in the late 400 ms - 1000 ms slow-wave (LPP).
The waveform of the exercise group tends to positive, and compared to the non-exercise group as the individuals evaluate physical self-esteem, the degree of brain activation of the exercise group is higher, the range is wider. The results provide a implication that more physical activity can improve the self. Keywords: physical exercise, adolescent, physical-self, ERP Psychological burnout among basket ball referees Tarek Brahimi (University of Djelfa) The research aimed to define the following variation in the degree of psychological Burnout phenomena among Basket Ball Referees according to the variable of Referee degree (international and first in education).
The research sample consisted (12) Referees chosen according to the deliberate method (6) from international degree. Degree retirees and (6) from first degree referees all actually registered in list of the Branch federation of Iraqi Basket Ball. The research used measure of psychological Burnout of the sport Refer which consists (s) tool stamen after the applicability and accuracy of tool was determined the data were statistically processed using a Arithmetic mean, standard deviation, Pearson’s simple relation coefficient, and the T-test”.
The research remanded the following: - Emphasize on psychotically preparing of referees in additional to the physical preparation in order to contract the matches in an efficient way and establishing physical courses and psychological courses to sharpen the referee senses and in order to find self successfully in the duty of referee. Keywords: psychological burnou, basket ball Promoting physical activity in workplace; an integrated model for applied exercise psychology interventions Seyed Ahmad Ghaziasgar, Amir Behrouz Daghoghi, Amir Hosein Memari, Hamideh Abrishamkar) On average, adults spend at least one-third of their life at work (World Health Organisation, 1999). Also, there is a clear relationship between the impact of work on individual health and company outcome so that it makes the workplace an ideal environment to promote the physical activity and other health behaviours of the adult population.
(Chu, Breucker, Harris, Stitzel, Gan, Gu & Dwyer, 2000). In addition, managers have a unique opportunity to improve the health of their staff through physical activity, improve worker performance and reduce sickness leave (Medibank Private, 2005), but they have may encounter with a few barriers to provide 388Posters Tuesday July 11th physical activity and other health behaviours for their staff. In the other hand, a lot of workplaces have some facilities for doing physical activity but their staff do not use of this services.
In this presentation, we discuss about our experience on how exercise psychology help us to conduct an integrated physical activity program in workplace setting. In the first part, we will present how we could receive the support of managers for our program. In the second part, we will speak about our detailed psychological intervention.
Also, in the third presentation we will explore about and present the flowchart of psychological guideline that our fitness trainer observed and those helped us to promote physical activity in workplace. Keywords: exercise psychology, physical activity, workplace Posters Session 2 (19.30-20.20) The validation of the Chinese version of Youth Experience Survey for Sport (YES-S) Shu Fang Huang, Chu-Min Liao This study was an exploratory validation of a Chinese version of The Youth Experience Survey for Sport (YES-S) developed by MacDonald (2012). YES-S is a self-reported instrument measuring what adolescents gain and experience in sports with 5 factors, including ‘personal and social skills’ (ability to adjust to and cooperate with others), ‘cognitive skills’ (creativity and information processing ability), ‘goal setting’ (ability to self- regulate for reaching goals ), ‘initiative’ (motivation and dedication), and ‘negative experiences’ (stress, negative influences, and inappropriate behaviors).
Items of YES-S were translated into Chinese language (traditional font) with a back-translation procedure and administrated to 185 Taiwanese adolescents (M＝135, F= 50; Age= 9- 19) participating in either varsity teams or sport clubs from 10 different sports. Exploratory factor analysis and item analysis were conducted given that this was a cross-cultural validation and changes in factor structure were possible. Results revealed a 5-factor structure as outlined by MacDonald (2012) but with several changes.
‘Goal setting’ merged with ‘initiative’ into a single factor (‘initiative’), while items of ‘negative experiences’ were divided into two factors which were termed ‘negative experiences’ and ‘deviant behaviors’. In conclusion, our data provided preliminary supports for the validity of this Chinese version of YES-S with 5 sub-scales: Personal and Social Skills, Cognitive Skills, Initiative, Negative Experiences, and Deviant behaviors. Further research with cross-validation on more samples, especially for Chinese from areas using simplified Chinese font (e.g.
China and Singapore), and examination of criterion-related validity is warranted. Keywords: positive youth development,youth sport Experiential avoidance and cognitive fusion associated with competitive state anxiety among adolescent aerobics athletes Shousen Xu, Jingcheng Li Based on the psychopathological model of the Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), Experiential Avoidance (EA) and Cognitive Fusion(CF) are essential components of psychological inflexibility. The competitive state anxiety among athletes presented their psychological inflexibility during the competition.
Therefore, the purpose of present cross-sectional study was to investigate whether EA and CF would linkage to three components of competitive state anxiety (cognitive anxiety, somatic anxiety, and self-confidence) differently. In total, 142 adolescent aerobics athletes participated in 2014 National Aerobics Championship and were asked to assess the Competitive State Anxiety Questionnaire-2, Acceptance and Action Questionnaire, and Cognitive Fusion Questionnaire through self-report. Data analysis indicated that, EA correlated with somatic anxiety significantly, and CF correlated with cognitive anxiety and somatic anxiety significantly.
Regression analysis results showed that CF predicted cognitive anxiety and somatic anxiety significantly and 389Posters Tuesday July 11th positively, with higher level of cognitive fusion linked with severe cognitive anxiety and somatic anxiety. However, EA did not predict cognitive anxiety and somatic anxiety. Also, EA and CF had no significant association with self-confidence.
The results of current study provided a framework in understanding the competitive state anxiety of adolescent aerobics athletes and suggested intervention of competitive state anxiety focusing on reducing EA and CF. Keywords: adolescent aerobics athletes, experiential avoidance, cognitive fusion, competitive state anxiety Habitual technical trainings do not improve cognitive functions Shota Sakamoto, Masamitsu Ito, Masahiro Katagiri, Takeru Gushiken, Yuta Uematsu, Kazuhiro Suzukawa It has been widely accepted that physical exercises improve cognitive function. There are various types of physical exercise: aerobic exercise, resistance training, coordinative exercise, and sports.
Several studies suggest that soccer, which is a typical team sport, improve executive functions. However, there are few studies focusing on the qualitative aspects in types of training method. In this study, we evaluated the relationship between habitual technical training and executive function.
The total number of subjects was 130 children (8- 12 years old). We divided them into 2 groups: One that has technical trainings (e.g. dribbling, feint, shoot) in a soccer team (N=60)(average 5.05 years of soccer experience, SD = 1.47) and the other one that do not participate in a sport club but has physical education classes (45 minutes) 2 or 3 times a week (N=70).
Executive functions were evaluated by a modified flanker task. The flanker task consisted of two trial types, with either congruent or incongruent visual stimuli. Children were asked to respond to the direction of the target arrow within the array of arrows by pressing the corresponding right or left button as quickly and accurately as possible.
The result indicated reaction time. The test result was compared between the junior soccer players and non-soccer players. We expected that the junior soccer players had higher accuracy and faster reaction times than the non-soccer players in the task because the technical training that the junior soccer players regularly have must have improved their executive functions.
Surprisingly, however, we did not see any significant difference in the score of the task between them. This result suggests that habitual technical training does not contribute to the executive functions. Keywords: sports activity, soccer, inhibitory control, executive functions Relationship between trait rumination/trait reflection and state self-esteem among Japanese university athletes: Using a qualitative approach Shohei Yamakoshi (Graduate School of Osaka University of Health and Sport Sciences) Recent research indicated inverse effects of trait rumination and trait reflection on mental health due to their different effects on state self-esteem among university athletes (Yamakoshi & Tsuchiya, 2017).
Research question was how highly ruminative athletes and highly reflective athletes face adversity that decreases state self-esteem. Grounded theory approach was adopted. Participants were recruited from the study of Yamakoshi & Tsuchiya (2017).
Participants were 1) three university athletes whose trait rumination score was higher than 1 standard deviation (SD) away from the mean score and trait reflection score was lower than the mean score, and 2) three university athletes whose trait reflection score was higher than 1SD away from the mean score and trait rumination was lower than the mean score. Data were collected through the use of semi-structured qualitative interviews. The interview guide consisted of five main question areas; 1) type of events, 2) coping strategies, 3) relationship with teammates and coaches, 4) social support, 5) consequences of the event.
Results indicated that both athletes experienced low state self-esteem when facing competitive related stressors such as slump. During this time, athletes high in trait rumination used problem-focused coping, felt jealousy and discomfort for teammates, felt isolated from others, and experienced negative self-perceptions. On the other hand, athletes high in trait reflection utilized coping strategies which involve communication with 390Posters Tuesday July 11th others, respected and trusted for teammates, received social support, and experienced positive self- perceptions .
These findings suggested that relationship with others might be the factor to differentiate the effects of trait rumination and trait reflection on state self-esteem. Therefore, developing positive relationship with others might be effective to enhance state self-esteem for athletes high in trait rumination. Keywords: trait rumination, trait reflection, state self-esteem, Japanese university athletes The psychological mechamism involved in the group sandplay technique’s positive effect on team performance in sport Shiro Nakagomi (University of Tsukuba) At present, the development of mental training methods for performance enhancement in team sports lags behind that for individual athletes.
In order to directly affect a team`s group dynamics for the enhancement of team performance, special mental training techniques for team sports are necessary. The authors have previously applied Group Sandplay Therapy (G-SP) to two team ball-sports and to two tennis doubles pairs, and confirmed the effect of such a method (1996, 2008, 2017). Sandplay Therapy was originally developed by D.
Kalff, as a play therapy for children, based on her knowledge of Jungian psychology. It was subsequently introduced to Japan by H. Kawai in 1965 as the Hakoniwa Therapy.
Okada adapted G-SP as a sensitive training method for psychotherapists (1991). The present study is an examination of the psychological mechanism involved in the enhancement of team performance by G-SP. For that purpose, we reviewed research materials from previous studies involving a women`s soccer team and a women`s volleyball team.
Regular members of each team were divided into groups of four or five that underwent G-SP sessions. Since better team performance was achieved after these sessions, the mechanism involved in the improved performance was determined by examining the changes in the content and composition of Sandplay works, looking at introspective reports, and checking the results of team cohesion, collective efficacy and psychological competitive ability. The GS-P experience was able to bring on these changes through cooperative working, the sharing of images and non-verbal communication between teammates in a special "playful and unreal" psychological space.
This helps lead to an understanding of oneself and others in athletic situations and brings about positive changes in team dynamics and team performance. Keywords: mental training, team performance, group sandplgy technique An investigation on self-esteem among community-living adults in India Shipra Srivastava, Jayashree Acharya, Pooja Rawat (Lnipe) Five different groups in society namely school group, engineering college group, physical education group, elite athlete group, and fitness group were assessed on their self-esteem by administering Rosenberg’s self esteem scale (1965). The 472 subjects were selected from Gwalior, MP, India age ranged from 14-35 with a mean and SD 21.25+9.11.The subjects of various groups were selected on the bases of their nature of activities like school students who focus on studies as well as playing activities and age factor also very less than other groups, engineering students are more focused in studies, physical education college students focused on pedagogical aspects of physical education and sports, elite athlete group who continuously play their games and grasp the opportunity to meet various culture of different society, on the other side fitness center who do their physical activity to being fit and for good shape.
To find out the difference among these groups descriptive statistics and ANOVA was applied and the significance level was set at 0.05.The calculated F value of 7.60 found significant because p-value 0.001 is less than 0.05 level of significance, so post hoc test was applied to know the mean difference. The mean difference found significant (p<0.05) elite athletes to fitness group (- 2.65) and elite athletes to engineering students (-1.85). The result of the study indicates elite athletes are having higher self-esteem.
391Posters Tuesday July 11th Keywords: self esteem, physical activity, pedagogical aspects Relationship between motor abilities, toe skill, and like and dislike for physical activity among Japanese kindergarten children Shino Izutsu (Japan Women's College of Physical Education), Akari Kamimura (Juntendo University), Natsumi Hamano (Japan Women's College of Physical Education), Masataka Hirosawa (Juntendo University) The purposes of this study was to determine Japanese kindergarten children’s like and dislike for physical activity and to examine the relationship between motor abilities, toe skill, and like and dislikes for physical activity.We collected data from 123 children, including 57 boys and 66 girls (42 three-year-olds, 37 four-year- olds, and 44 five-year-olds), in 2016. Individual interviews were conducted to assess the kindergarten children’s like and dislike for physical activity. We measured their 20-m sprint time, distances for standing broad jump and tennis ball throw, and the number of marbles they could move using their toes (toe skill index).
Statistical analysis was performed by using the chi-square test and Pearson’s correlation analysis.More than 70% children answered, “I like physical activities.” There were significantly more “likes” than “dislikes.” The correlation analysis revealed no significant correlations between like and dislike for physical activity and motor abilities or toe skill. However, a significant correlation was observed between motor abilities and toe skill. The 5-year-old children showed a significant correlation between the number of marbles (right leg) and physical ability (20-m sprint time; r = .35) and standing broad jump (r = .39).
The 4-year-olds showed a significant correlation between the number of marbles (right leg) and motor ability (standing broad jump; r =.54). The 3-year-olds also showed a significant correlation between the number of marbles (left leg) and motor ability (ball throwing; r = .37).We conclude that most children like physical activity, and like and dislike for physical activity might not be associated with motor abilities and toe skills among Japanese kindergarten children. Toe skill might be correlated with some part of motor abilities.
Keywords: like and dislike for physical activity, motor abilities, toe skill, preschool children Relationship between athletes life stress and burnout: Mediating effects of perceive global stress Shih Wei Chan Although many studies adopted Smith (1986) cognitive-affective model of athletic burnout in examining mechanism underlying stress-burnout relationship (e.g., Gustafsson, & Skoog, 2012; Lu, Lee, Chang, Chou, Hsu, Lin, & Gill, 2016), very few studies examine the mediating role of perceived global stress on the athletes’ life stress and burnout relationship. Purposes: (a) to examine the relationship between athletes’ life stress, perceived global stress, and burnout; (b) to examine the mediating role of perceived global stress on athletes’ life stress and burnout relationship. Methods: We sampled 195 college athletes (Mage = 19.89, SD =+ 1.34; males =138; females=57) and completed the College Student-Athletes’ Life Stress Scale (Lu et al., 2012), Perceive Stress Scale (Cohen, Kamarack, Mermelstein, 1983), and Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ , Raedeke & Smith, 2001).
Results: Pearson’s product correlation analyses found two types of life stress (sport- specific stress and general-life stress) correlated with perceive global stress, and burnout. Hierarchical regression analyses revealed a partial mediating effect of perceive global stress on athletes’ life stress-burnout relationship. We concluded that athletes’ perceived global is the key mechanism underlying stress-burnout relationship.
Future research directions and implications of the study were discussed. Keywords: competitive sports, life stress, well-being, over-training 392Posters Tuesday July 11th Effect of parental behavioral control on water high-risk practices for adolescents: Moderated mediating effect Shi Luo, Yun Li, Hui Zhang Base on social learning theory and ecosystem theory, the study explored the mechanism of perceived parental behavioral control in predicting water high-risk practices through a moderated mediation model centering on affiliation with deviant peers. A total of 7485 participants（3663 male，3822 female；Mean age=12.95） from five provinces completed a questionnaire survey.
The results indicated that：（1）Affiliation with deviant peers played partial mediating effect between parental behavioral control and water high-risk practices. Parental behavioral control not only had a direct influence on water high-risk practices，but also promoted water high-risk practices indirectly by increasing affiliation with deviant peers.（2）Sensation seeking moderated this mediation effect. Sensation seeking moderated the second path of the mediation.
Simple slope test shows that, in the sense of low level of sensation seeking, with the increase of affiliation with deviant peers, the water high-risk practices showed a significant upward trend(β=0.20，t=4.983，P<0.001）, poor companion increased by a standard deviation, water high-risk practices increased 0.46 standard deviation. Therefore，the effect of parental behavioral control on adolescents’ water high-risk practices was moderated mediating effect.．These findings had important theoretical and practical value to reduce water high-risk practices. Keywords: adolescents, parental behavioral control, affiliation with deviant peers;sensation seeking, water high-risk practices, moderated mediating effect Effect of water safety skills on high-risk practices for adolescents: Moderated mediating effect Shi Luo, Yun Li, Hui Zhang Base on KASP theory and overconfidence theory, The study explored the mechanism of perceived water safety skills in predicting water high-risk practices through a moderated mediation model centering on overconfidence.
A total of 2840 participants from five provinces completed a questionnaire survey. The results indicated that: （1）Overconfidence played partial mediating effect between water safety skills and water high-risk practices. Water safety skills not only had a direct influence on water high-risk practices，but also promoted water high-risk practices indirectly by increasing overconfidence.（2）Water risk perceptions moderated this mediation effect.
Water risk perceptions moderated the second path of the mediation. The simple slope test showed that the high risk practices showed a significant upward trend (β = 0.39, t = 4.90, p<0.05), with the water risk perceptions being low (the risk-aware standard score was equal to -1) , overweight self-confidence increased by 1 standard deviation, high risk practices will increase 0.39 standard deviation; risk perception in the general level (risk perception of the standard is equal to 0), with excessive self-confidence increase, water high-risk practices is still significant (β= 0.25, t = 4.02, p <0.001). Overweight self-confidence increases by 1 standard deviation, and high-risk practices will increase by 0.25 standard deviation.
When water risk perceptions is more (risk-aware standard is equal to 1), (β= 0.21, t = 5.01, p <0.001). The self-confidence increased by one standard deviation and the water high-risk practices increased by only 0.21 standard deviation, which was higher than that of water risk perceptions when less, the increase will be reduced by almost half. Therefore，the effect of water safety skills on adolescents’ water high-risk practices was moderated mediating effect.．These findings had important theoretical and practical value to reduce adolescents’ water high-risk practices.
Keywords: adolescents, water safety skills, overconfidence, risk perceptions, water high-risk practices, moderated mediating effect 393Posters Tuesday July 11th The beneficial effects of acute exercise on executive function in adolescents SeYun Park (Chungnam National University), Jennifer Etnier (University of North Carolina Greensboro) Evidence supports that a single session of exercise has benefits for cognitive performance following exercise (Chang et al., 2012; Lambourne & Tomporowski, 2010), with meta-analytic results suggesting that the benefits are largest for measures of executive function (EF). Although these benefits have been demonstrated across the lifespan, the vast majority of research has been conducted with young adults (18-30 yrs), and we are unaware of any study that has tested the effects for high-school aged, healthy children (HS students). Hence, the primary purpose of this study was to assess the effect of moderate intensity acute exercise on subsequent EF performance in this population.
Korean HS students (8 male, 11 female; age: M=15.95 yrs, SD=0.23) volunteered to participate in the study. Using a within-subjects design with order of conditions randomized and counter-balanced, participants performed the Stroop task, the Trail Making Task, the Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT), and the Tower of London (TOL) test following rest and following exercise with sessions performed on different days. Participants were equipped with a heart rate (HR) monitor and instructed to exercise at 60- 80% age-predicted HR.
On the exercise day, participants performed a 5-min warmup, 20-min of exercise, and a 5-min cooldown on a bicycle ergometer. Findings indicated that exercise resulted in significant benefits for Stroop Color and Stroop Color/Word tests (p<.05) and nearly significant benefits for Stroop Word, SDMT, and TOL total moves (p<.10). These results provide an important extension to the literature by confirming that 20 minutes of moderate intensity exercise benefits EF performance for HS students.
Benefits were particularly robust for measures of information processing and inhibition, but were also suggestive for working memory and planning. These findings may have implications relative to the inclusion of exercise during the school day to benefit HS students’ academic performance. Keywords: acute exercise, executive function, cognitive performance, adolescents The effect of neurofeedback and mindfulness on sport anxiety and athletic performance of young soccer players Seyed Mohammad Zadkhosh, Hassan Gharayagh Zandi, Rasool Hemayattalab (University of Tehran) The aim of this study was to examine neurofeedback and mindfulness interventions for anxiety reduction and athletic performance enhancement.
For this purpose, 45 soccer players who were attended in national football league of Iran were assigned to three experimental 1 (intervention based on alpha/theta neurofeedback training), experimental 2 (intervention based on mindfulness meditation) and control group. Athletes in experimental group 1 received twelve-session, 30-minute alpha/theta neurofeedback training, in experimental group 2 received twelve-session, 30-minute mindfulness meditation training and control group did not receive any intervention. Before and after interventions sport anxiety scale questionnaire and shoot performance test were used to collect data.
Covariance analysis results showed that the improvement of athletic performance scores and reduction of anxiety scale were significant in experimental group 1. In addition, results of the experimental group 2 showed that the improvement of athletic performance scores and reduction of anxiety scale scores were significant. And there were significant different between experimental group 2 compared to experimental group 1 in sport anxiety scale, but there were not significant differences between experimental group 1 compared to experimental group 2 in athletic performance.
According to these findings, we concluded the alpha/theta neurofeedback training and mindfulness meditation training are appropriate to increase athletic performance and decrease level of sport anxiety. Keywords: neurofeedback, mindfulness, sport anxiety, performance, soccer player 394Posters Tuesday July 11th The psychological impact of media on the performance of Iranian Olympic athletes’ Seyed Ahmad Ghaziasgar, Amir Hosein Memari, Mohammad Khabiri, Mohammad Hadi Hadizadeh The aim of present study was to survey the effect of media on Iranian Olympic athletes’ performance. Phenomenological approach in qualitative research was used.
In this study, five Olympic athletes that participated in Rio 2016 were interviewed by using in-depth, open-ended, and semi-structured interviews. Data was analyzed by using open and coaxial coding methods as well as hierarchical analysis. Results from data analysis showed that media (e.g., TV) could affect the athletes in two paradoxical ways: a) provided high pressure situation that reduced athletes’ performance and b) provided motivational situation that improved their performance.
Finally, based on finding researchers suggested that media’s managers and reporters must aware of psychological effect on athletes performance. Also, sport psychologists must pay attention to these factors and instruct athletes to how face and manage media pressures or aids. Keywords: psychological media roles, olympic athletes, pressure, motivation Visual control strategy by sloped and non-sloped green and skill expertise in golf putting Seungmin Lee, Dong-Wook Han The purposes of this study were to investigate performance accuracy and visual control characteristics according to breaking lie in golf putting task.
To accomplish this goal, 14 participants (7 professional golfers with more than 10 years of experience and 7 amateur golfers) were participated in the study. All participants performed 40 putts, 20 putts at straight lie and slopy lie respectively. In each type of terrain, 10 putts were executed in 1.5m and 2.5m respectively with wearing eye movement tracking system all the time.
Visual control characteristics such as quiet eye duration(QED), quiet eye dwell time(QEDT) and gaze fixation location were measured. The result is as follow: First, there was a difference in both performance accuracy and visual control characteristics according to the golf expertise. Particularly, pro golfers showed lower absolute error in both experiment conditions, distance and slope, than amateur golfers[p<.01].
Second, the QED and QEDT were found to be longer in professional golfers on straight lie putts [QED: p<.05, QEDT: p<.05] than in amateur ones. Third, there was a difference in gaze fixation location between different level of expertise [p<.05]. Especially, the professional golfers fixed their gaze location at the breaking point of putting lie, however, amateur golfers fixed their gaze location at the hole.
In conclusion, the visual control characteristics were found to be more different in slopy lie than straight lie of putts according to the golf skill level. It could be seen that performer’s visual control characteristics from the green affects the putting performance. Exploring exercise addiction experiences of fitness activity participants Seul Lee (Kookmin University) Participation in exercise is commonly known as positive behavior for physical and psychological health.
However, this does not apply to all exercise behaviors. Addictive exercise behaviors often causes harm to a person's health and well-being. The purpose of this study was to examine participants' experiences of exercise addiction.
The current study is a case study design using inductive content analysis method. The research participants were three male fitness activity participants with more than three years of experiences in exercise. They spent more than three hours a day, five times a week in a fitness exercise, and obtained high scores (70 or more) on the Korean version of exercise addiction scale.
Data were collected by 30- to 40-minute semi- structured interview, observation notes and related literature search. The semi-structured interviews consisted of questions such as the starting point of the exercise, personality traits, and mood when exercising or not exercising. Observations were recorded three times while the participants were in their fitness activity.
The collected data were transferred to a computer word processor and analyzed by triangulation to enhance the 395Posters Tuesday July 11th integrity and validity of the research data. Data were categorized to get meaningful themes. Data analysis extracted three research findings: role models in their mind, psychological characteristics, and emotional state; (a) Their role model was a strong inspiration when the participants were in exercise; (b) The three participants had Type A personality, perfectionism, and obsession with body image and dietary control; (c) The participants experienced positive emotional states such as stress relief, happiness, and ecstasy while they were immersed in exercise.
However, when they were unable to exercise, they showed withdrawal symptoms such as severe anxiety, depression, and helplessness. Keywords: exercise addiction experiences, semi-structured interview, fitness activity participant Roots to grow and wings to fly: A case study of psychosocial development of young people in a performance club setting Sergio Lara-Bercial (ICCE and Leeds Beckett University), Jim McKenna (Leeds Beckett University) The need to conduct psychosocial development research in ecologically valid settings has long been identified (Bronfenbrenner, 2008). Informed by the principles of Realist Evaluation (Pawson & Tilly, 1997), this case study examined the programme theories (PTs; context, mechanism and outcome configurations) of the environment’s stakeholders at two different points in time.
In-depth semi-structured interviews were conducted with former club athletes and their parents (n=16 ) and current coaches (n=5) In addition, two sets of focus groups were carried out with current parents (n=6) and players (n=6) at two different age groups (Under 13 and Under 15). Subsequently, a targeted in-situ examination of the setting was conducted using ethnographic methods (i.e., extensive observation, interviews, pictures, etc.). The analysis of the data revealed a broad range of developmental outcomes at self, emotional, moral, social and cognitive level.
It also established the relevance of the club context in the consecution of these outcomes (i.e., club ethos and culture, and club history and social and geographical context). Myriad interconnected and interdependent mechanisms were observed and judged to play a central part in whether positive or negative development took place. The study reaches two main conclusions.
First, that the overall functioning of the club seemed to provide players with roots to grow (i.e., structure, routine and stable relationships) and wings to fly (life-purpose, hope and a safe space to self-express). Secondly, the highly individualised journeys of young people through sport are highlighted. The outcomes of the experience varied greatly based on the internal and external assets of the young person.
The study offers a set of recommendations for practitioners and clubs to maximise the psychosocial development of their athletes. Keywords: psychosocial development, youth development, youth sport, realistic evaluation Improving decision making with video-feedback analysis (The DTM Model Applies to Tennis) Sergio Costa (University of Chieti) The decision training model (DTM) developed by Vickers (2003, 2007) explains the construction of tactical experiences, favouring the development of tactical knowledge and cognitive skills, including the training of cognitive skills involved in decision making. To do so, different tools are used, such as video feedback or questioning (Vickers, 2007).
The purpose of this poster is to explain the effect of a decision training program, using a combination of video feedback and questioning with tennis players (Gonzàlez et al., 2014). My research was done with two players of the Circolo Canottieri Roma, 17 and 20 years old, with a sporting experience of 7 and 8 years. Both had at the beginning of the work a italian ranking 2.7 and trained 5times a week for 2hours a day with the same coach.
I analyzed 3 games before the operation to compare these data with 3 games after the program analyzing the differences between correct and wrong decisions and executions. The intervention consisted in a reflexive supervision protocol through the use of video feedback of 5 matches. The program, 396Posters Tuesday July 11th inspired by the works of Vickers (2007) and Garcia-Gonzalez (2014), included analysis of six actions (3 successful and 3 bad decisions).
The videos were analyzed between 24 and 48 hours after the match, showing the development of the whole point, to give the athlete the possibility to carry out a correct and better interpretation of the context. The goal of the sport psychologist was to guide the player in the analysis of the game situation through a process of discussion and reflection, not intervening directly, trying to understand what had brought the player to that choice, using a particular schema. My results showed that the reflexive supervision protocol produced an improvement of the sports competence, the procedural knowledge, the decision-making and the sports performance, confirming the results obtained in other studies (Iglesias, 2006; Moreno 2010; Moreno et al 2008.
Keywords: tennis, decision making The influence of core affect on cycloergometer endurance performance Selenia Di Fronso, Laura Bortoli, Claudio Robazza, Maurizio Bertollo (BIND-Behavioral Imaging and Neural Dynamics Center, Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, “G. d'Annunzio” University of Chieti-Pescara) Research on health behavior has been focused on the influence of physical activity on affect, mood, and emotion (Ekkekakis, 2013). In the current study we examined the influence of core affect on cycloergometer endurance performance and on Heart Rate Variability (HRV).
Participants were 20 sport science students aged from 20 to 28 years (M=24.1, SD=2.6). Core affect was randomly elicited by two sets of positive and negative pictures chosen from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang et al., 2008) that were displayed to the participants during a cycloergometer performance. In a preliminary visit, participants rated the pictures in terms of affective valence, arousal, and dominance, and undertook a ventilatory threshold assessment.
ECG was continuously recorded before, during, and after performance using Bioharness (Zephir Technology) in order to assess the influence of positive and negative pictures on HRV indices. Perceived effort (Borg Scale, CR- 10), arousal and hedonic tone (affect grid, Russel, 1989) were collected every minute during performance. Core affect elicited idiosyncratic effects on performance.
RM ANOVA 2 groups (fit, unfit) x 2 conditions (positive, negative pictures) revealed significant differences between groups and conditions (F1,18= 3.64, p =.05). Fit participants obtained better performances when negative pictures were presented. Unfit participants obtained better performances associated with positive pictures without any change on HRV indices after performance (p = .86).
In summary, both positive and negative pictures were found to exert beneficial effects on cycle- ergometer endurance performance as a function of the participants’ physical fitness level. These findings could help coaches to support performance improvement using visual stimuli. Keywords: core affect, IAPS, HRV, endurance performance Imagery use helps attention focus and task adherence during effort: Recommendations for best practices Selen Razon, Umit Tokac, Gershon Tenenbaum Sedentariness remains high despite the well known benefits of physical activity.
This study investigated the effect of imagery use on perceived exertion (RPE), attention allocation, time on task, lactate accumulation (LA), and Heart-Rate (HR) during an exertive task. Forty five participants (22 males, 23 females) were randomly assigned to one of the three groups: control, dissociative imagery (i.e., external focus of attention), associative imagery (i.e., internal focus of attention) and performed a progressive cycling task at 10% above anaerobic threshold to volitional fatigue. RPE, attention, and HR (at 1mn intervals), and lactate levels (RPE=5, and at task completion) were assessed.
Participants using associative imagery remained longer on task (M = 420.40 seconds, SD = 344.87) relative to the ones using dissociative imagery (M = 405.80 seconds, SD = 390.26, Cohen’s d = .04), and no imagery (M =377.20, SD = 290.52, Cohen’s d = .14). Participants using associative 397Posters Tuesday July 11th imagery reported higher RPEs (M =3.60, SD= 0.312) relative to the ones using no imagery (M =3.05, SD= 0.312, Cohen’s d =0.82), and dissociative imagery (M =2.38, SD= 0.312, Cohen’s d = 4.02) resulting in a significant main effect for condition, F (2, 42) = 3.80, p = .030, ηp2 = .153. Participants using associative imagery reported higher mean of attention focus (M = 5.42 SD =.368) relative to the ones using no imagery (M = 4.02 SD =.368, Cohen’s d =3.94) and dissociative imagery (M = 3.32, SD = .368, Cohen’s d = 5.91) resulting in a significant main effect for condition, F (2, 42) = 8.43, p = .001, ηp2 = .286.
Imagery use through its capacity to modulate the attentional focus facilitates perceived exertion and time on task. Findings can help cost-effective strategies to lower perceived exertion and increase exercise adherence. Implications and recommendations will be outlined.
Keywords: imagery use, perceived exertion, attention focus, time on task, lactic acid, HR, exercise behavior Tracking activity: Evaluating perceived usefulness and effectiveness of Fitbit Selen Razon, Alex Wallace, Jorge Ballesteros, Nicole Koontz, Alex Montoye Most adults fail to meet the recommended physical activity (PA) guidelines (Pleis, Lucas, & Ward, 2009). PA tracking technologies may help increase PA behaviors because they facilitate self-monitoring and self- regulation for users (Michie et al., 2011). In response to recent calls (Cadmus-Bertram, Marcus, Patterson, Parker, & Morey, 2015; Cheon & Jarrahi, 2015), the present study surveyed opinions and attitudes on perceived usefulness and adoption of Fitbit within a university setting.
Participants (N = 371, Mage = 31.3, SD = 14.4) responded to an online survey. Analyses revealed that 97.3% of the respondents used Fitbit to track PA while some others did it to track heart rate or to compete against others. Majority of respondents (80.9%) reported increased PA levels as a result of Fitbit use and 63.5% reported that Fitbit had a very positive impact on their health.
Additionally, most respondents (88.1%) reported that they like using their Fitbit and 67.7% reported intentions for continued use in order to increase PA in the future. Respondents’ reported satisfaction with Fitbit use was significantly associated with the perceived usefulness of the Fitbit’s mobile application, perceived impact of Fitbit on their health, and intentions for future use (P < .001). Qualitative analysis revealed three major themes: (1) criticism related to use, (2) positive comments related to use, and (3) comments related to mobile application.
The results suggest that novel advances such as Fitbit could hold unique potentials to improve PA behaviors. Practical recommendations to best use Fitbit or alternative activity trackers to improve exercise behaviors will be outlined. Keywords: PA behaviors, Fitbit, best practices Coaches’ perspectives on their roles related to athletes’ personal and psychosocial development in university sport Scott Rathwell, Bradley W.
Young (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada) Evidence suggests that university sport programs can foster positive development (Deal & Camiré, 2016; Rathwell & Young, 2016). Qualitative studies on university coaches suggest that coaches may play an integral role in facilitating university athletes’ development of personal and psychosocial competencies (Jeemin, Bloom, & Bennie, 2016; Rathwell, Bloom, & Loughead, 2014; Vallée & Bloom, 2005). However, little is known about university coaches’ strategies for enhancing personal and psychosocial development.
The purpose of this study was to thoroughly understand university coaches’ views on and strategies for fostering athletes’ personal and psychosocial development. Semi-structured open-ended interviews were conducted with 14 outstanding Canadian university coaches (9 male and 5 female) who were recognized by their athletes as being individuals who invested considerable effort, and concern towards athletes’ development. Interviews were analyzed using an inductive approach (Braun & Clarke, 2006).
Coaches discussed the conditions of university sport that foster personal and psychosocial development. Specifically, coaches felt sport accelerated athletes’ development because it (a) forced athletes to interact with people who were different from themselves, (b) exposed athletes 398Posters Tuesday July 11th to a greater variety and frequency of experiences than regular university students, and (c) placed athletes in high pressure situations. Coaches also described the deliberate strategies they used to maximize their athletes’ personal and psychosocial development, including establishing support networks, building team culture, and empowering athletes to take responsibility of their own development.
Overall, the findings from this study offer one of the first accounts of university coaches’ views and strategies regarding their direct and indirect roles related to personal and psychosocial development in university sport. Keywords: coaching, positive development, emerging adulthood, university sport The utility of three questionnaire measures of physical activity in healthy young adults: Comparison with accelerometer data Schilling René, Gerber Markus (Departement of Sport, Exercise and Health, University of Basel) Accurate assessment of physical activity is essential to determine the magnitude of the health-related benefits of regular physical activity. While physical activity questionnaires are easy to use, their accuracy in comparison to objective measures has been questioned.
The purpose of the present study was to examine the utility of three questionnaire measures; a recently-developed instrument, the Simple Physical Activity Questionnaire (SIMPAQ), the Seven Day-Physical Activity Recall (7DPAR) and the short form of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ-SF). Accelerometer data was collected in 72 university students (50% females). Telephone interviews were conducted to complete the SIMPAQ and the 7DPAR.
Participants also self- completed the IPAQ-SF. The amount of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) measured using the SIMPAQ differed much less from MVPA assessed via accelerometry compared to the 7DPAR and IPAQ-SF. Significant correlations (p<.001) were found between accelerometer-based MVPA, the SIMPAQ (r=.51), the 7DPAR (r=.55) and the IPAQ-SF (r=.41).
While participants needed less time to complete the SIMPAQ (p<.001), participants tended to be more confident about the accuracy of the answers they provided on the 7DPAR (p<.01). These three questionnaire measures of physical activity performed similarly in a healthy young adult sample. The SIMPAQ can be completed in a relatively short time, which could be an advantage in clinical settings where time for physical activity assessment is limited.
Research is currently underway to validate the SIMPAQ in people with psychiatric diagnoses, an example of a highly sedentary population that was the primary target for this new instrument. Keywords: questionnaire, accerlometer, physical activity, IPAQ, SIMPAQ, 7DPAR, usability, validity Stop&Go: An intervention program to promote healthy and physically active lifestyles for patients with substance use disorders Saül Alcaraz, Marina García (Addictive Behaviours Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau) In patients with substance use disorders, exercise could help in the treatment of substance addictions. Interventions focused on promoting physical activity and healthy lifestyles for patients in residential treatment centres and ambulatory settings have been developed in the last years.
However, there is a lack of programs promoting a healthy and physically active lifestyle for patients requiring inpatient detoxification treatment. We present the development of an intervention program with such characteristics, namely “Stop&Go”. Stop&Go includes two different phases.
Phase I is aimed at understanding the variables related with adherence to healthy lifestyle interventions. Patients with substance use disorders will be invited to participate in focus groups (Study1) and to respond to questionnaires assessing variables related to exercise and healthy habits (Study2). Phase II will use the knowledge obtained in Phase I to develop and evaluate an intervention to promote healthy and physically active lifestyles for patients admitted to an inpatient detoxification centre.
We 399Posters Tuesday July 11th will develop an intervention based on Self-determination theory postulates with two axes: education and motivation. Patients will participate in four practically-oriented training sessions, focused on (1) nutrition and oral hygiene, (2) sleep habits and self-care, (3) physical activity and exercise, and (4) smoking cessation. In addition, the entire inpatient detoxification centre will be adapted to encourage autonomous physical activity and to reinforce the ideas presented in the education sessions.
The main strength of Stop&Go is the combination of perspectives included in its development (i.e., intervention led by an interdisciplinary team and based on patients’ needs). Stop&Go may help patients move towards a healthy lifestyle and thus, may bring about changes in patients’ (1) knowledge acquired, (2) variables related to healthy habits (e.g., exercise motivation) and (3) psychological well-being. Keywords: exercise motivation, psychological well-being, healthy living, physical activity, autonomy support, self-determination theory Motivational profiles for exercise of patients with substance use disorders: A preliminary cluster analysis Saül Alcaraz, Sergio Remis (Addictive Behaviours Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau) Research has shown that exercise activates reward pathways and neurochemicals that are similar to those induced by drugs of abuse, which supports exercise as a promising adjunct treatment for substance use disorders (SUDs; Linke & Ussher, 2014).
In light of this, the purpose of the present study is to identify motivational profiles for exercise in such a context. Participants were 86 patients with SUD admitted to an inpatient detoxification centre. Patients (Mage=43.48, SD=8.39; male=76.7%) were mainly admitted to the detoxification centre due to alcohol (37.2%) and cocaine (31.4%) SUDs.
Most of them (64%) considered themselves as physically active. The Behavioural Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire-3 (BREQ-3) was used to assess patients’ regulations towards exercise and the International Physical Activity Questionnaire was included to measure patients’ physical activity. A hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward’s linkage method with the squared Euclidian distance measure was initially conducted.
The six subscales of the BREQ-3 were used as clustering variables. Inspection of the results suggested that a 3-cluster solution was the most appropriate. Subsequently, a k-means cluster analysis was conducted in order to confirm the results of the previous analysis.
Three similar clusters were again identified: “high self-determined motivation/low controlled motivation” (C1; n=49), “low motivation” (C2; n=16) and “moderate self-determined and controlled motivations” (C3; n=15). The ANOVA conducted to test differences in the levels of physical activity between clusters did not show significant results, although the “low motivation” cluster clearly showed the lowest score (C1=3166.14 MET- minutes/week [MMW], C2=1603.88 MMW, C3=3791.57 MMW). Even though further analyses need to be conducted to confirm our results, the three motivational profiles identified could be useful to practitioners in order to design exercise promoting interventions as an adjunct treatment for SUDs.
Keywords: exercise, physical activity, self-determination theory, cluster analysis, motivational profile, substance use disorders How do freshmen experience a training program based on sports psychology? -A study of a female university football club- Satoshi Tominaga, Hironobu Tsuchiya (Osaka University of Health and Sport Sciences) The purpose of this study was to qualitatively examine the internal experience of freshmen with regard to a support program and conceptualize a model for this experience. Freshmen have many difficulties because they are experiencing a new environment.
Maintaining a support environment is useful for preventing non- adaptation. In this study, we provided a “Support Program for Freshmen” to help freshmen adapt to their new 400Posters Tuesday July 11th lifestyle and examined their internal experience through the program. This qualitative study was based on the research question, “How do freshmen experience the Support Program for Freshmen?” The Support Program for Freshmen was based on Structured Group Encounter programs (Kokubu, 1981), which incorporate learning of the psychological skills of Sport Mental Training, an area of Sports Psychology.
The program consisted of 8 sessions (orientation, self-analysis and goal setting, self-understanding, understanding of others, coping, self- release, discussion with an older student, and settlement). Data was collected using free-format introspective reports written by 14 freshmen (female, mean age 18.42 years, mean athletic experience 10.79 years) who participated in the Support Program for Freshmen, and was analyzed using the Grounded Theory Approach. From the results, we created 26 codes, 12 categories, 5 category groups, and conceptualized a model of the Support Program for Freshmen based on internal experience.
The model produced 5 hypothetical findings. Experiencing the Support Program for Freshmen (1) encouraged conversation between freshmen in a non-daily context, (2) was a positive experience for freshmen, (3) deepened self-understanding, (4) deepened understanding of others, and (5) provided a foundation for interpersonal relationships in the context of university life. These results suggest that the Support Program for Freshmen is an effective strategy for maintaining a support environment for freshmen.
Keywords: support program for freshmen (SPF), structured group encounter (SGE), grounded theory approach (GTA) Applicability of recovery and stress ratings among junior athletes Sarah Kölling (Ruhr University Bochum), Michael Kellmann (Ruhr University Bochum, University of Queensland) Regeneration management and regular recovery-stress monitoring play pivotal roles in junior sports, as high training volume and intensities are already standard among competitive junior athletes. The Acute Recovery and Stress Scale (ARSS) and the Short Recovery and Stress Sale (SRSS) (Kellmann et al., 2016) are eligible for this purpose. However, these were validated among adolescent athletes > 16 years.
Therefore, it was the purpose of this study to examine psychometric properties of these questionnaires to assess their applicability among 14- to 16-year-old athletes. A sample of 303 junior athletes between 14 and 16 years (n = 185 male) answered the 32-item ARSS which contains four recovery and four stress scales on a scale ranging from 0 to 6. The 8-item SRSS which represents the ARSS scales as single items were rated on the same scale.
Analyses involved internal consistency (Cronbach’s α), discriminatory power (r[it]) and correlations between corresponding ARSS scales and SRSS items. ARSS scales Physical Performance Capability (α = .84), Mental Performance Capability (α = .79), Overall Recovery (α = .79), Muscular Stress (α = .84), Lack of Activation (α = .73), and Overall Stress (α = .79) showed acceptable to good internal consistency, whereas Emotional Balance (α = .60) and Negative Emotional State (α = .66) were below that threshold. Satisfactory discriminatory power ranged between r[it] = .33 to .74.
Internal consistency of SRSS-Recovery (α =.75) and SRSS-Stress (α = .70) were acceptable. ARSS scales and SRSS items correlated between r[s] = .50 and .65. The results indicate some difficulties in participants’ understanding of single items which might reduce the scales’ reliability.
Emotional Balance and Negative Emotional State need modification, especially before these questionnaires can be applied among younger athletes (10 to 14 years). This underlines the importance of youth-adequate tools for sustainable and practical use in junior sports. Keywords: monitoring, regeneration management, questionnaire, psychometrics Self-regulation and wellbeing of retired football athletes Sara da Silva (School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK), Sasa Elizabeth Vann (School of Kinesiology, Ball State University, US), Patrícia Coutinho (Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal), Jean Marie Place (Department of Nutrition & Health Science, Ball State University, US) 401Posters Tuesday July 11th Across their life span, individuals encounter optimal age-periods for achieving certain goals (Heckhausen et al., 2010), such as to achieve expertise in a given career domain.
Once those optimal age-periods have passed and investment in a given goal is no longer possible, developmental regulation theories claim that disengagement from the goal and reengagement in alternative goals will contribute to an adaptive development (Haase et al., 2013). The present study explored the regulatory strategies used by retired elite football-athletes. We applied an interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) to semi-structured interviews conducted separately with four football ex-athletes.
Our findings show that participants found it difficult to disengage from their career goal as football athletes and this had a negative impact on their wellbeing. The main reasons stated for finding it difficult to disengage from their careers as athletes were the reduction of sense of identity and high intensity emotions, the lower level of responsibility when compared to being a coach, and loss of social recognition. Additionally, while participants did invest in alternative life-goals linked to the football field (e.g, becoming a coach), they did not consider these goals to be as fulfilling as their career as athletes.
These findings suggest athletes approaching retirement might benefit from support interventions since this process seems to have a negative impact on their wellbeing. These interventions should aim at helping ex-athletes to reframe the meaning of retirement, and to identify new life-goals that could be equally fulfilling. Keywords: ex-athletes, football, developmental regulation theories, wellbeing Drive for muscularity, drive for thinness, attitudes and intentions to use substances to improve performance and appearance in students of sport sciences Sara Agnello, Luca Mallia (Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico”), Fabio Lucidi (Department of Social and Developmental Psychology, ‘La Sapienza’ University of Rome), Arnaldo Zelli (Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome “Foro Italico”) Previous studies have been investigating the relationship between personal dispositions towards their own bodies and intentions to use PAES in adolescent athletes of different sport levels (e.g.
Zelli et al.,2010). These studies have shown that for both males and females,the drive for muscularity (DM) and the drive for thinness (DT) positively predict through time,and in a direct way,the intention to use PAES. Moreover,only the DM have an indirect effect on the intention,through its effect on the attitude towards this use (eg.
Zelli et al.,2010). The aim of this study is to test the same model in a group of university students of sport sciences,analyzing possible differences between males and females.Two-hundred and forty-three students of sports sciences (59.3% males)from the State University of Rome "Foro Italico" (mean age=22.9 years,SD=3.0) carried out an online questionnaire including:a) the Drive for muscularity Scale(α=.95);b) the EDI-2 Drive for Thinness sub-scale(α=.88);c) a scale of positive attitudes towards the use of PAES (α=.95); and d) a measure of the intention to use PAES in the next three months (α=.97). Multi-group Structural Equation Models (SEM) were used to test across gender a model hypothesizing that DM and DT have a direct and an indirect effect,through their relationship with attitudes,on the intentions to use PAES.The results showed that the model has good fit indices(Chi-square (135)=377.77, p<.001,CFI=.95, TLI=.94; RMSEA=.111; SRMR=.063).
However, the pattern of relationships quite differs across gender. In males and females, the DM has a direct effect on the intention (β=.32 and β=.52, p<.001).On the contrary only for males the DM presents an indirect effect on the intention (αβ=15; p<.001), through its positive relationship with the attitudes (β=.28, p<.001). Overall, the study results show the fundamental role, also in students of sport sciences, of the DM, then it can be considered one of the main factors on which to intervene in a preventive way in the use of PAES.
Keywords: body image, PAES 402Posters Tuesday July 11th Motivational climate and the intention to continue / drop-out and burnout in two moments of a season Santiago Troncoso, Orlando Reyes, Alejandra Rodriguez, Nallely Castillo (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), Isabel Balaguer (Universitat de Valencia), Jeanette López-Walle (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León) Based on Duda’ proposal (2013) on the coach-created motivational climate and empirical work, this study examines the effect of Empowering/Disempowering Climate on the beginning of a season (T1), and the intention to continue/drop-out and burnout, at the middle of a season (T2) in two groups, one of them trained with Empowering Coaching programme (EC; Duda, 2013). Research informed that empowering dimensions linked to adaptive responses to sport, like persistence (Pelletier et al., 2001). Disempowering dimensions predicted more maladaptive responses such as intentions to dropout sport (Sarrazin, Vallerand, Guillet, Pelletier, & Cury, 2002).
The Empowering Coaching™ education programme (Duda, 2013) comprises of an interactive workshop that aims to have coaches become more aware of the nature of and ways to enhance quality motivation in their players. Six soccer academies participated in the study, three in the experimental group (EG) and three in the control group (CG). A total of 111 boys soccer players (Mage = 12.45; SD = .95), with a three-day weekly training average (SD = .93) filled the questionnaires at the beginning and the middle of a season: Empowering and Disempowering Motivational Climate Questionnaire (EDMC-Q); Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ); and Intention to continue/drop-out (INT-C/D).
The results showed adequate fiability of the instruments used: In T1 the CG and EG of Empowering Climate (ECL) and Disempowering Climate (DCL) -C, INT- climate in T1 predicts positively the intention to drop- L of T1 -.63, p < .01). On the other hand, in the CG, the ECL in T1 predicts negatively the intention to drop- -.54, p < .05). Keywords: Empowering Coaching™, motivational climate, intention to continue/drop-out, burnout Helping teachers overcome negligence in elementary physical education Sangmo Han (Gyeongin National University of Education) The purpose of this study was to identify the negligence factors in teaching elementary physical education among teachers and to describe how those are overcome through CoP program (Community of practice program).
The participants in this study were three elementary school teachers who taught physical education to 4th graders. In-depth interviews, participant observation and documents were employed in order to collect data. Constant comparison method were used for data analysis.
Research findings indicated that teachers had low level of motivation to teach(more teachers were reluctant to teach physical education). CoP(community of practice) program established to help teachers cope with this phenomenon was applied to solve problems found in this study, which included 'reforming the curriculum', 'improving teaching environment', and 'enhancing the professionalism'. The program helped teachers increase their self-efficacy on their physical education lesson and prepare themselves for physical lessons more faithfully.
The CoP program has created a positive environment that was not only preventing negative group-thinking but also practicing good physical education lessons. Keywords: elementary school teacher, physical education, community of practice The predictability of big-five personality on coaching efficacy among coaches San-Fu Kao (National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, ROC), Wei-Chieh Tseng (Nataional Taiwan Sport University, Taiwan, ROC), Chien-Ming Hsu (National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, ROC) 403Posters Tuesday July 11th The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship between big-five personality and coaching competency. This study examined the five subscales of Big-Five Mini-Markers (BFMM), openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and emotional stability and their predictability of the four subscales of the Coaching Efficacy Scale (CES), game strategy efficacy (GES), motivation efficacy (ME), technique efficacy (TE), and character building efficacy (CBE).
Participants were high school and university coaches (N = 217; male = 142, female = 75) from Taiwan. The coaches were administered the BFMM and CES. Regression analyses showed openness and conscientiousness positively predicted to GES, ME, and TE.
While conscientiousness and agreeableness positively predicted to CBE. These results are in accordance with the frameworks of personality and coaching efficacy within sport. Keywords: personality, sources of coaching efficacy, coaching education Unique case study to evaluate EMDR model efficacy on improving pianist performance skills and competition anxiety reduction Sandra Nogues Recasens Sport psychology is about human performance.
Activities were high performing skills are needed expose the athlete to a physical, mental and emotional impact. Musicians and athletes have the same commitment: training and using their mind and body to perform. We brought this case study to proof the effectiveness on using Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (E.M.D.R.).
Model for improving performance. Specially on this case, competition anxiety and pianist skills' activation. Based on a multi-procedural approach: the High Risk Model of Threat Perception (Wickramasekera, 1988) and the E.M.D.R Model intervention (F.
Shapiro, 1979). Out methodology consists on pre and post data recollection for qualitative and quantitative results comparison: i.e. Neurocognitive test, self-perception evaluation on variables focus, comfort and control, pre- anxiety response, levels of induced self-pressure and negative cognitions.
Qualitative and quantitative coach’s’ evaluation on negative and positive body language, repetitions, musical reading accuracy, technical consistency, clarity and organization on execution. Besides, variabHRV monitoring during trainings and during EMDR intervention. A 10-day EMDR intervention with Basic protocol and EMDR Endurance Protocol (EMDR Spanish Association).
Our subject experienced positive changes in all variables measured. Pre and post percentage data comparison was higher. Post intervention variables had positively changed.
Increased positive self-perception, as focus of attention and quality of practice, also positive total percentage change on all variables measured, including quantitative SDNN values and level of pressure, which was reduced. Her psychological and physiological response to stress pre and during competition has reduced. She experienced less inside pressure, negative fears and cognitions, and disappeared her anxiety physical reactions, leading her to perform better.
Keywords: E.M.D.R. model, pianist skills performance, competition anxiety, cognitive believes, physiological response Bullying among schoolchildren from the municipalities of Novo Cabrais, Vale do Sol and Vera Cruz, RS, Brazil Sandra Mara Mayer, Heloisa Elesbão (UNISC) Debates about violence and aggression are present nowadays, especially in the school environment. School violence in Brazil is not a recent problem, but the aggravating issue is the repetition in which these acts are happening.
When it occurs repetitively, it is called bullying. This violence is practiced by one or more students against others, generating pain and anxiety in the victim. To identify the number of students who have been assaulted and to verify the form of aggression reported by the students from the 6th to the 9th year of schools in the municipalities of Novo Cabrais, Vale do Sol and Vera Cruz, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, 404Posters Tuesday July 11th Brazil.
The sample consisted of 564 students, of which 236 were female and 328 were male, aged 10 to 17 years. The data were collected through the Olweus questionnaire, adapted by Mayer. Statistical analysis was performed in the SPSS 22.0 program (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
In Novo Cabrais 36,4% of students say they have already been assaulted, in Vale do Sol 30,43%, in Vera Cruz 32,54%. In all three municipalities, the main form of aggression reported was verbal, Novo Cabrais (12,1%), Vale do Sol (30,43%) and Vera Cruz (40,82%). In this research we concluded that a high number of students suffered aggressions.
Based on the results found, it is necessary our reflection about how we could to try to change these data. On November 6, 2015, Law 13.185 was approved, called "Antibullying Law", so all schools are developing public policies to try to minimize this issue. With the approval of this law we will seek ways to in order to reduce the rates of school violence, with education as the main mechanism.
Keywords: school children, aggressiveness, school Sheltered children and adolescents: a study of the motor development of the participants of the Copame Project of the University of Santa Cruz do Sul - RS - Brazil Sandra Mara Mayer, Heloisa Elesbão (UNISC) The shelter situation in Brazil is a measure of judicial protection for children and adolescents who are in situations of social vulnerability. However, this is still today, with paradoxical functioning and management policies, because, at the same time as it protects, it segregates and excludes its sheltered from the social context. The Copame Project is a partnership between the Community Association Pro - Amparo do Minor (Copame) and the University of Santa Cruz do Sul (UNISC).
It counts with the participation of scholars and professors from several areas of knowledge, Physical Education, Psychology and Dentistry. With the intention of promoting recreational and recreational activities, stimulating care aspects psychomotor, affective and well- being of the sheltered.To verify the Motor Age of those housed in the aspects of Fine Motor (IM1) and Global Motricity (IM2), comparing the pretest and post-test after the interventions with Physical Education classes. The sample of this study consisted of 9 individuals, 5 males and 4 females, aged between 63 months (5 years and 3 months) and 153 months (12 years and 9 months).
For the evaluation, the Rosa Neto Motor Development Scale tests were used. Motor ages Fine Motor (IM1) and Global Motor (IM2) were obtained through the sum of the positive values in each of the tests for each aspect, being expressed in months. Statistical analysis was performed with the SPSS 22.0 program (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA).
In the pre-test the IM1 had the mean of 58,6±60.0 months and in the post-test 76±22,4; In IM2 in the pre-test the mean was 80,0±72,0 months and in the post-test 100,0±18,0. There was improvement in the IM1 and IM2 aspects in the post-test in relation to the pre-test and it was observed an improvement in the emotional and relational issues of individuals. Keywords: motor development; motor deficit; social vulnerability Exploring the subjective experiences of amateur club golfers during competitive performance Martin Ridley, Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, UK) Kimiecik and Stein (1992) claimed that the subjective experiences of sport performers are often neglected by sport psychology researchers due to a predominant focus on performance outcomes.
This study used the experience sampling methodology as described by Kimiecik and Stein (1992) by adapting their questionnaire for golfers to complete during a competitive round of golf. Six male adult amateur club golfers with handicaps ranging between 3 and 13 (mean 7.5) rated their feelings using a Likert scale before and after each hole. These golfers were also asked to declare their scoring goal for each hole and the score that they had achieved.
The handicap system for golf is intended to improve the experience of participation and is based on a golfer’s 405Posters Tuesday July 11th potential rather than their mean score. This group of golfers had a mean scoring goal for their rounds (cumulative goals from each hole) of seven shots better than their mean handicap, but actually scored five shots worse than their mean handicap. The findings from the questionnaire showed strong correlations (0.7 and above) between key facets of positive subjective experience, for example ratings of enjoyment after a hole had strong correlations with focus, performance, feeling in control, decision making, satisfaction and competitiveness during performance.
Also of interest was that their subjective rating for their performance only had a moderate correlation with their scoring outcome (-0.6). Kimiecik and Stein (1992) stated that to achieve optimum experience there needs to be (among other things) a harmony between the perceived challenge and skill level, a focus on the task and a feeling of being in control. To improve golfers’ experiences of playing golf, researchers and practitioners could focus more on golfers’ mental approach and subjective experiences rather than just on technical performance outcomes.
Keywords: golf, experience sampling, scoring goal, enjoyment Anxiety, self-confidence, and performance in football players: A mixed-method approach Tom Penman, Stefan Koehn (Liverpool Hope University, School of Health Sciences, UK) To date there is little research that specifically applies to state anxiety and performance analysis. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the influence of anxiety and self-confidence on performance among amateur footballers. The methodology of this study employed qualitative, quantitative, and performance analysis.
The Competitive State Anxiety Inventory- 2 (CSAI-2; Martens et al., 1990), performance analysis and semi-structured interviews were utilized in order to assess the different psychological states before, during, and following performances. Eleven amateur football players completed the CSAI-2 45 minutes prior to kick-off during their footballing season in the southwest of England, UK. Results from the CSAI-2 indicated that none of the associations were significant yet the correlation between cognitive anxiety and performance was in the predicted direction.
However, interviews results provided additional information on the CSAI-2 findings. It became apparent during the study that the use of three measurements in the form of CSAI-2, performance analysis and semi-structured interviews were beneficial as the CSAI-2 wasn’t a strong enough predictor alone. This study does however provide support for past research that states moderate anxiety and high self-confidence predict optimal performance.
Future studies should explore how symptoms should be managed where psychological skills training are enforced with a direct focus on increasing self-confidence and reducing anxiety levels. Keywords: football, CSAI-2, interviews, performance analysis Differences in general intelligence and visual memory among middle aged housewives of varied lifestyle Sanchita Baruah, Jayashree Acharya, Shubhda Bhosle (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) As people age, they change in a myriad of ways, both biological and psychological. Age related changes are not uniform across individuals.
Cognitive function tends to decline with advancing age. The basic cognitive functions most affected by age are attention and memory (Glisky, 2007). Women with higher levels of physical activity were less likely to develop cognitive decline (Yaffe et al 2001).
The objective of the present investigation is to identify differences in general intelligence and visual memory among middle aged housewives of varied lifestyle i.e regular exerciser (who are involved in free hand exercise including walking daily for 45 mins), casual exerciser (once in a week for more than 2hours ) and non exerciser (no exercise at all) . The subjects were voluntary participant in the age group of 45-55 years with mean and SD of 43.81± 3.58. Each group had 10 subjects each The test on general intelligence (Adaptive Matrices test [AMT]) and visual 406Posters Tuesday July 11th memory (VISGED) was conducted in Vienna Test System.ANOVA reveals a significant difference among the three groups.
The obtained value for general intelligence is (F [2, 27] =13.25, p=.00) and visual memory is (F [2, 27] = 13.29, p=.00). The post hoc test shows significant difference between groups who performs regular exercise and casual exercise; between regular exercise group and non exerciser in both general intelligence and visual memory. Casual exerciser and non exerciser did not show any significant difference.
A Meta analysis was done by Sofi et al. (2010) and found high level of physical activity was significantly protected against cognitive decline. Keywords: general intelligence, visual memory, regular exerciser, casual exerciser, non exerciser Antecedents, characteristics and consequences of psychological momentum: a taiwanese athletes’ perspective Sam H.
H. Hsu , Frank J.H. Lu, Hong-Yu Liu (Chinese Culture University, Taiwan) Psychological momentum (PM) is a phenomenon that is commonly reported by athletes, coaches and commentators characterized by players/teams gaining dominance for a period of the game (Hartley, 2010; Jackson & Mosurski 2005; Jones, & Harwood, 2008).
Still, there is lack of research by holistically examine its antecedents, characteristics and consequences from different culture. To examine athletes’ experiences of PM by holistic perspective. Five different elite athletes (pool, track and field, volleyball, table- tennis), participated in-depth interviews, and their media reports, personal documents, and field notes were also collected.
Ground theory method (Strauss & Corbin, 1986) was used to analyze related documents and transcribed verbatim, and to produce meaningful results. Athletes’ personality, motivation, and external social reinforcements are significant triggers leading to PM as previous literature (e.g., Jones, & Harwood, 2008 ), but some are different such as winning drive and psychological edge. The characteristics of PM includes changes in the athletes’ sense of control, confidence, optimism, motivation and energy as current literature reported (e.g., Crust & Nesti 2006).
Consequences of PM includes winning the game, increasing motivation, confidence, and resilience. Findings are worthy forwarding to athletes, coaches and practitioners in order to gain PM frequently. Future research directions are also suggested.
Keywords: psychological energy, mindset, winning drive, competitiveness The role of perceived autonomy support on athlete-coach relationship and enjoyment in adolescent soccer players Safter Elmas, Sevim FiDan, F. Hülya Asçi (Marmara University) The primary aim of this study was to examine if perceived autonomy support predicts athlete-coach relationship and enjoyment in male soccer players. Second aim was to examine if there is difference in perceived autonomy support, coach-athlete relationship and enjoyment based on age.
Coach-Athlete Relationship Questionnaire, Perceived Autonomy Support Scale-Coach Form and Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale-Short Form were administered to 203 adolescent male soccer players (Mage=13.26;SD=1.23). Hierarchical regression analysis was conducted to test the role of perceived autonomy support on subscales of coach-athlete relationship and enjoyment. Year of sport experience and age were entered to analysis in Step 1.
In Step 2, perceived autonomy support was included to the model. Further, ANOVA and MANOVA were conducted to test the difference in perceived autonomy support, enjoyment and coach-athlete relationship by age. Hierarchical regression analysis showed that year of sport experience and age only explained 5% of commitment in Step 1.
In Step 2, while perceived autonomy support predicted all subscales of coach-athletes relationship and explained 43% of commitment, 47% of closeness, 38% of complementarity, it did not predict enjoyment (p>0.05). The perceived autonomy support was positively correlated with commitment (β=0.66), closeness (β=0.70), complementarity (β=0.63). Moreover, ANOVA analysis showed no significant difference in 407Posters Tuesday July 11th enjoyment by age (p>0.05), but perceived autonomy support differed (p<0.05).
MANOVA analysis showed significant difference in coach-athlete relationship by age (Pillai’s Trace=0.26;F(12,588)=4.71;p<0.05). Follow up univariate analysis indicated age difference in all subscales of coach-athlete relationship (p<0.05). As a result, perceived autonomy support predicts the quality of coach-athlete relationship in adolescent soccer players.
Further, perceived autonomy support, closeness, commitment and complementarity decrease as age increases. Keywords: perceived autonomy support, coach-athlete relationship, enjoyment Expertise of leading female tennis athletes – From the perspective of deliberate practice/deliberate play – Ryoko Takemura (Sophia University), Takaaki Kato (Keio University) The aim of this study was to clarify the process though which leading female tennis athletes gain expertise from deliberate practice (DPR), which first requires high concentration and effort for performance improvement, and from deliberate play (DPL), which attaches importance to experiencing enjoyment in the early period of learning. In recent years, review studies have reported that a high proportion of factors are not explainable by DPR, indicating the need for a new approach.
In this study, in addition to a survey on the quality and quantity of practice, survey items were drawn up from keywords presumed to have an important connection to the process of gaining expertise in order to identify other influencing factors. The subjects of the survey were ten female professional tennis players. The results revealed that, in the categories that involved the use of DPL/DPR over time and Developmental model of sport participation (Cote et al., 2007), nine players displayed a disposition for early stage specialization.
Of those nine players, six had more than 10,000 accumulated hours before becoming a professional, and three had less than 9,000 hours. Moreover, in the early stage specialization type, enjoyment of tennis as a game had been maintained to a high degree in the early period of learning. This was also observed in the transitional type.
Furthermore, one transitional type player who had transitioned to tennis after having experienced various competitions and games had less than 4,000 accumulated hours when she became a professional player. Analysis of the family/coach types revealed that both strict and receptive characteristics were noted among parents and coaches, which appears to be connected to the maintenance of a player's motivation. Finally, common items were demonstrated with each player's distinguishing skill trends, and the possibility of a new interpretation was explained.
Keywords: expertise, female athlete, tennis Searching strategy in performing response selection task under time constraints Ryoji Onagawa, Masahiro Shinya, Kazutoshi Kudo (Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo) Decision making in sport is often performed under severe time pressure. For example, when a football player searches for pass courses, s/he decides whether to pass to a pre-planned pass target, or to spend more time to search for better options. In this situation, s/he needs to consider the trade-off on spending time to search: increase of gain by finding better option, and decrease of the gain by the pass target being covered by defenders while searching.
Here, we developed a response selection task that mimics decision-making under time constraints, and investigated whether people can optimize their strategies under the time constraints. Eleven healthy graduate students chose one of four targets, each of them had different values (two, four, six or eight), presented on a screen. Three time constraints were set by using fast, middle, and slow discount function, in which the target’s value decreased linearly to zero in 800, 1200, and 1600 ms after each participant’s simple reaction time, respectively.
If a participant spent 400 ms for searching and chose a target of six in the middle condition, s/he got four points (target value six was discounted by 33% (400/1200 ms)). Expected score was modeled as a function of time and optimal timing to maximize the expected score was 408Posters Tuesday July 11th estimated. We then compared the observed participants' response timing with the estimated optimal timing.
Based on the model, the participants should take enough time to search for the high valued target in the slow condition, which was exactly what the participants did. In contrast, in the middle and fast condition, estimated optimal strategy was to spend limited time for searching target and respond at earlier timing, whereas the participants spent more time. These results suggest that it is difficult to optimize their strategy under severe temporal constraints, at least without sufficient practice.
Keywords: decision-making, statistical decision theory, visuomotor control, time pressure, optimality Factors influencing on exercise habits after having one’s first child - Perspective of the value consciousness of sports and purposes of playing sports - Ryo Konno (J.F. Oberlin University) The purpose of this research is to assess factors influencing on exercise habits after having one’s first child from the perspective of one’s value consciousness of sports and purposes of playing sports. The participants were 492 middle-aged persons.
The survey contents were the value consciousness of sports, current and previous exercise experiences, and purposes of exercising. The characteristics of participants were 226 males and 266 females (the average age = 50.1 years old, SD = 4.09, age range = 38 – 65). The factor analysis on the value consciousness of sports (principal factor analysis, promax rotation) produced 3 factors: fair play, competence, cooperativeness, and their reliabilities and validities were assessed.
Exercise habits were classified into 3 groups: high exercise habit group, low exercise habit group, and no exercise habit group. Both high and low exercise habit groups were further divided into 2 subgroups: 1) constant exercise group, those who continue to do regular exercise even after having their first children, 2) stopped exercise group, those who used to do regular exercise after completing their highest level of education but stopped doing so after having their first children. The results showed that men in the constant exercise groups had significantly greater value consciousness of sports than men in the stopped exercise groups, but women in these two groups did not show any difference on their value consciousness of sports.
For both men and women, the constant exercise groups and the stopped exercise groups had significant differences in their purposes of playing sports. Keywords: exercise habit, after having one’s first child, the value consciousness of sports, purposes of playing sports Stress-mindset, personal stress and psychological well-being: a multi-study paper Ross Wadey (St Mary's University, Twickenham), Chris Wagstaff (University of Portsmouth), Stephen Mellalieu, Rich Neil (Cardiff Metropolitan University), Brendan Cropley (University of South Wales) Stress continues to receive significant research attention in the field of sport psychology (e.g., Neil et al., 2007; Fletcher & Arnold, 2017). Yet, while we have developed a more nuanced understanding of how athletes transact with the demands they encounter in competitive and organisational contexts, limited attention has been devoted to personal stress.
In addition, researchers interested in stress in sport have typically focused on providing recommendations to eliminate or reduce the negative outcomes associated with stress; ignoring the possibility that stress can have beneficial outcomes for athletes’ psychological well-being (PWB; Collins & MacNamara, 2012; Howells & Fletcher, 2015). Study 1 aimed to explore the relationship between personal stress and PWB. Participants (N=214; Mage=24.3 years) completed two measures: personal stress and Psychological Well-Being–Posttraumatic Changes Questionnaire (PWB-PCQ; Joseph et al., 2012).
Data was analysed using Pearson product-moment correlation. Findings revealed a positive relationship between positive stress and PWB. Despite this novel and significant finding, we know little about who is more likely to experience greater PWB.
Study 2 aimed to examine if stress-mindset moderates this relationship, which is defined as the extent to which one holds the belief that stress has enhancing consequences (Crum et al., 2013). 409Posters Tuesday July 11th Participants (N=241; Mage=23.2) completed three inventories: personal stress, PWB-PCQ (Joseph et al., 2012), and Stress Mindset Measure (Crum et al., 2013). Data was analysed using hierarchical multiple regression.
Findings revealed that stress-mindful moderated the relationship between personal stress and PWB. That is, athletes with a stronger belief that stress has enhancing qualities were more likely to experience greater PWB following personal stress. These findings have important implications for athlete well-being.
Future research should examine how stress-mindset leads to improved PWB. Keywords: stress, well-being, growth, mindset Performance optimization in competitive exams of Clinical Psychology: case study Rosana Llames (University of Seville), Ana García-Dantas (University Hospital), Juan Tomás Escudero (Universidad de las Islas Baleares) There is ample evidence in the literature on the importance of psychological preparation for improvement in performance. If we take the definition of competition "test or set of tests in which a series of opponents struggle to win" and apply it to a CE (Competitive Exam), we understand that the opponents requirements are similar to an athlete’s psychological demands, however we have not found studies about the efficacy of psychological intervention in CE.
This study aims to assess the efficacy of a psychological intervention in the preparation of a CE (study/examination) from the same treatment that would be applied in a case of preparation for an athlete in competition (training/competition). The subject is 26 years old with a PhD in psychology, who was presented, for the second time, PIR (clinical psychology) opposition. Intervention was initiated on the basis of the demand of the subject "to the test in psychological conditions that favoured the maximum performance".
It took place during 11 weeks prior to the exam, with a weekly session. Was divided into three phases: 1) evaluation and goal-setting; (2) cognitive-behavioral intervention to improve study habits and reduce obsessive negative thoughts related to the outcome. (3) elaboration of competitive routine (location of exam).
We evaluated the efficacy by means of qualitative interview pre and post intervention. The preliminary phase showed high levels of activation, difficulties in planning that interfered with proper habits of resting and feeding, and catastrophic obsessive thoughts related to the outcome of the opposition. At the end of the intervention the applicant presented an optimal psychological state with a regulated routine, reduction of obsessive thoughts, greater self-confidence and optimum activation levels to perform properly.
She passed the CE. As conclusion we recommend psychological intervention in candidates of CE in order to optimize performance. Keywords: sport psychology, competitive examination, performance, clinical psychology preparation Progress and prospect of student water safety education Rong Fan, Yun Li, Hui Zhang, Bin Wang, Shi Luo Water safety education is universally accepted the best way to prevent drowning accidents.
It is crucial for school safety education. After more than ten years study and practice, foreign water safety education has made great progress, however, the high rate of drowning accidents reflects the importance for further study about water safety education. This study discusses the concept ,content and mechanism of water safety education.
The development of water safety skill has experience a series of stages, which include single swimming skill instruction, the transformation from swimming skill to water safety skill, and the modeling of water safety skill. Scholars have been trying to define water safety education from the instrumental perspective. Water safety skill and knowledge are developed constantly in order to improve students' water safety attitude and to reduce the influencing mechanism of water high risk behavior, which leads to a system of water safety education that needs to be completed.
Literature review show that water safety education is realized through the command of water safety skill and knowledge. Students' water safety attitude and their 410Posters Tuesday July 11th water high risk behavior are educated by water safety education. Therefore, water safety education is no longer restricted to instrumental perspective such as "survive, fitness or competition".
It is very necessary to switch the educational concept to establish the integrated educational mode such as "skill, attitude, and behavior". Future study is suggested to change from practical use(lifesaving) perspective to mode construction: first the student water safety education mode is to be established as a foundation; second, water safety education experimental test need to be considered as method; third, water safety education hierarchical test standard is to be completed. The scientific water safety education mode is expected to be established in the future.
Keywords: water safety education, mode, student, research progress, prospect What is next? How young athletes experience the youth academy Rodrigo Salomão, Cristiano Barreira (University of São Paulo) In this research, the sport is approached as a cultural practice capable of mobilizing the subjectivation of its practitioners. Thus, young athletes compound their existential horizon by significantly considering their sports practice.
Situated on career transition and aiming to understand how these athletes go through decisive moments and engage in sports activity, the purpose of this study is to identify and understand the horizon of lived experiences by young athletes belonging to young academy of two sports modalities (basketball and athletics). The phenomenological psychology of sport was adopted as a method. Through its rigorous process of data collection and analysis, the results can reach a descriptive character, based on phenomenological interviews and intentional cross.
Therefore, it was made and transcribed 12 interviews, 6 of each modality. The results were described in 5 categories, such as existential decision, restrictions, commitment, values, athletic career and sports culture. They address essential and predominant aspects among practitioners of these modalities, as the constant tension of negotiation that circumscribes the daily life of these young athletes by circulating among commitments, training and leisure.
This is a balanced approach to how conflicts, values and existential definitions appear decisive in these transition horizons. Consequently, it is possible to recognize and understand the structural elements of this experience that unfold essential psychological meanings by which these athletes will existentially guide themselves in their future. Admitting practical applications of the results, we highlight the relevant contribution to the technical committee that works with this public and especially sports psychologists who, based on this work, will be able to guide their interventions, taking into account lived and contextualized experiences in the youth sports universe.
Keywords: young academy, sport psychology, phenomenological psychology of sport, youth sport Psychology of sport and mental health: An experience with body practices Rodrigo Salomão, Telma Matos, Adriele Ishimoto, Luiza Figueiredo, Karoline Michalski, Cristiano Barreira (University of São Paulo) When reflecting on the relationship between mental health and quality of life, it is possible to consider benefits in several dimensions, such as physical, psychological and social rehabilitation, general improvement of physical fitness, valuable gains of independence and self-confidence by the realization of daily life activities, in addition to improve the self-concept and self-esteem of the practitioners. Taking into account mental health and quality of life, the regular practice of physical activity for psychiatric patients is much relevant. The purpose of this intervention was to offer corporal practices, based on a phenomenological perspective in Psychopathology and Sport Psychology, as a promotion and health resource aligned to the therapeutic proposal of the Community Group of Mental Health of the Day Hospital (HD) of Clinical Hospital of the Medical School of Ribeirão Preto – University of São Paulo.
The patients are usually sedentary and complain about the side effects of the medication, such as muscle stiffness and weight gain. Phenomenological studies on the 411Posters Tuesday July 11th corporeality in the varied psychopathological conditions should favor the recognition of the experiences to be unfold by these practices, aiming an integral improvement of the patients. Intervention activities occurred over 12 months, attending on average 16 psychiatric patients of the HD.
A Physical Education professional (PE) taught the practical activities, also followed by three monitors (PE), and a Sport Psychologist. A phenomenological perspective in Psychopathology and Sport Psychology guided the methodological procedures. Aligned with a therapeutic work, these corporal practices seek to favor social support and inclusion, and the activities are surrounded by the valorization of subjectivity, mental health and personal experience.
Keywords: body practices, psychology, phenomenology, sport psychology Child sport cohesion questionnaire: Cross-cultural adaptation and content validity to brazilian portuguese Rodrigo Pieri (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro), Adriana Lacerda (Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro), Pedro Pires (Universidade Federal Fluminense), Alberto Filgueiras (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro), Livia Meireles (Universidade Federal do Piaui), Angela Donato (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro) Cohesion is a theory construct that has been studied in different contexts for some decades and group cohesion is an idea that tries to understand the kind of relationship established among individuals. Inside sports, cohesion can influence performance, communication, well-being and possible cases of drop-out. Since 1985 four instruments were developed in Canada to assess cohesion through sports team in different ages - Group Environment Questionnaire (1985), Physical Activity Group Environment Questionnaire (2000), Youth Sport Environment Questionnaire (2009) and Child Sport Cohesion Questionnaire (2013).
In children’s sports the development of group cohesion is pivotal to promote pleasure and well-being during practice. In this sense, the present study aims to present the cross-cultural adaptation process and content validity assessment of the Child Sport Cohesion Questionnaire to Brazil. This Canadian instrument assesses cohesion in 9-to-12 years old teams in two dimensions: social and task.
The final version of the measurement, named in Brazilian Portuguese as Questionário de Coesão no Esporte Infantil, was produced by the following methodology: translation, synthesis, back-translation and content validity assessment by 5 specialist judges in the field in two criteria: pertinence towards the psychological construct and semantic understanding. During the process there was a constant concern about the cultural differences of both country involved, instrument original and adapted. The Content Validity Coefficient was used to measure judge’s evaluations toward the two criteria.
Results showed items adequacy regarding understanding (,90) and pertinence (,90) with two exceptions. The difficult in the instrument’s adaptation was discussed in the lights of cohesion and group dynamics theories and both items were reviewed. It was concluded that the Brazilian translation of the questionnaire was adequate to be used in the target population to be validated.
Keywords: cohesion, adaptation, content validity, sport, psychology, children Burnout in professional female soccer players Roberto Ruiz-Barquín, Silvia María Bartolomé García, Ricardo de la Vega (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid) Burnout in sport has been analyzed mainly from a cross-sectional perspective, although longitudinal studies have increased in recent years (Cresswell & Eklund, 2006; Quested & Duda, 2011). The objectives of the present study are: describe the characteristics of the Burnout in two differential moments of the season in professional and semi-professional female soccer players; analyze if there are differences of Burnout and the symptoms that compose it in the two different moments of the season. The sample is made up of 36 female soccer players aged between 16 and 31 years old (M=20.50; SD=3.68) belonging to two teams of a Professional 412Posters Tuesday July 11th Soccer Club of the Autonomous Community of Madrid.
The first team (n = 19) plays in «1st female division» and the second (n = 17) in «1st National». The instruments administered were: Personal and sport data questionnaire (Ruiz-Barquín et al., 2010) and the Burnout Inventory in Sportsmen (BDI, Garcés, 1999, 2004). The evaluations were carried out in February and May of 2015.
The Wilcoxon W test and the Contingency Coefficient were applied in the statistical analysis. Burnout has been analyzed by prevalence analysis, based on the Total Burnout Index (TBI), and based on the "risk levels" associated with Burnout. The analyses show a low Burnout rate both in the first moment (5.6%) and in the second moment (2.8%).
However, there are significant changes in Burnout symptoms at both times, as well as a trend towards statistical significance in risk levels (p<.10). It was observed a lower realization with sports activity (p<.05) and increases in Depersonalization levels (p<.01) and in TBI (p<.05). On the other hand, there are no changes in the Emotional Exhaustion factor.
The results show the usefulness of analyzing the Burnout using different indexes of analysis and approaching it from a dynamic perspective (Quested & Duda, 2011). Keywords: burnout, soccer, longitudinal analysis, risk levels, total burnout index Chronotype in judokas of high performance and sports technification Roberto Ruiz Barquín, Daniel Jimeno Ruiz, Alejo García Naveira (Universidad Pontificia de Comillas) The analysis of the chronotype (morning, mixed and evening) in athletes constitutes an important research line when it comes to predicting the moments of the day in which the people obtain a greater sport performance (García-Naveira, Locatelli and Ruiz-Barquín, 2015; Jarraya, Jarraya, Chtourou and Souissi, 2014). The objectives of the present study are to describe the chronotypes in high performance judokas and to establish possible differences in chronotypic according to the sport age category and sex category.
The sample is composed of 24 judokas with ages between 14 and 25 years of age (M= 17.67, SD = 3.28), 17 men (M = 17.65, SD = 3.34) and 7 women (M =17.71; SD = 3.40), distributed in three sports age categories (cadets, n=10; juniors, n=9; seniors=5). The evaluation instrument used was the Composite Scale of Morningness (CS). The results show that 23 judokas have a mixed chronotypic profile, and only 1 judoka has a morning profile.
The analysis carried out according to the sport age category shows a gradual decrease in the CS scores (trend towards eveningness) to higher age sport category (p<.10). Post hoc analyzes shows clear differences between cadets and seniors (p<.05) and between juveniles and senior (p<.05). Regarding the sex variable, it does not show significant results.
The existence of a predominantly mixed profile could facilitate the adaptation of judokas evaluated in terms of the loads of training and competition in different time zones. Regarding the sports age category, it indicates the need to determine optimal training and competition schedules. Senior judokas could get higher training benefits for their higher performance during the afternoon (evening).
The absence of differences according to the sex variable could indicate that the lifestyle and sports activity of high performance judoka is more determinant than the condition of being male and female. Keywords: cronopsychology, personality, judo, high performance, sports technification Physical self–concept in runners: Changes during a training cycle in non–professional adult runners Roberto Aviles, Antonio Sanchez, Alberto Rodriguez, Raimundo Castaño, Jose Maria Fuentes, Salvador Perez, Sara Alonso Physical self-concept is a psychological variable with great influence on human behavior (Candel, Olmedilla y Blas,2008; Contreras, 2010). The relationship between physical activity and physical self-concept has been well documented (Rodríguez, Goñi y Ruiz de Azúa 2006; Contreras, 2010).
However this relation is not always stable throughout the life cycle (Moreno et al,2013). This study sought to determine how a running 413Posters Tuesday July 11th training plan in collective modality and carried out by a trainer modifies the perception of physical self-concept in adult non -professional runners that get involved in a training plan for the first time. The Physical Self- Concept Questionnaire (Cuestionario de Autoconcepto Físico – CAF) was administered to (N=) 18 subjects (13 W,5 M) of adult age (37 – 42).
The quasi-experimental Pre –Test/ Post – Test design was analysed through an analysis of the average scores and variances on the different scales of the questionnaire. The data collected were examined in ANOVA table and analysed with SPSS 11.5. The post - test obtained a high internal consistency between their items (α = 0.895).
We observed positive correlations (p < .01) among all the scales of the instrument employed.The training program was performed 3 days per week for 4 months: Tuesday session (strength & conditioning based on functional training (bodyweight) and flexibility; Thursday sessions: proprioceptive, aerobic/anaerobic intervals, core stability); and Saturday sessions (aerobic resistance).Training sessions were carried out on the street and at city parks. The results show that training program increased significantly all CAF scale levels (p < .01) with the exception of strength scale (p ˂ .05). Physical attractiveness is the scale with the highest correlation with Post –Test CAF in adult non –professional runners (p < .01) (rxy =0.829).
Our results show how a training plan can promote beneficial effects on the psychological condition of non - professional runners in adulthood. Keywords: physical self- concept, running, adult stage, mental health The stability of mental toughness across situations: Taking a social-cognitive approach Robert Weinberg (Miami University), Joanne Butt (Sheffield-Hallum University) The present study adopted a social-cognitive perspective to explore the stability of mental toughness using the cognitive-affective processing system model. (Michel & Shoda, 1985).
Specifically, the purpose of this study was two-fold: (a) to explore possible fluctuations in mental toughness across situations; and (b) to identify the cognitions, affect, and behaviors associated with perceived mental toughness and mental weakness. Participants were tennis players (n=12) based full time in an elite performance academy and were aged between 14 and 20 years (Mage = 16.5; SD = 2.66). Players were interviewed and transcribed interviews were analyzed using a thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006).
Three researchers searched for themes across the interview data and reached consensus on the coding of raw data and subsequent categorization of data into themes. Players identified a variety of competition (e.g., opponents, pressure) and training (e.g., consistency, intensity) related situations requiring mental toughness. Findings indicated that players could be mentally tough in some situations but mentally weak in other situations suggesting that mental toughness can fluctuate.
In addition, players identified different cognitions, affect, and behaviors when they perceived mental toughness and mental weakness. For example, mentally tough facilitative cognitions included positive thinking, belief in self, and task-focus whereas mentally weak cognitions included doubting self-thoughts, distracting thoughts, and a focus on outcome. Mentally tough behaviors included high effort, focused decision-making and assertive play, whereas mentally weak behaviors included decreased effort, negative body language and poor strategy.
Coping strategies included being relaxed, maintaining confidence and focusing on task-relevant cues. To conclude, it is anticipated that findings generated can be used as a platform to develop context-rich mental toughness training interventions. Keywords: mental toughness, stability, social cognitive Does passion predict exercise addiction?
A study in team- and individual sports Rita Kovácsik (Eötvös Loránd University of Science) Limited new empirical evidence suggests a robust connection between passion, especially obsessive passion and exercise addiction. The aim of the current inquiry was to examine the relationship of obsessive- and harmonious passion to exercise addiction specifically in people practicing team- and individual sports. 414Posters Tuesday July 11th Athletes (n = 190, 59% of them were women and 41% men, mean age = 22.94 ±SD = 4.64 years) represented six sports, three team- (cheerleading, soccer, and basketball; n = 92) and three individual sports (running, gymnastics, and kettlebell; n= 98).
Participants completed the Exercise Addiction Inventory (Terry, Szabo, & Griffiths, 2004) and the Passion Scale (Vallerand et al., 2003). A multiple linear regression revealed that both obsessive- and harmonious passion were strong (p < .001) predictors of exercise addiction and together accounted for 39% of the variance in it. Separate regressions for team and individual sports, revealed that passion accounted for 25% of the variance in exercise addiction in the former, but for twice as much in the latter (50%).
However, albeit significant, harmonious passion had only a weak contribution in both cases (4 - 3%). The prevalence of exercise addiction in team- and individual sports’ athletes were identical (15%). Athletes in team sports scored higher on harmonious passion than those in individual sports (p < .001).
All psychological measures correlated with the weekly hours of exercise (p < .001), which, nevertheless, was not a predictor in the model for exercise addiction. The findings support the emerging empirical results suggesting that exercise addiction is largely determined by obsessive passion. They expand the extant knowledge by distinguishing the predictive power of obsessive passion within the team- and individual sports.
The study also supports recent findings that athletes in team sports report greater harmonious passion than those practicing individual sports. Keywords: athlete, compulsive exercise, exercise dependence The influence of sport participation on psychological states of an athlete with an acquired impairment Rika Sekiya, Hiroshi Sekiya, Chiaki Raima (Hiroshima University) Athletes with an acquired impairment have been paid less attention compared to other athletes in sport psychology. The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of participating in sport after injury on psychological states of an athlete with an acquired impairment using a qualitative method.
A semi-structured interview was conducted with the athlete with an acquired impairment (female; age = 23 years; competitive experience in para-sport = 5 years). Verbal data were analyzed with the Trajectory Equifinality Model that enabled us to describe important events and psychological states in three phases of her life. Before the injury, she had a fun life with common troubles.
After the injury, she always had suicidal thoughts. However, she started playing sport after watching a DVD about para-sport that was recommended by her attending physician. After the day of starting sport to the present, she received encouragements from her teammates and coaches who didn’t discriminate against impairment and became to enjoy an active life.
On the other hand, she has been frustrated by some coaching guidance policies that promote continuation of playing sport rather than achieving excellence in results. Taken together, she became positive after participating in para- sport because she received social support such as encouragements from people around her, although she requires further improvement in attitude of surrounding people. Keywords: psychological change, psychological states, athlete with an acquired impairment Preliminary validation of the implicit scale of conceptions of sports ability on the Chilean context Ricardo Martínez- Romero (Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain and University of Concepción, Chile), Hugo Aranguiz Aburto, Oscar Herrera Gacitua, Jorge Salazar Espinoza (University of Concepción, Chile) The conceptions that people has, influence directly on their behavior, can be subject and influenced by internal or external attributes.
The objective is to identify, in a preliminary way, the scale of implicit conceptions of sports ability in the Chilean context (Conceptions of the Nature of Athletic Ability Questionnaire). The study was descriptive, correlational and cross-sectional, with a sample of 126 university students (18-26 years), from the Universidad de Concepción, Chile. The scale of implicit conceptions of sports 415Posters Tuesday July 11th ability applied, presents 12 questions distributed in two dimensions: fixed and incremental.
On this study the validated version in Spain was adapted to the Chilean context with previous revision of experts from the areas of psychology, physical education and methodologists. The instrument has a Likert scale, with a minimum score of 1 point (Never) and a maximum of 5 points (Always). The overall results are 3.63 + .37, while in the fixed dimension it was 2.47 + .71 and in the incremental 4.79 + .28.
On the other hand, the analysis of the Cronbach presented a score of .62, while the fixed and incremental dimension obtained indices of .75 and .49, respectively. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) sample adequacy showed a value of .74, indicating that it is acceptable and less likely that a question is explained by more than one factor. The results showed four factors, where the first factor brings together all the items of the incremental dimension, while the items of the fixed dimension are distributed in the three remaining factors.
The conclusions show that the internal consistency proved to be acceptable and presents implications from the theoretical-practical point of view, since knowing the type of sports conception will improve the physical, technical and motivational capacities, improving the results in the trainings and in sports competitions. Keywords: sport, conception, skill, incremental, university students, fixed Type of sport, practice time and self-efficacy among university students Ricardo Martínez- Romero (Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain and University of Concepción, Chile) Self-efficacy is the judgment that each person has over their own abilities, based on what they organize and execute to achieve the desired performance (Bandura, 1987). It has been much studied by psychology, being a determining factor in the behaviors and responses of individuals.
The aim of this study is to characterize and relate the type of sport, the time of practice and the self-efficacy in university students. The study was descriptive, correlational and cross-sectional. It was carried out with a sample of 126 university students from the Universidad de Concepción-Chile (18-26 years).
The Spanish version of the general self- efficacy questionnaire, validated in Chile (Cid, Orellana & Barriga, 2010), consisting of 10 items with a Likert scale, minimum of 1 point (Never) and a maximum of 5 points (Always) and two questions: the type of sport (individual or collective) and practice time (years). The results show that the practice time in individual sports is 6.01 + 1.56 and collective 8.31 + 0.95 and the total of 7.80 + 0.83. The self-efficacy in individual sports is 4.02 + 0.36 and collective 4.26 + 0.01 and the total 4.21 + 0.22.
The variables does not present levels of significance at 1% and 5%, which reflects that there are no relationships. The analysis identifies that the practice time is about seven years, reflecting the commitment to sports practice, even with the academic responsibility to study higher education. Likewise, self-efficacy is close to the maximum score with a low standard deviation, which implies positive feelings and success in the execution of the tasks, which influence the emotional and behavioral reactions in the development of the sports competitions (Bandura, 2001).
These results could be useful for the beginning of future interventions that allow to extend the design of the sports demands in this population, identifying other characteristics that contribute to the improvement of the performance and sports result. Keywords: self-efficacy, individual, time, sport, collective, students, university Satisfaction of basic needs and associated coping strategies. A study in a sample of Spanish soccer players Cecilia Peñacoba Puente, Patricia Catalá Mesón Since 1980s, research on coping within sports psychology has increased exponentially.
The definition of coping as a process and the need to contemplate specific situational variables has led to the study of the relationship between satisfaction of basic needs and coping strategies of athletes. In this context, the aim of this study is to analyze the relationship between the three basic needs (autonomy, competence and 416Posters Tuesday July 11th relationships) and coping. In addition, given the need, pointed out by some authors, to consider the perception of coping effectiveness, in addition to its use, both indicators have been taken into account: effectiveness and use.The sample consisted of 562 soccer players aged between 12 and 19, all belonging to teams from the Community of Madrid.
In this study, data was collected using the Basic Psychological Needs Satisfaction questionnaire (PNSE) and the Approach to Coping in Sport Questionnaire (ACSQ- 1). The results showed that the need for competence was positively associated with most coping strategies (except with the use of mental withdrawal and risk behaviors that maintained a negative association). Regarding effectiveness, positive correlations were observed in all cases, except for mental withdrawal.
Regarding autonomy, there were significant positive correlations with regard to the use of certain coping strategies (i.e., mental withdrawal, risk behaviors, and seeking social support). Finally, with regard to social relations, there are significant positive correlations with the use of emotional calm, cognitive restructuring, risk behaviors and search for social support, and with perceived effectiveness of cognitive restructuring and risk behaviors. Results pointed to differential relations between the need that the player intended to cover and the use of certain coping strategies.
However, perceived effectiveness of coping seemed to be less associated with the type of need that is intended to cover than the use of coping. Keywords: basic needs, coping, soccer Temporal patterns of U-15 soccer players’ moods Ricardo Marinho de Mello de Picoli, José Lino Oliveira Bueno (FFCLRP-USP) The aim of this study was to examine mood changes in U-15 soccer players which occurred during a competitive season. Processes like mood decay and the influence of expectation for the game were investigated, as well as the influence of context in the athletes’ mood variations.
Eighteen young players (15.4 ± 0,266 year-old) from a Brazilian soccer club participated in this study. For the assessment of players’ mood, a short form of Lista de Estados de Ânimo Presentes (LEAP – Present Mood List) was used, applied forty minutes before some training sessions and matches. LEAP is a brazilian instrument constructed to measure forty different moods, grouped in twelve factors, at the moment of the response.
Presence values of each LEAP’s Factor were calculated for each participant in each event. The data were collected in three weeks (interval of time of one match to another) of the competition and in types of events: prior to the last trainning session before the match, at a few moments before the match and prior to the first training session after the match; to the analysis of the time course of moods. Results have shown temporal patterns of mood changes.
LEAP’s Factors II (Fatigue), VII (Interest) and XII (Serenity) changed in function of time course, allowing the analysis of mood decay process and the influence of the expectation in these changes. Also, some moods showed different patterns in function of a given time interval (Factors IV – Limerence/Empathy and VII – Interest), as well as different presence values in these time intervals’ comparison. Moreover, Factors III (Hope), V (Physiologic) and XI (Receptivity) have shown patterns of mood changes in function of time course in different intervals of time.
The importance of including temporality as an influential variable in neurobiological models is noteworthy, especially in the investigations about subjective aspects like mood. Keywords: mood, soccer, time course, sport psychology ESC Project: Are we influenced by strangers’ physical activity and sedentary behaviour? A Randomized Controlled Trial Ricardo Gonçalves, Rui Batalau, Joana Cruz (Centro de Investigação em Desporto e Educação Física (CIDEF), Manuel Teixeira Gomes Institute – Portugal), Antonio Palmeira (Interdisciplinary Centre for the Study of Human Performance (CIPER) – Faculty of Human Kinetics, Universidade de Lisboa – Portugal) 417Posters Tuesday July 11th Research has found that people are more active when their significant others are, suggesting that this behaviour can be "contagious".
However, social contagion through unfamiliar people is not well known. So, the aim of this randomized controlled trial was to analyze the association between social contagion through strangers and PA and SB bouts. Data from the ESC project were used.
In total, 142 adults were randomly allocated in four groups: a) control group, primed with videos about healthy nutrition; b) Brochure Group, primed with brochures about PA and SB; c) PA Group, primed with strangers (staff members) talking about PA, ten people doing PA (prepared actors) and videos about PA; d) SB Group, the same intervention as PA Group, but SB priming instead of PA. Participants PA and SB were measured by Actigraph (wGT3X) accelerometers for seven consecutive days, one week before, one week after, and three months after the intervention. The number and duration of SB bouts (<100 counts/minute) lasting 1-14, 15-29, and ≥ 30 consecutive minutes, and of Moderate-to-Vigorous PA (MVPA) bouts (≥ 1952 counts/minute) lasting ≥ 10 consecutive minutes were calculated.
Repeated measures multivariate ANCOVA, using gender as covariate, was used. Results show that the PA brochure decreased 1-14 min SB bouts daily duration (less 12%) in the following week (all p<.001, large effect size). Nonetheless, this effect is overturned after three months (all p<.001, large effect size).
Regarding ≥ 10 min MVPA bouts, both groups primed with PA decreased their daily duration in the following week (p = .011, medium effect size). The use of brochures to promote PA may not be beneficial. Additionally, the interventions with strangers did not affect activity levels in this exploratory study.
More studies are warranted to confirm these results. Keywords: strangers, priming, social contagion, physical activity, sedentary behaviour, adults Teacher evaluation based on student performance, well-being and ill-being in physical education teachers: Self-determination motivation as mediator Ricardo Cuevas (University of Castilla-La Mancha), David Sánchez-Oliva (University of Lisbon), Juan Gregorio Fernandez-Bustos (University of Castilla-La Mancha), Héctor Moreno-Casado (University of Extremadura) The use of teacher evaluation based on student performance use has been spread considerably in different countries in the last years. In addition, the impact of this kind of evaluation on the teachers’ psychological health has been understudied.
Thus, using Self-determination theory as a framework, the aim of this study was to examine different types of teacher motivation as possible mediators between the pressure caused by assessment based on student performance and the teacher psychological well-being and ill-being. For this objective, 360 Spanish PE teachers of secondary education (230 men and 130 women), aged between 23 and 61 years filled a questionnaire that assessed perceived pressure due to student performance, self- determination motivation (autonomous, controlled, and amotivation), subjective vitality (as indicator of well- being), and exhaustion (as indicator of ill-being). For he mediation analysis the bootstrapping technique was used.
The results showed that the total indirect effects between pressure for the evaluation and well/ill-being were significant. However, when examining specific indirect effects, it was seen that these effects were not significant for autonomous and controlled motivation. Only amotivation mediated the negative indirect effect from pressure on vitality, and the positive indirect effect of pressure on exhaustion.
These data indicates that perceived pressure resulted in higher levels of exhaustion and lower levels of vitality via increased amotivation. Because of a lack of previous studies that analyse the relations between these variables, this finding is particularly useful to understand the processes that affect to the teacher psychological well-being. Keywords: evaluation, school, bootstrap, vitality, exhaustion 418Posters Tuesday July 11th External focus of attention and autonomy support have additive benefits for motor performance in children Reza Abdollahipour (University Olomouc, Czech Republic), Miriam Palomo-Nieto (University Olomouc, Czech Republic & Technical University of M, Rudolf Psotta (University Olomouc, Czech Republic), Gabriele Wulf (University of Nevada Las Vegas, USA) The purpose of this study was to examine the combined effects of external focus instructions and autonomy support on motor performance of children.
In addition, we sought to provide evidence for an increased focus on the task goal under the external focus condition by using an inattentional blindness manipulation. Thirty-six children (mean age: 8.5, SD: 1.3 years) were asked to perform a bowling task with their dominant hand. In a within-participant design, each participant performed 8 trials under external focus (path of the ball), internal focus (hand), or control conditions.
In each attentional focus condition, they performed half of the trials under a choice (autonomy support) condition, in which they were able to choose among 4 bowling balls, and a no-choice condition (white ball). Both attentional focus and choice/no choice conditions were performed in a counterbalanced order. The external focus instruction resulted in greater bowling accuracy (i.e., more pins knocked down) than internal focus and no instructions (control).
Furthermore, choice resulted in more effective performance than no choice. Thus, both factors had additive benefits for performance. There was some evidence for an increased task focus in the external condition.
The present results show that, within the same individuals, instructions to adopt an external focus and providing them with a small choice contributed independently to enhance motor performance in children. Keywords: choice, bowling, inattentional blindness Attribution for succes and failure of student athletes Martina Jurkovic, Renata Baric, Rebeka Prosoli (Faculty of Kinesiology University of Zagreb) Success and failure are an integral part of the sport and everyday life of the athletes. Because of that, the goal of this study was to investigate how student athletes explain the causes of their most and least successful performance in their sports career.
We examined how these reasons differ for success and failure, between male and female students and according to the type of sport (individual vs. group). Participants were 194 students from the Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Zagreb (Nw=77, Nm=117).
For measuring attributions, we used Weiner attribution model and CDS II scale (McAuley, Duncan & Russell, 1992). The results showed that participants make more internal, stable and personally controllable attributions for success than for failure. Differences between male and female students were obtained only on the locus of control dimension for failure where woman attributed their failures significantly more to internal factors.
There were no significant differences in attributions considering the type of sport. We also analyzed the reasons stated by the athletes and concluded that, for the most successful competition performance, 59 % of the reasons can be categorized as mental preparation, 24 % can be categorized as physical preparation, 8 % of the reasons are related to effort, 5 % of the reasons are connected with support from others (coach, teammates…), 1 % are connected with good luck and 3 % can be categorized as other reasons. For the least successful competition performance, 56 % of the reasons can be categorized as mental preparation, 11 % as lack of support/pressure from others, 10 % were connected with fatigue/injury/sickness, 9 % were about physical preparation, 3 % were connected to having a bad day, 2 % with inexperience and 9 % of the reasons can be categorized as other.
These results can help further understand athlete’s perceptions about the reasons connected with their success and failure. Keywords: reasons most succesful, least sucessful, achievement 419Posters Tuesday July 11th Preliminary results of a systematic descriptive bibliographical review on the measurement of sport performance in sport psychology Raúl Barrios, Damián Ursino (Universidad de Buenos Aires) Sports performance is a polysemic term and sensitive to sports discipline. The published scientific literature does not present a consensus in its operationalization making it difficult to measure it with the different psychological factors.
The aim of the present poster is to present the preliminary results of a bibliographical study on psychological factors and sports performance. The study consists of a general description of bibliometric aspects and an analysis of the different ways of measuring sports performance. A systematic descriptive review was conducted in seven academic searchers.
Each of the descriptors combined a psychological factor (anxiety, self-confidence, concentration, motivation, and self-efficacy) and the term “sports performance” (in English and Spanish). The filters implemented were: a) publication period from 2006 to 2016, b) journal articles, and c) Spanish, English or Portuguese language. Inclusion-exclusion criteria consisted of: a) empirical studies b) studying some psychological factor and c) measuring sports performance.
A pre-selection of 79 documents was made from the reading of titles and abstracts. The final selection includes 60 articles selected from the complete reading of them. The documents were analyzed by the IBM SPSS in its version 22.
The most investigated sports correspond to sports with cooperation and opposition (50%) and they turned out to be Basketball (13%), Volleyball (13%) and Football (11%). Besides, the most used sports performance measurement methods were the ad-hoc observation instruments (32%) and competition scores (23%). Measurements by data from institutional sources, as well as measurements by ad-hoc observation instruments, are more frequent in cooperation and opposition sports.
In addition, the use of competition scores measures is more frequent in sports without cooperation or opposition. Finally, the only three studies using psychometric instruments were used in non-cooperative sports with opposition. Keywords: sport performance, systematic review, psychological factors, sport psychology Motives for the practice of physical activity and the impact on subjective well-being in older adults Raul Antunes, Nuno Couto, Diogo Monteiro, João Moutão, Luís Cid (Sport Science School of Rio Maior (ESDRM-IPSantarém), Research Center in Sports Sciences, Health and Human Development (CIDESD)) The inherent reasons for human involvement in an activity have been broadly studied, since it is one of the constructs with the most influence on behavioural maintenance throughout the time.
This issue is particularly important in physical activity context if we consider the low adherence to this behaviour all over the world, assuming particular relevance in the European elderly population. This way, the main goal of this study consisted in an analysis of the impact that the motives that lead to the practice of physical activity in older adults can play on the variables that constitute subjective well-being (satisfaction with life and affect) through a structural equations model. With regard to the analysis of differences in these variables’ levels according to the amount of physical activity practiced (IPAQ categories: Low; Moderate; High), through one- way anova test, complemented by a tukey post-hoc test.
Participants included 300 older adults (n=300), including 238 females and 62 males, aged between 60 and 90 years old (M = 68.59; SD = 6.54), of Portuguese nationality who practice differing levels of physical activity. The results enable us to conclude that the motives for the practice of physical activity have positive effects on the perception of satisfaction with life and on affect. On the other hand, the analysis of the differences in the level of subjective well-being (satisfaction with life and positive and negative affect) according to the amount of physical activity practiced verified that there seems to be a progressive effect of physical activity on the perception levels of satisfaction with life and positive affect, and respectively, the cognitive and emotional dimensions of subjective well-being.
Keywords: aging, affect, satisfaction with life, physical activity 420Posters Tuesday July 11th Validate the satisfaction of the sports services: UANL, México Raquel Morquecho Sanchez, Verónica Morales Sánchez, Jose Alberto Perez Garcia, Juan Carlos Gonzalez Castro, Erika Gadea In the actuality it is the great importance in the Mexican universities the management of the sports facilities, this is link with the competitiveness of the organization and the user satisfaction. The sports organizations has taken this challenge and have the propose to better the conditions of the internal organization, executing actions in the facilities, as well as in the personal, with the propose to enhance the satisfaction of the services that they offer. In this context, the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León (UANL) counts with great offer of sports installations and physical activities programs.
The present investigation has the propose of validate the satisfaction of the sports services in the UANL. This design of this investigation is descriptive, through a stratified sample. The instrument used in this investigation was the Cuestionario de Evaluación de la Calidad Percibida en Organizaciones de Servicios Deportivos Universitaros (QUNISPORT v.mx);Which is composed of 5 factors (1.
Functionality and comfort of university sports areas, 2. Interaction with the Coach, 3. Management of sports services, 4.
Characteristics of the program of sports activities and 5.Measure environment and comfort of bathrooms And dressing rooms); the sample was integrated for 357 participants Of both genders, 156 men and 195 women, lost values, divided in a range of age between 14 and 61 years, all users of the facilities in the university. Between the more significant results show that the human factor is determinant for the user satisfaction, in special the coaches, being an direct contact of the organization with the users during the process of the presentation of the service. We concluded that the university sport organization should establish strategies based in the continuous improvement, through the client satisfaction, because the quality of the sport service, is not defined by the organization, but bye the own users.
Keywords: satisfaction, sports services, user, university In the UCA fair play. The sport education Teresa García Valderrama, Antonio Yébenes Montoro, Rosario Navarro Durán, Rafael Rivas Caballero (University of Cádiz) The University of Cadiz (UCA) is committed to education and training through sport. To this end, the Vicerectorate of Social Responsibility, Cultural extension and services, by its Sports Service, created in 2008 the program" In the UCA Fair Play, The sport education" (Sport educates through fair play).
This ambitious program establishes an ethical frame of reference for university sports: The “Decalogue of the Fair Play” and its instrumentalization through the application of additional points in the scores. These additional points are established for each match, two ways: positive points (if there are not sports sanctions), or negative points (in case of higher-level penalties). So with the implementation of these points has been possible the decline in almost 85,4% of sports sanctions (in football and indoor football matches).
Also, the teams have changed the way they had to work, through the putting out of the players that cause problems or with non-sporting behavior. This program has been implemented in a few sports organizations, committed to fair play (Sports Games in town council of Cadiz and Andalusian zone championships). So, it obtaining over the years various prizes at local, regional, national and international level: Andalusian Sports Prize, 2009; City of Cádiz Award for Sports, 2010; National Sports Prize "Joaquín Blume Trophy", 2010; World Fair Play Diploma of the International Fair Play Committee, 2011; Best Sports Program in Andalusia.
AGESPORT (Andalusian Association of Sport Managers) 2015 All the program information in www.uca.es/deportes/campana-la-uca-juega-limpio Keywords: fair play 421Posters Tuesday July 11th The impact of the sports climate generated by the coach in the goal orientation of university athletes Rafael Peñaloza Gómez (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), José Carlos Jaenes (Universidad Pablo de Olavide), María del Pilar Méndez Sánchez (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), Mirna García- Méndez (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), Nancy Ponce-Carbajal (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), José Alberto Calva-Franco (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) Goal orientation is an approach to the study of people's motivation and has been defined as the mental structure through which individuals interpret and respond to goal situations (Cáceres, 2005, Cáceres-Alvarado, 2013); different theories have divided the goal orientation in two or three dimensions, in the latter case, they differentiate between master's goals, goals of approximation and avoidance of performance; these forms of giving meaning to the execution are of vital importance in the sport and in young people, can be influenced by contextual variables such as the athletic climate that generates the trainer during the competitions and trainings (Salinero, Ruiz & Sánchez, 2006), this sport climate can be characterized by how the coach supports the autonomy of the athlete, which has been related to avoidance of negative experiences, self-efficacy, among other variables (Appleton, & Duda, 2016, Hung, & Wu, 2016). For this reason, the objective of the present work is to analyze if there is an impact of the sports climate, in the different dimensions of the goal orientation of youth athletes. Participants included 150 university athletes from Mexico City who answered two instruments, the Three-Dimensional Questionnaire on Achievement Goals (Cáceres-Alvarado, 2013) and the Sports Climate Questionnaire (Deci, & Ryan, 2000).
The analyzes showed the internal consistency of the scales (Tridimensional Goal of Achievement Questionnaire, α = .870; Sports Climate Questionnaire, α = .917), in addition, it found significant regression values of the Sports Climate on the Master (R² = .27, p <.05) and on performance avoidance (R² = .36, p <.05). These findings demonstrate the importance of coaching behaviors aimed at supporting autonomy in their teams, especially the impact on athletes' reactions to goal situations. Keywords: sports climate, goal orientation, motivation, coach Understanding the relationship between mental illness and sport: A life history perspective Rachel Jewett (University of Toronto) Mental illness remains a significant health concern and evidence suggests that athletes are not immune from experiences of mental illness (Gulliver et al., 2015).
Although sport participation has been associated with psychological benefits, when participation reaches competitive levels it can become entangled with stressors such as injury, performance pressures, and vulnerabilities such as developing a strong athletic identity and early retirement (Storch et al., 2005; Lavallee & Robinson, 2007). These stressors may influence an athlete’s experiences with mental illness. A life history methodology was used to explore an elite athlete’s experience with mental illness.
This perspective allowed for the exploration of phases of the athlete’s sport career, including transitions to different training environments, working with different coaches, periods with injury, and retirement. The participant was a female former national and collegiate athlete in her mid-twenties, was one year post-retirement from sport and had been diagnosed with an adjustment disorder with depression and anxiety. Seven interviews were conducted which produced nine hours of recorded material.
Data analysis involved an iterative process of reviewing transcripts with the participant to develop initial interpretations and then a thematic analysis. The participant developed a strong athletic identity and enhanced self-confidence during her sport career which, coupled with a damaging interpersonal relationship, contributed to a period of identity loss and mental health challenges post-retirement from sport and graduation from university. The findings from this study lead us to question whether the significant support and free access to services provided to sports stars within the collegiate system potentially leaves such individuals vulnerable to feelings of 422Posters Tuesday July 11th isolation and helplessness once outside of the collegiate-athlete bubble and thus contributed to challenging transitions out of sport.
Keywords: mental health, sport, life history, elite athlete A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised control trials to promote physical activity via dyadic interventions Rachel Carr (Curtin University, Perth, Australia), Andrew Prestwich (The University of Leeds, England), Eleanor Quested, Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani, Daniel Gucciardi, Dominika Kwasnicka, Nikos Ntoumanis (Curtin University, Perth, Australia) Physical activity (PA) is known to be associated with health benefits including reductions in risk of chronic diseases (e.g., diabetes, bone and joint diseases, cancer) and depression (Warburton et al., 2006, 2010). Individuals usually attempt to change their PA (or refrain from doing so) while embedded in social networks with friends, romantic partners and family (Scholz & Berli, 2014). Most of the research on the role of social influence has explored individual/group level effects or how one person can support someone else to increase their PA (e.g.
Knoll, Hohl, Keller, Schuez, Luszczynska & Burkert, 2016). There is lack of research evidence additionally exploring interventions that aim to change the PA behaviour of a dyad (e.g. parent-child, romantic partners, friends).
Transactive goal dynamics theory states that a given dyad are not two independent agents, they share resources and goals (Fitzsimons, Finkel & vanDellen, 2015). This systematic review and meta- analysis focuses on the effectiveness and utility of dyadic randomized control trial interventions (RCTs) to promote PA. Medline, Psycinfo and Web of Science were searched using terms relating to “dyad”, “RCT” and “PA”.
This study also explores whether any observed effects of dyadic interventions on PA vary as a function of the type of dyadic relationship; the quality of the study; or the type of PA measured. This review analyzes whether the type of goals promoted (e.g. whether they target one dyad member or both) alters the effects of dyadic interventions on PA.
Preliminary data from 58 studies indicate the effect size of dyadic interventions on PA is small but moderator analyses indicate that dyadic interventions work better in certain contexts/populations. Initial results show that when dyad members have simultaneous goals for their own PA they achieve the greatest effect size. The findings of the review will inform future dyadic interventions for PA promotion.
Keywords: dyads, systematic review, meta-analysis, randomised control trials, physical activity, interventions Encouraging older adults with a disability to participate in sport and physical activity: An examination of the Inspire and Include project Rachel Arnold, Jessica Francombe-Webb (University of Bath), Sean Smith (Age UK) Inspire and Include is a project designed to encourage older (age 50+) adults with a disability (OADs) to participate in sport/physical activity. It involves the delivery of various adapted activities, supported by trained volunteers and project partners. The study presented will provide an overview of the project and then an evaluation of its impact.
The project was implemented by ten local Age UK partners, with 346 OADs (118 male, 199 female, 29 not reported) participating in this study. Participants were asked to complete questionnaires at four time-points: the start of the project, 10-weeks, 20-weeks, and 1-year post. Questionnaires assessed sport and physical activity participation, choice and accessibility of sport and physical activity, experiences (e.g., enjoyment, others’ awareness of issues faced by ODAs when participating), health (e.g., physiological measurements and subjective ratings), and well-being.
Using unconditional latent growth models, the findings showed a significant positive average rate of change in the number of active pursuits (0.089, p<.01), enjoyment of activities (0.365, p <.001), and perceptions of general health (0.120, p <.001), sleep quality (0.093, p <.001), energy levels (0.084, p <.001), strength (0.064, p <.01), flexibility (0.066, p <.01), mental well-being (0.090, p 423Posters Tuesday July 11th <.001), life satisfaction (0.420, p <.001), and others’ awareness of the issues faced (0.332, p <.001) across the four time points. Furthermore, a significant negative average rate of change was demonstrated in body mass index (-0.260, p <.01) and waist circumference (-5.072, p <.01) across the first three time points. Rates of change in the frequency/duration of active pursuits, perceived barriers, and other physiological measures were non-significant.
These findings offer a number of important recommendations and implications, which will be presented, for those wishing to enhance activity participation across the lifespan and within specific populations. Keywords: ageing, disability, exercise, inclusion, physical activity, sport The relationship between athletes' gratitude and subjective well-being: The mediating role of perceived social support Qi Luo (Wuhan Sports University) Traditionally, research in psychology has focused on the study and prevention of psychopathology. With the increased popularity of positive psychology, researchers have shifted their attention to examining the development of personal strengths and competencies.
A hot research topic within the positive psychology movement was well-being. In recent years, a very large body of evidence has emerged, suggesting that gratitude was strongly related to all aspects of well-being. However, the underlying mechanisms between gratitude and well-being have rarely been examined for athletes.
Thus, the current study aimed at investigating the mechanism underlying the relationship between gratitude and athletes’ well-being. We proposed that the perceived social support would be an important mediator. A sample of 483 Chinese elite athletes (47.2% female, mean age=19.24 years, SD=3.99) was recruited to complete athlete gratitude questionnaire (Chen, 2012), athletes’ subjective well-being questionnaire (Jiang, 2013), perceived available support in sport questionnaire (Freeman, 2011).
Regression analysis indicates that gratitude and perceived social support significantly positively predict athlete’s well-being (β=.24, t=6.12, p <.001; β=.52, t=4.43, p<.001), altogether explaining its 44% variance. Structural equation modelling has been used to analyse the mediating effect of perceived social support, indicating that perceived social support partially mediates the relationship between gratitude and well-being. The mediating effect size of perceived social support is 0.23.
The ratio of the mediating effect to total effect is 49%. To sum up, we could draw the conclusion that gratitude could help athletes to perceive more social support and thus gain higher level of well-being. Lastly, practical implications are discussed in term of gratitude intervention, such as gratitude lists, gratitude contemplation.
Keywords: gratitude; subjective well-being; perceived social support Differences in sensomotor coordination as a function of team games Pooja Rawat, Jayashree Acharya, Shipra Srivastava (LNIPE) The purpose of the study was to analyze the sensomotor coordination (SMK) among various team games. The 60 subjects (Basketball-15, Volleyball-15, Hockey-15, and Soccer-15) were selected on the bases of purposive sampling from Lakshmibai National Institute of physical education, Gwalior, India. Their age ranged between 17-24 years with a mean and SD of 20.73 +2.78.
Vienna test system (VTS), a leading computerized psychological assessment tool was used for measuring sensomotor coordination. The Vienna Test System SPORT is perfectly designed for sports psychology assessment. The psychometrically valid tool for profile analysis, talent assessment and development of training plans gives players and athletes a clear picture of their sports psychology profile – in terms of both skills and personality (Vienna Test System sports, 2017).
Researcher analyzed the sensomotor coordination (SMK) with sub factors, mean angle deviation (SMK_MAD) this indicates how well the respondent was able to control and influence the tilting motion regardless of correct motion, mean horizontal deviation (SMK_MHD) in which how consistently in terms of time the 424Posters Tuesday July 11th respondent able to control and influence horizontal motion , mean vertical deviation (SMK_ MVD) in which how consistently in terms of time the respondent able to control and influence motion from front to back & Time in ideal range (SMK_TIR) percent of time the circular segment will in the ideal range within a given interval. Descriptive and ANOVA statistics was applied. F-values of SMK_MHD; SMK_ MVD; and SMK_TIR (4.78, 6.08 & 3.23) were found significant because their p-values 0.005; 0.001; 0.029 are less than 0.05 level of significance.
After applying post hoc test, soccer has higher MHD than other team games; in MVD of SMK again soccer better than other team games; at the last in TIR of SMK volleyball is better than other team games. Keywords: sensomotor coordination, team games Exploring the cultural aspect of motivational climate: An eastern perspective Po-Fu Lee, Frank Jing-Horng Lu (Chinese Culture University), Chien-Chang Ho (Fu-Jen Catholic University) Achievement goal theory (Nicholls, 1989; AGT) have led development into an authoritative model of motivational climate (MC) in past decades. However, researches successively argued that dichotomous model of MC might be unable to explain the phenomena comprehensively within achievement behaviors and motivational environments (Keegan et al., 2010; Urdan & Maehr, 1995; Wentzel, 1993), and need to investigate from different domains.
The purpose of this study was to explore the cultural aspect of motivational climate surrounding in non-competitive sports by investigating the experiences of martial artists/instructors, fitness participants/coaches, and team sport members that were perceived to be motivationally relevant by the performers/instructors. A grounded theory approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) was employed throughout the data collection and analysis. Eleven martial artists/instructors, fitness participants/coaches, and team sport members were invited to participate semi-structured interviews investigating how/what they perceived/expected the motivational climate during practice/training.
Besides, another 11 trained qualitative researchers/PE teachers and one senior sport psychology professor were arranged to join a focus group interview. Numerous cultural aspects (relating to cultural expectation of personality, attitude, citizenship, moral, emotional connection, respect, social ranking order) and social influence were found in the study. The results indicated that instructors might create a situational achievement task on cultural expectation while training or practicing beyond inter/intra-personal comparisons on the nature of sport, especially in student/non-competitive sports.
A central finding of this paper is that there was a specific cultural expectancy on sport participation created by instructors/coaches. More specifically, sports are reflection of culture, and could be an educational media to citizenship and socialization. Keywords: motivation climate, achievement goal theory, cultural influences, citizenship The differences in mental toughness and exercise behaviour amongst athletes and exercisers Phillippa Wood (Leeds Beckett University) Mental toughness (MT) remains a contested concept which emerged from the realms of sport psychology and is closely associated to superior athletic performance (Sheard, 2012).
Engagement in exercise requires selected aspects of mental toughness such as self-control (Dusseldorp et al., 2014) and confidence (Middlekamp, Wolfhagen & Steenbergen, 2015). Nascent research noted that MT may coincide with over- training (Crust et al., 2014) and intense physical activity (Sabouri et al., 2016). Yet, there still remains scant empirical research examining the differences in exercise behaviour and MT.
To develop further understanding this study examined differences in MT (using multidimensional measures: SMTQ; Sheard, Golby & van wersch, 2009; PPI-A; Golby, Sheard & van Wersch, 2007) and exercise frequency, intensity, duration, structure and nature, in addition to occurrences of over-training. Participants (N=504 athletes and exercisers, M= 23.3 years, SD= 4.5; 236 males) were recruited within the student body and via social media and participated using the 425Posters Tuesday July 11th online survey hosted by SurveyMonkey (SurveyMonkey Inc, 2016). The data was assessed for normality, and analysed using MANOVA.
The findings suggest that those higher in mental toughness engaged in structured workouts (p=.003; p<0.001), more frequently (p<0.001) and for a greater duration (p<0.001). However, there were no significant differences in MT across the nature of the exercise (p=.140), the frequency of intense sessions (p=.780), or over-training (p<0.001). The results suggest that superior athletic performance of the mentally tough may be attributed to the way in which they engage in exercise; the current findings did not support the notion that MT may coincide with over-training.
Beyond the scope of sport, further research is warranted to examine mental toughness in the context of exercise and health. Keywords: mental toughness, exercise behaviour, performance, athletes, exercisers How to determine success of sport psychological interventions? Ambulatory assessment of functional athletic behavior Philipp Röthlin, Stephan Horvath, Daniel Birrer (Swiss Federal Institute of Sport Magglingen) Sport psychological interventions (SPI) are often evaluated by changes in objective performance (e.g., ranking).
Unfortunately, external factors like opponents or training load may conceal the true effects of SPI. A promising alternative is an ambulatory assessment of functional athletic behavior (FAB) during competitions. We present the development and initial validation of a three item FAB questionnaire.
It examines the quality of actions and movements (item 1), the attentional focus on relevant performance cues (item 2) and the accordance with valued distal goals (item 3). These are important preconditions for objective success that are less influenced by external factors, and therefore suitable indicators for the success of an SPI. The FAB measure was completed by 44 athletes (48% male, Mage = 25.3, SDage = 8.9; amateur, elite junior and elite level) from three sports (tennis, curling, floorball) during two matches or games, respectively (familiarization and validation phase).
Each time they rated three to four sport specific sequences (i.e., a game, an end or a period) directly after the sequence (tennis and floorball) or at the end of the game (curling). Results from familiarization show that athletes understood the instruction very well and reported no or minor positive changes for their athletic performance indicating a good usability of the FAB measure. Furthermore the FAB measure is reliable (αs > .81) and valid.
FAB significantly correlated with general subjective and objective performance measures (e.g., win/loss), and was related to performance level. Advantages and disadvantages of the ambulatory assessment method in sport are discussed. In sum, FAB might be a good alternative to objective performance outcomes to examine the quality of a SPI.
FAB is less dependent on interfering factors, allows for a comparison between different sports, and is close to what athletes actually do and experience in competitive situations (i.e., a high external validity). Keywords: ambulatory assessment, applied research, validation Psychological well-being in relation to leisure-time physical activity among female university students Petra Dolenc (University of Primorska) Several studies have provided ample support for the positive association between regular physical activity and psychological well-being. Despite the well-known health benefits of physical activity, young women are less likely to meet physical activity recommendations compared with men.
The objective of the present cross- sectional study was to examine the relationship between participation in leisure-time physical activity (LTPA) and psychological well-being (emotional states, life satisfaction, self-esteem, perceived global health status) in Slovenian female university students. A total of 145 participants aged between 19 and 25 (M = 20.49, SD = 1.31) were classified into three LTPA groups (low, moderate, and high) according to physical activity frequency, intensity and duration. Psychological well-being variables were measured using the Slovenian versions of 426Posters Tuesday July 11th Satisfaction with Life Scale, Positive and Negative Affect Schedule, State Self-Esteem Scale and Self-Rated Health.
In relation to the three LTPA groups, MANOVA indicated significant differences in well-being variables (Pillai’s Trace = 0.32, F = 3.18, p < .01, partial η2= 0.13). High and moderate LTPA groups rated their perceived health status better than the low LTPA group. Participants with high and moderate LTPA also exhibited higher self-esteem compared with those with low LTPA.
Furthermore, life satisfaction and positive affect were significantly higher in the high LTPA group than in the low LTPA group. Research findings have demonstrated the potential effect of regular physical activity on psychological well-being in female university students. It would be of utmost importance to promote physical activity during the emerging adulthood years since lifestyle patterns are often set during this time period.
Keywords: life satisfaction, positive affect, negative affect, self-rated health, self-esteem, physical activity Stress coping strategies and self-efficacy in athletes of different performance Petar Mitic, Nenad Stojiljkovic (Faculty of Sport and Physical Education, University of Nis, Serbia) Adequate stress coping is often cited as one of the important factors of success in sport. Also, frequent question is which psychological characteristics are associated with adequate coping. It is particularly important to identify those psychological characteristics that can be improved.
The aim of this paper is to examine the relationship between self-efficacy expression and stress coping strategies in athletes of different performance. The sample comprised 340 athletes, 171 of which belong to a sub-sample of elite athletes (those playing for the national team or participating in international competitions), whereas 169 of them are non-elite athletes (involved in the regular competition system at a lower national level). The CISS instrument is used in order to collect data on the stress coping strategies (Endler & Parker, 1990) and GSE (Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1995) for self-efficacy.
The results indicate that elite athletes show a preference for using task-focused strategies rather than those emotion-focused and avoidance-focused ones (social diversion and distraction). In both sub- samples, task-focused coping strategy use is in a statistically significant positive correlation with self-efficacy, whereas self-efficacy has statistically significant, poor and negative correlation with emotion-focused strategies only in elite athletes. The results emphasize the importance of adequate coping with stress for elite sports performance, as well as the connection between self-efficacy with such coping strategies.
Considering the fact that self-efficacy can be improved from the earliest ages through vicarious experience, verbal persuasion and successful performance, this finding could have practical implications for coaches in the sense that by improving self-efficacy they can help athletes to be more prepared to deal with stress. Keywords: coping strategies, self-efficacy, athletes, performance Attentional focus in motor learning: the effects of the distance of external focus of attention and task difficulty Pei-Pei Cho, Chu-Min Liao (National Taiwan Sport University) Previous studies (e.g., Wulf, Höß, & Prinz, 1998) have shown that learning can be enhanced by directing performers’ attention away from their body (‘‘external focus’’). It has also been suggested that the distance of the external focus and task difficulty might affect the advantage an external focus of attention (e.g., Wulf, 2007).
The purpose of the present study was to test the interactional effects of the distance of the external focus and task difficulty on learning badminton services. Badminton novices (N=78) were randomly assigned into a 2x4 (task difficulty x attentional focus) between-group design, learning either forehand (relatively simple) or backhand (relatively difficult) low services with an internal attentional focus (focusing on the wrist), near external focus (focusing on the face of the racket), far external focus (focusing on the top of the net), or the farthest external focus (focusing on the service line on the opposite court). Participants had a total of 200 trials (20x10 blocks) in the acquisition phase and 20 trials in a retention test and a transfer test.
Performance was 427Posters Tuesday July 11th measured by both the trajectory and the location of the service. ANOVAs showed that the group focusing on the top of the net performed significantly better than the group focusing on the wrist in the transfer test, with no other differences in the transfer test and no group differences in the retention test was found. These results didn’t support the suggested effects of the distance of the external focus and task difficulty but did show the benefits of external focus of attention on learning badminton services.
Keywords: attentional focus, relatively difficulty task, distance effect Parents’ emotional intelligence and sideline behaviors: The mediating role of coping strategies Pedro Teques (Polytechnic Institute of Maia), Henrique Martins (Maia University Institute), Daniel Duarte (Polytechnic Institute of Maia) Although the significance of emotional intelligence and coping has been recognized for parental involvement in youth sports (e.g., Harwood & Knight, 2015), no studies were found that explore these relationships. The current research examines how emotional intelligence facilitates adaptive coping across parents’ sidelines behaviors at youth soccer games. During an international youth soccer tournament, 236 parents (126 women, 110 men) of youth soccer players (boys and girls who were between 9 and 15 years of age) were recruited to participate in this study.
Parents ranged in age from 28 to 62 years old (M = 40.50, SD = 5.63). Naturalistic observations were carried out in a football field. Subsequently, parents were approached at the end of the game to participate in the study.
Structural equation modelling was performed to test the relationships between emotional intelligence, coping strategies, and parents’ sideline verbal behaviors. The overall assessment of the structural model was found to be acceptable [χ2(120) = 1242.48, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.95, TLI = 0.94, RMSEA = 0.05 (CI = 0.05, 0.06), SRMR = 0.04]. Regarding the associations between emotional intelligence and coping, parents’ self-emotions appraisals and regulation of emotion showed significant negative relationships on maladaptive coping strategies, whereas others-emotions appraisal, use of emotion, and regulation of emotion were positively associated with adaptive coping.
Next, we examined the links between coping and sideline behaviors. Adaptive coping was positively associated with praise/encouragement, and negatively with negative comments. Maladaptive coping was associated with striking a balance, negative comments, and derogatory comments.
These findings highlight the relevance of parents’ emotional intelligence, and coping strategies in the expression of sideline behaviors during youth games. Keywords: parents' influence, naturalistic observations, structural equation modeling, youth sport, soccer Emotional intelligence and competitive sports: Comparative study between adolescent athletes and non-athletes Pedro Galvis Leal (Universidad Libre) The aim of the study was to compare the Emotional Quotient (EQ) and Intrapersonal, Interpersonal, Stress Management and Adaptability scales in adolescent elite athletes and non-athletes. A sample of 105 subjects (47 athletes and 58 non-athletes) was studied.
The subjects had an average age of 14.6 years on the emotional intelligence quotient. Additionally, the athlete subjects were asked to fill out questionnaires regarding perceived motivational climate. The data obtained indicate a significant difference between the emotional quotient of competitive athletes and non-athletes, with the exception of the variable "Intrapersonal Scale" in which no significant difference was presented.
Also, a positive correlation was found between motivational climate in regards to task orientation and the EQ of athlete subjects. Keywords: emotional Intelligence, sport, motivational climate 428Posters Tuesday July 11th Self-concept in primary schools students and its association with fitness Pedro Antonio Sánchez Miguel, Diana Amado, Miguel Ángel Rodríguez González, Mikel Vaquero Solís (University of Extremadura) The importance of fitness to promote psychological issues in Primary school children is a topic well documented (Mayorga, Viciana, & Cocca, 2012; Rodríguez-García et al. 2012).
In this regard, self-concept is one of the most examined health-related psychological constructs (Madariaga & Goñi, 2009). Thus, the purpose of the current study is to test the relationship between self-concept and fitness in Primary schools students. Participants were 303 students, both male (n = 150) and female (n = 153), ranging in age from 10 to 13 years old (M=11.74; SD=.85), belonged to 8 schools from the city of Cáceres (Extremadura, Spain).
Individuals filled the Physical Self-Concept Scale (Fox, 1990) adapted and validated into Spanish by Moreno, Cervelló, Vera & Ruíz (2005). Moreover, they completed the agility – velocity test (10 x 10 meters) included in Alpha Fitness Test by Ruiz et al. (2009), and the 6 minute walking test (Zenteno, Puppo & Ramiro, 2007) to measure agility and aerobic resistance, respectively.
The dependent variable was fitness, whereas agility and self-concept were included as independent variables in the research. Descriptive, correlation and regression analysis were used in order to know the relationships and predictions with the variables studied. Results revealed a strong relationship between perception of self-concept and velocity-agility, as well as low levels of self-concept were related with poor fitness.
Further, appearance and self-esteem emerged as predictors of poor fitness in Primary students. Finally, these outcomes showed evidences of the importance of promoting physical activity in education in order to enhance self-concept in students. Besides, some strategies to increase physical activity levels in education, as well as some practical implications are shown.
Keywords: self-concept, fitness, students, primary school Levels of stress and recovery in brazilians road cycling athletes Paulo Vitor Suto Aizava, Matheus Almenara Rosendo (Maringá State University) Ciclism is a sport popularly practiced by young people and adults in general. As a competitive context, stress is a variable that can lead to psychophysical destabilization between the athlete and the environment. High levels of stress are related to insecurity, restlessness, increased anxiety-state and have a direct impact sports performance.
This study verified the levels of stress and recovery in Brazilian road ciclism athletes. Our sample was composed by 45 athletes from 9 ciclism teams from the state of Paraná – Brazil. Data were collected with the RESTQ-Sport Stress and Recovery Questionnaire for Athletes, 1 or 2 days before the 16th Century game Song City Cup, in the second semester of 2016.
Athlete were evaluated at their accommodations, according to the subject's availability. Data were analyzed using the Anova One Way (Levene homogeneity test, Bonferroni’s post hoc) Kruskal-Wallis test, Spearman's correlation coefficient (p<0.05). The results showed that cyclists presented low levels of stress (general stress x = 2.25) and recovery (social recovery x = 4.25, physical recovery x = 3.75).
The athletes who did not complete the competition had greater somatic complaints (Md = 2.25) and the athletes who won the podium showed a better physical recovery (Md = 4.25) than the other competitors (p = 0.008). The dimensions conflict / pressure (r = -0.293, p <0.05), lack of energy (r = -0.444, p <0.01) and somatic complaints (r = -0.317, p <0.05) significant and negative relation with age, whereas fatigue (r = 0.294, p <0.05) was positively correlated with the time of practice. It is concluded that better-performing ciclism athletes are better equipped to withstand all the physical and psychological pressure that the sport provides to the athlete during the competition, indicating age as a possible factor to control these demands.
Keywords: stress, recovery, performance, ciclism 429Posters Tuesday July 11th Levels of personal and social responsibility of athletes and attitudes towards sport Paulo Martins (Faculdade Motricidade Humana) The development of personal and social responsibility (PSR) through sport participation, promotes a successful transition into adult life. As such, this study looks to contribute towards the understanding of the relationship between the development of personal and social responsibility (PSR) and attitudes towards sport within the context of competitive sports. The study counted with the participation of 472 athletes (mas=365; fem=107) the average age was 16.97 years (SD= 4.51).
The athletes were from different competitive levels (i.e. elite, national and regional) different sports (individual, collective and combat sports). In order to measure the levels of PSR and attitudes towards sport (both positive and negative ones) we used the Portuguese versions of the Personal-Social Responsibility Questionnaire and of the Sports Attitudes Questionnaire.
A confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to examine the psychometric properties of the model. Internal consistency of the constructs was assessed through composite reliability, while average variance extracted (AVE) values were estimated to assess convergent validity. Then a structural model was performed to test the relationships between the constructs.
The results reveled a good adjustment with the data [χ²(247) =616.93 (p <.001), χ²/gl=2,498; CFI=.94, GFI=.90; TLI=.93, RMSEA=.058]. The results also revealed that PSR (β=.79, p<.001) has a positive meaningful connection with Positive Attitudes. On the other hand, the coefficients of the trajectories between RPS and Positive and Negative Attitudes revealed that the coefficient of the trajectory between PSR and Negative Attitudes (β=-.04, p<.689) did not showcase a statistically meaningful value..
Overall, the RPS variable was responsible for approximately 63 % of the variance of the factor Positive Attitudes (R2=.63). In conclusion this study remarks that high levels of PSR correspond to high levels of positive attitude towards competitive sport participation. Keywords: Personal and social responsibility, attitudes, sport Competitive anxiety in young elite female handball players according to specific playing position Patricia Irene Sosa Gonzalez, Rosa Maria Alfonso Rosa (Universidad de Sevilla) Many authors emphasize the importance of competition anxiety about sports performance.
Thus, the main objectives were to determine the psychological profile presented by young female handball players in terms of competitive anxiety, and explore the relationship between competitive anxiety and specific playing position. The sample was composed by 137 female players aged 13 to 16 years old (M= 14.25, SD=.74). The competitive anxiety subscale (with 8 items) belonging to the Spanish “Escala Infantil - Juvenil de Habilidades Psicológicas y Comportamiento en el Deporte - CHPCDC” (Godoy, Vélez, Ramírez & Andréu, 2005) was used (“Psychological Skills and Behaviors in Sport Competition -Children-Young Scale” in English).
The results show that the days before the game the players are more nervous than when the game will start and feel even less nervous during the game. The main reason that increases their nervousness during the game are their own or team's mistakes or failures. Regarding matches, 34.3% say that they feel just as nervous whether they play at home or away or if they win or lose, and 32.1% say they feel more nervous when they play at home and lose.
On the contrary, during the training the players do not feel any pressure or this does not affect their performance. 41.6% say that when they feel overly active or nervous they do things that always help them feel better and control them. The results show a statistically significant association, low and directly proportional (contingency coefficient = 0.329, p <0.05) between the amount of pressure, tension, fear or nervousness felt by the players in the hours prior to the match and their specific position of game.
It is necessary to implement specific intervention programs to provide tools that help athletes adjust their levels of competitive anxiety, especially for the days before the competition. Keywords: competitive anxiety, handball, young female players, specific playing position,sports performance 430Posters Tuesday July 11th Study about motivation in young high level performance female handball players Patricia Irene Sosa Gonzalez, Rosa Maria Alfonso Rosa (Universidad de Sevilla) The aims of this study were to know the motivation level of female handball players in terms of basic, daily and competitive motivation, and analyze possible differences in the degree of each these motivations, depending on the specific playing position. The sample was composed by 137 high-level female handball players aged 13 to 16 years old (M=14.25; SD=0.74) participated in the study.
All players competed in the highest league of their sports category, were selected as the best players of their sport category and included in the National Sporting Training Program of the Royal Spanish Handball Federation. As data collection instrument the three subscales of motivation (basic, daily and competitive) of the Spanish “Escala Infantil - Juvenil de Habilidades Psicológicas y Comportamiento en el Deporte - CHPCDC” (Godoy, Vélez, Ramírez & Andréu, 2005) - “Psychological Skills and Behaviors in Sport Competition -Children-Young Scale”, in English, were used. The results, analyzed by percentage in each of the five response options, show that in the basic motivation subscale, 90.5% of the players responded that they practice this sport because "I simply have free time and I am good at this." About the daily motivation subscale, 52.6% of the players reached a high level, and 43.1% even very high.
With regard to competitive reasons, it is observed that 92.7% of the players show a high competitive motivation during the match, dropping this high competitive motivation to 68.6% of the participants during the training sessions, noting also that 29.9% of them report an intermediate competitive motivation during training. Regarding the analysis of the different types of motivation according to the specific position of the game, the results show there wasn´t association between basic motivation, daily motivation and competitive motivation according to specific playing position occupied by these young female handball players. Keywords: motivation, handball, young female players, specific playing position, sports performance Effects of exercise on executive functions in Korean preschool children Hei-Rhee Ghim (Chungbuk National University), In-sun Kang, Hyeonjin Lee (Yeungnam University) This study examined the effects of physical exercise on Korean children’s executive functions.
Fifty one 3- year- old, 53 4-year-old, and 53 5-year-old children participated in the study. The children in each age group were divided into two groups, i.e., a physical exercise group and a non-physical exercise group. Children in the physical exercise group participated in the football game or Taekwondo(Korean martial art) after school and children in the non-physical exercise group participated in a violin lesson or an English lesson after school.
The children were trained 4-5 times a week for 3-months. Three components of executive functions were measured at the beginning of the semester and remeasured after 3-months. Inhibitory control was measured by a flag task, switching was measured by a card-sorting task, and working memory was measured by a backward-word task.
After controling the pretest scores, the covariance analysis were conducted. The results were as follows. There was a significant group effect (inhibitory control, F(1,150)=18.81, p <.001, switching, F(1,150)=51.91, p<.001, working memory.
F(1,150)=79.64, p<.001), showing much higher performance in the physical exercise group than in the non-physical exercise group. These results mean that physical exercise plays an important role in executive functions. There was also a significant age effect (inhibitory control, F(2,150)=4.84, p<.01, switching, F(2,150)=13.22, p<.001, working memory, F(2,150)=7.16, p<.001), showing a big difference between 3- and 4-year-olds.
These results imply that the physical exercise effect might vary depending on the age level. Keywords: exercise, executive function, inhibitory control, working memory, switching Distributive justice: the effects of coaches’ interpretation of status and power of the role of coach Ling-Wen Huang, Chu-Min Liao (National Taiwan Sport University) 431Posters Tuesday July 11th Blader & Chen (2012) have been devoted to differentiating status and power, and have found status and power would have opposing effects on justice enacted toward others. The purpose of our study was to explore the coaches’ interpretation of status and power on distributive justice.
In our experiment, 34 coaches who were divided into status or power group. Each coach read a scenario and role play as the head coach in the scenario that described a city team won champion in national competition and the team received prize from sport department in the city. Every coach can remain the same allocation or reassign the prize to 5 starting athletes, 1 bench player, 1 head coach and 1 assistant coach.
In proportion analysis, three out of eleven coaches in power group and six out of twenty-three coaches in status group remained the same distribution way. Eight out of eleven coaches in power group reassigned and six of them distributed much more money to head coach. On the other hand, fifteen distribution ways were occurred in status group and only two of them reassigned more money to head coach.
We assume that athletes perceived been exploit by head coach if they receive less money than they deserved. Comparing two kinds of explanation of role, 9.1% injustice occurred in status group significantly lower than 36.4% injustice in power group. Our results showed different ways in explaining the authority of coach lead to different decision making process.
We suggested coaches to see themselves in a good way that is earn respect from others instead of manipulate power. Keywords: fairness, coach-athlete relationship, leadership Relationship of physical condition with attentional and perceptive measures in adolescents depending on gender Rafael Enrique Reigal Garrido, Antonio Hernández Mendo, Verónica Morales Sánchez, Juan Pablo Morillo Baro, Juan Antonio Vázquez Diz, Luna Moral Campillo, Miriam Crespillo Jurado, Araceli Fernández Gea, Joaquín Delgado Giralt, Alejandro Domínguez Fernández, Roberto Pérez Lobato, Rocío Juárez Ruiz De Mier (Universidad de Málga, España) To analyze the relationship between physical activity practice and cognitive development, it is necessary to evaluate physical fitness variables. In numerous studies it has been emphasized that the improvements in brain functioning appear when the physical capacity of the individuals has been significantly increased.
The purpose of this study was to analyse the relationship between physical condition and perceptual and attentional capacity in a group of adolescents according to gender. A total of 116 adolescents from the province of Malaga (Spain), aged between 14 to 17 years (M = 15.07; SD = .86) participated in the study. To analyse the perceptive and attentional processes, the Toulouse-Pieron test and the D2 care test were used.
The physical condition was evaluated through the horizontal jump test, the Course Navette test and the 5 x 10 meter speed test. Linear regression analyses were performed, which indicated that oxygen consumption and the horizontal jump test were predictors of the attentional and perceptive measures analysed in the boys. In girls, oxygen consumption and speed test were the main predictors.
The obtained results suggest, as described in previous research, that physical fitness should be a variable valued when the impact of physical activity is analysed on the cognitive development of children and adolescents. In addition, coinciding with previous research, the variable oxygen consumption is one of the main measures related with cognitive performance, appearing in this work both in the predictive models of boys and girls. Keywords: physical activity, physical condition, attention, adolescence Physical condition and attentional ability in adolescents Antonio Hernández Mendo, Juan Pablo Morillo Baro, Verónica Morales Sánchez, Juan Antonio Vázquez Diz, Rafael Enrique Reigal Garrido, Fernando González Guirval, María Auxiliadora Franquelo Egea, Joaquín Delgado Giralt, Miriam Crespillo Jurado, Luna Moral Campillo, Araceli Fernández Gea, Alejandro Domínguez Fernández (Universidad de Málga, España) 432Posters Tuesday July 11th In the last years, several works have highlighted the positive impact of the practice of physical activity on children and adolescents.
The benefits that have been suggested by these investigations have a special relevance in this phase of the life cycle due to the positive relationship that exists between a correct cognitive activity with an adequate psychosocial functioning and adaptation to the environment. It is also considered that for physical practice to affect these health parameters, it must have a previous impact on the physical condition of the people, acting as a modulator. With the purpose of increasing the evidences about this line of work, the purpose of this work was to analyse the attentional capacity of a group of adolescents in function of diverse variables of physical condition.
116 adolescents from the province of Malaga (Spain), aged between 14 and 17(M=15.07; DE=86), participated in the study. The Toulouse-Pieron test was used to analyse the perceptual and attentional processes. The physical condition was evaluated with the horizontal jump test, the Course Navette test, the 5 x 10 meter speed test and a percentage of fat mass measurement.
Two groups (n1= 55 y n2 = 61) were made up through cluster analysis, characterized by a low and a high level of physical condition respectively. The analyses of means comparisons indicated that the group with the best physical condition scored the most favorable in the following care test parameters: responses (R), processed (P), hits (A), omissions (O) and direct score (P.S). There were no significant differences in errors (E).
The results obtained suggest, as has been described in previous research, that the fitness level could be related to the attentional capacity at these ages. Keywords: physical activity, physical condition, attention, adolescence How does leadership affect wisdom through coaching-efficacy based on passion? A conditional process model Gokhan Caliskan (Gazi University), Arif Ozer (Hacettepe University), Veysel Kucuk (Marmara University) Most decisions are based on incomplete information on wisdom, which is both the most effective use of available knowledge and the acceptance of the consequences of wrong decisions (Lloyd,2006).
Morse (1996) indicated that transformational leaders dealt with ambiguity and could see the limitations of their decisions. They encourage the maturation in followers. Young (2006) asserted that individuals having higher self-efficacy made more decisions than ones having lower self efficacy.
This research investigated the mediator role of efficacy between leadership and wisdom. Also, this indirect relationship could change depending on passion. For the development of individual wisdom, passion, which is the enforcement of belief to make things happen, is highly significant.
Moreover, passion is essential to the application or action of wisdom (Rowley, 2005). Therefore, passion could be in moderated relationship with transformational leadership, efficacy, and wisdom.The aim of the current study is to examine whether the passion moderates the indirect effect of the coaches’ transformational leadership on wisdom. The coaching-efficacy mediates the relationship between coaches’ transformational leadership and wisdom (Hayes, 2012-2016; model 14).152 voluntary soccer coaches from Turkish professional leagues in 2016-2017 participated in this study.
Coaching experiences of the participants ranged from 13 to 18 years. Differentiated Transformational Leadership Inventory (Callow et al., 2009), Coaching Efficacy Scale (Feltz et al., 1999) Coach Passion Scale (Vallerand et al., 2003) and Three- Dimensional Wisdom Scale (Ardelt, 2003) were applied to the participants. Process script was performed.
As pre-analysis, assumptions of regression were checked. According to the result of the analysis, there is a statistically significant positive correlation between the scores of transformational leadership and self efficacy (b= .93, t= 7.93, p=.00). Increase in each unit transformational leader.
Keywords: wisdom, transformational leadership, coaching efficacy, passion 433Posters Tuesday July 11th Parental support throughout athlete development: The case of Portuguese volleyball players Patrícia Coutinho (Centre For Research, Education, Innovation And Intervention In Sport (CIFI2D), Faculty Of Sport, University Of Porto, Portugal), Sara da Silva, (School Of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK), António M. Fonseca, Isabel Mesquita (Centre For Research, Education, Innovation And Intervention In Sport (CIFI2D), Faculty Of Sport, University Of Porto, Portugal) In the past decades, researchers have examined the psychosocial influences in athlete development and their impact in expertise achievement (Harwood & Knight, 2009; Ulrich-French & Smith, 2006). Specifically, the support provided by parents is considered of utmost importance, having significant implications in athletes’ sport participation, personal development, and performance (Côté, Murphy-Mills, & Abernethy, 2012).
The purpose of this study was to understand the support provided by parents throughout the different stages of volleyball players’ development while considering their expertise level. Thirty highly skilled (HS) and thirty less skilled (LS) volleyball players participated in a retrospective interview specifically designed to gain in-depth understanding of parental support throughout three stages of development (8-12 years, 13-16 years, 17-20 years). The data were subjected to thematic analysis.
Results indicated that both HS and LS players described parents as providers of tangible support during the early stages of development (8-12 years). However, as the players progressed in sport, parents’ role changed to a more emotional supportive role (13-20 years). Considering the players’ expertise level, only LS players reported the overly involvement of parents in training and competitions when they specialized in volleyball (13-16 years) and how sometimes this became a way of pressure for them.
Contrarily, HS players reported that, in this phase, parents were not much involved in training sessions and competitions, but they acted as an important source of emotional support. They also mentioned how parents gave them the agency to decide about their interests and the best pathway to take in their career. The findings of this study highlight the critical and different role that parents play throughout the different stages of players’ development, which may have an important influence in determining the achievement of high levels of performance in sport.
Keywords: psychosocial influences; parents; family; talent development An innovative proposal from the model of sports education in primary education Pablo Luna, Javier Cejudo (UCLM) The present study was aimed at assessing the effect of a programme based on the model of Sport Education (Siedentop,1994) about the psychological well-being in 5th year Primary Education students in a state-subsidized school. The Sport Education Model crops up in order to develop a model for teaching physical education classes that encourage authentic experiences of sport. Experiences in which all students have equal opportunities practice, become efficient (competent), experts of the sport (literate) and excited about practice (enthusiastic).
Sport Education has a sporting and didactic foundation. With regard to the sporting foundation, it tries to preserve the essential aspects of sport. As for the didactic foundation, it focuses on social values, adaptation of curricular content and boosting of educational objectives (e.g.
cooperative learning, autonomy, role assignment). The program was developed in three stages, totaling 18 sessions of 50 minutes each: 1.INITIAL STAGE: explanation of programme, in which the role assignment took place as well as the self- construction of materials. 2.INTERMEDIATE STAGE: formal competition and familiarizing with play.
3.FINAL STAGE: culminating celebration event and hand-over of self-constructed prizes. A quasi-experimental design of repeated measures pretest-posttest with a control group was used. The participants in the study were 108 students (n=108).
Out of the sample group, 28 (25,92%) were assigned to the control group and 80 (74,07%) were assigned to the experimental group. In order to assess psychological well-being, the version of PANAS (Positive and Negative Affect Schedule;Watson, Clark and Tellegen,1998) was used, validated in Castilian by Sandín (2003) for its use with children. The results confirmed that the programme stimulated in the 434Posters Tuesday July 11th experimental groups a significant improvement in the adjustment of psychological well-being.
Mainly,the programme proved to be effective in order to improve positive affectivity (PA). Keywords: primary education, physical education, model of sports education, emotional intelligence, education in values, interdisciplinary nature, divergent thinking Multidimensional perfectionism and cortisol stress response: a systematic review and evaluation Michael Page, Andrew Hill, Owen Kavanagh, Susan Jones (York St John University) The purpose of the study was to conduct a systematic review and evaluation of published research examining multidimensional perfectionism and cortisol stress response. A literature search yielded 7 articles reporting 8 studies.
Seven studies examined cortisol reactivity (CR) and 2 studies examined cortisol awakening response (CAR). Each study was rated in terms of the methodological quality and those rated as high methodological quality were classified as providing supportive, contradictory, or inconclusive/null evidence of a negative relationship between perfectionistic strivings (PS) and cortisol stress response and a positive relationship between perfectionistic concerns (PC) and cortisol stress response. In terms of CR, 1 study was rated as low methodological quality, 1 study was rated as medium methodological quality, and 4 studies were rated as high methodological quality.
Of the high quality studies, one study provided supportive evidence of a positive relationship between PC and CR, and a further 3 provided inconclusive/null evidence. The only high quality study to examine the relationship between PS and CR provided inconclusive/null evidence. In terms of CAR, 1 study was rated as low in methodological quality and the other was rated as medium methodological quality.
Based on our review of research, no firm conclusions can currently be drawn regarding the relationship between multidimensional perfectionism and cortisol stress response. Suggestions are provided in order to improve methodological quality of future research and to address this question appropriately. Keywords: personality, motivation, individual differences Relationships between sports psychological profile, competitive anxiety and satisfaction of basic psychological needs in beach handball players Juan Pablo Morillo Baro, Juan Antonio Vázquez Diz, Antonio Hernández Mendo, Verónica Morales Sánchez (Universidad de Málaga, Spain), María Julia Raimundi (Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina), Jorge Jiménez Salas, Francisco Moreno Morales, Rocío Pérez López, Rafael Enrique Reigal Garrido, Fernando González Guirval (Universidad de Málaga, Spain), Luis Blanco Romero (Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica, Costa Rica), María Auxiliadora Franquelo Egea (Universidad de Málaga, Spain) The objective of this research was to examine the relationship between the sports psychological profile with competitive anxiety and the satisfaction of basic psychological needs in a sample of players of Beach handball depending on gender.
111 U19 and senior players aged between 17 and 32 participated in the study. The 55.90% were of male gender (n=62) and 44, 10% were women (n= 49). The psychological inventory of sports performance (IPED) was used to analyse the sports psychological profile of the participants, the inventory of the state of anxiety (PNSE) in competition-2 (CSAI-2) to evaluate the State of anxiety and self- confidence, and the scale of satisfaction of basic psychological needs to measure the satisfaction of the basic psychological needs.
Through an analysis of cluster, by gender, the sample was divided into two groups based on the variables of the IPED (male: n1=24 y n2=38; female: n1= 27 and n2= 22. In both genders, the created groups were characterized by a low score in all factors of the IPED in one case and a high score in all of the factors of the IPED in another case. Comparison of means analyses indicated that men had less somatic anxiety, as well as greater self-confidence, perception of the need for competition and social relations in the group with higher scores in the IPED.
In women, the results showed that girls with higher scores in the IPED obtained 435Posters Tuesday July 11th better scores on self-confidence and perception of the need for competition. The data obtained in this study indicated that the analysis of the psychological profile of sports could help to better understand the athletes and to assess more accurately some psychological variables involved in sports performance. Keywords: psychological profile, anxiety, basic psychological needs , beach handball 436Posters Wednesday July 12th WEDNESDAY JULY 12TH Posters Session 3.
(9:30-10:30) Psychological characteristics associated with sports performance in young elite female handball players. Differences between specific playing position Patricia Sosa Gonzalez, Rosa Maria Alfonso Rosa (Universidad de Sevilla) The psychological characteristics have received special attention from the researchers, since these usually have a great influence not only in training performance but also during competitions. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine the psychological characteristics associated with sport performance in young elite female handball players and whether there were psychological profiles differences between specific playing positions.
The sample was composed of 137 young elite female handball players with a mean age of 14.25 (SD= .74) years old, which have been playing a mean of 8.66 (SD= 2.16) years, and participating in competitions during 5.10 (SD= 2.18) years. All players competed in the highest league of their sports category, were selected as the best players of their sport category, belonged to the National Sporting Training Program of the Royal Spanish Handball Federation, and commonly performed at least 3 training sessions per week plus one official match. As data collection instrument the Spanish “Cuestionario de Caracteristicas Psicológicas Relacionadas con el Rendimiento Deportivo –CPRD” (Gimeno, Buceta & Pérez-Llantada, 2001) was used (“Psychological Characteristics Associated with Sports Performance Questionnaire” in English).
Regards the specific playing position, 25.2% played in the back positions, other 25.2% played in wing position, 15.8% played in centre back position, 16.5% played in pivot position, and 15.1% played in goalkeeper position. No statistically significant differences were found in the psychological profiles according to specific position occupied by the young female handball players. Future studies are necessary whit a larger sample size, as well as age and sex, in order to generalize these conclusions.
Keywords: psychological profile, sports performance, handball, young female players, specific playing position Dose-response effect of acute exercise on resting-state EEG in children with attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder Yu-Jung Tsai (Department of Physical Education, National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan), Chung-Ju Huang (Graduate Institute of Sport Pedagogy, University of Taipei, Taiwan), Tsung-Min Hung (Department of Physical Education, National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan) Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is characterized by a deviant pattern of baseline cortical activity during resting state with increased theta/beta ratio. Previous studies have provided evidence to support the beneficial effects of moderate acute exercise on normalizing the cortical activity in children with ADHD; however, the moderating role of exercise intensity has not been addressed. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the dose-response relationship between intensity levels of acute aerobic exercise in children with ADHD.
For 28 children with ADHD, the resting-state EEG during eyes open was recorded before and after a single bout of acute exercise at three different intensities in counterbalanced order. The results showed that high exercise intensity had lower theta/beta ratios compared to low exercise intensity in the parietal region after exercise intervention. In addition, only high exercise intensity showed a pre-post reduction in theta/beta ratio for the parietal region.
These findings suggest that high exercise intensity may be more effective in normalizing the cortical activity that enhances the cognitive functions of children with ADHD. Keywords: exercise intensity, ADHD, EEG ratios 437Posters Wednesday July 12th Impact of physical activity enjoyment on physical activity frequency and motor ability among Japanese children aged 6-12 years Yujiro Kawata, Akari Kamimura (Juntendo University), Shino Izutsu (Japan Women's College of Physical Education) An increase in inactive children and decline in the motor ability of young people in Japan have been public concerns because they may cause secondary problems, such as lifestyle disease at a young age. We focused on the importance of physical activity enjoyment with regard to these problems.
This study aimed to clarify the impact of physical activity enjoyment on the frequency of physical activity and motor abilities among Japanese children aged 6-12 years. Participants were 370 Japanese children aged 6-12 years: 191 boys and 179 girls (Mage = 8.74 ± 1.86). We collected the data of children’s demographic profiles (sex, age), physical size (height, weight), physical activity enjoyment, frequency of physical activity, and motor abilities (performance during a 50m sprint, standing broad jump, softball throwing, grip force, sit-ups, forward bending, quick jumps, and multistage fitness test).
To examine the effect of physical activity enjoyment, we conducted a regression analysis considering sex, age, and body mass index as moderators. The result showed a significant effect of physical activity enjoyment on frequency of physical activity (β = .396, p < .001). There were significant effects on performance of the 50-m sprint (β = -.109, p < .01), standing broad jump (β = .161, p < .001), softball throwing (β = .184, p < .001), grip force (β = .107, p < .01), sit-ups (β = .209, p < .001), quick jumps (β = .232, p < .001), and multistage fitness test (β = .232, p < .001).
However, no significant effect on forward bending was observed. These results indicate that children’s physical activity enjoyment has an impact on the frequency of physical activity and motor ability; thus, we propose that fostering enjoyment in physical activity might resolve the problem of inactivity and motor decline among Japanese children. Keywords: physical activity enjoyment, physical activity frequency, motor ability, young children Program for the development of the implicit beliefs related to the intelligence and sporting ability in secondary students Ricardo Martínez- Romero (Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain; Assistant Professor University of Concepción, Chile), Viviana Espinoza Torres (University of Concepción, Chile) The importance of study habits, health and behaviors in the beginning of the educational processes is of crucial importance in the people's life, due to the evidence that these practices continue into adulthood.
The aim was to evaluate whether the application of a 6-session program increases the score of the incremental variable in the instrument of the implicit beliefs related to the intelligence and sporting ability. The descriptive, longitudinal and quasi-experimental study with two groups: one control and another experimental of secondary students of Concepción, Chile. A program of 6 sessions was designed and then applied once a week, with a duration of 90 minutes chronological, to increase the confidence, persistence, security, the stirring of problems, among others.
Then, two questionnaires were applied: Implicit beliefs of intelligence (Dweck & Leggett, 1988) and Implicit beliefs of sporting ability (Biddle, Wang, Chatzisarantis, & Spray, 2003), each instrument has two dimensions, Fixed and Incremental. The results obtained, after the application of the Questionnaire Implicit beliefs of intelligence, indicated that only the students of the experimental group, in the fixed dimension, showed difference before and after the program. On the other hand, the data cast from the Questionnaire Implicit beliefs of sporting ability, on control and experimental groups did not show significant results after the application of the program.
Although the results were not encouraging, future research should include the analysis of the implicit beliefs of intelligence and ability, through longitudinal and experimental studies that provide information on how to develop the incremental belief, identifying stages of development to improve the establishment of habits. Keywords: ability, belief, sport, intelligence, student, incremental, fixed 438Posters Wednesday July 12th After the final buzzer – life satisfaction and readiness for sports retirement of former elite ice-hockey players Pasi Roslund, Raymond Bertram (University of Turku), Niilo Konttinen (KIHU Research Institute for Olympic Sports) The termination of a sports career of elite sporters happens at a relatively young age. For this reason, elite sporters have to commence an alternative career after their sports career, a situation not every sporter is prepared for.
The purpose of this study was to investigate which sport-related factors influence former Finnish elite ice-hockey players’ post-career life satisfaction as well as the factors that determine their preparedness for career termination. The data set included 159 former Finnish professional ice hockey players who responded to an extensive web questionnaire. We used linear regression models to analyze which factors are related to life satisfaction and preparedness for career termination.
The results showed that post career life satisfaction was influenced by players’ subjective evaluation of athletic achievements, readiness for career termination and education level. More specifically, it was found that more achievements, better preparedness for post-career life, and higher level of education were related to greater life satisfaction. In turn, preparedness for post-career life was related to voluntariness of the retirement decision, institutional support and education level (but not e.g.
athletic identity) with more voluntary retirement decisions, more institutional support (from the club and the ice hockey association) and higher level of education being related to higher degree of preparedness for post-career life. By responding to a number of open questions, the former ice hockey players suggested possible improvements to increase preparedness for post-career life. Economical guidance, mentor systems, and earlier alerting of education possibilities were offered as solutions to attenuate and/or avoid possible negative consequences of career termination in the future.
Keywords: life satisfaction, preparedness, retirement, ice hockey Links between perceived motivational climate and Greek youth basketball players’ motivation Omiros Vlahos (University of Thessaly) It is well documented that coach created motivational climate has a significant impact on athletes’ motivation. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the links between perceived motivational climate and Greek youth basketball players’ motivation. The sample consisted of 222 youth athletes (M age: 13.8 ± 1.41 years) from eight Greek basketball clubs, that voluntarily participated in this study.
Prior to their training session, participants completed a number of valid and reliable questionnaires measuring perceived motivational climate, behavioral regulation in sport, basic psychological needs, and achievement goals. Results showed that mastery approach climate, performance approach climate and social approval climate were positively related with the most adaptive motivational variables, that is intrinsic and identified regulation, autonomy, competence, relatedness and task oriented goal. On the other hand, performance avoidance climate was positively related to the most maladaptive outcomes, namely, introjected regulation, extrinsic regulation, amotivation and ego oriented goal.
Multiple regression analyses revealed that performance avoidance climate and mastery approach climate were the most significant predictors for most of the dependent variables. Based on the above results, perceived motivational climate seems to play an important role on youth basketball players’ motivation. Coaches should have the proper training, through innovative educational intervention programs, aiming to create a team climate that will emphasize personal development, social approval, cooperation, empowering interpersonal relations and enhanced athletes' autonomy.
Keywords: climate, basketball, motivation, youths 439Posters Wednesday July 12th Level of activación in the badminton serve Omar Estrada Contreras, Nicolas Fernández Martínez (CEU Cardenal Spínola), Eugenio Antonio Pérez Córdoba (Universidad de Sevilla), Enrique Cantón (Universidad de Valencia), Pablo Jodra Jiménez (Universidad Alfonso X El Sabio) In the research carried out by Estrada-Contreras, Barrios, Pérez-Córdoba, González, Álvarez and Morales (2013), in which the level of psychophysiological activation in fencers was registered, it emphasized the interest of measuring the real actions of athletes. The objective of this work was to measure the activation level of the serve in two conditions of greater and lesser pressure in Badminton players. A number of 30 athletes participated (Mage= 19.81 years old, SD = 7.88), divided by level of performance (high and low).
The Schufried Biofeedback 2000 wireless equipment was used to measure the following variables: galvanic skin response, heart rate, peripheral temperature, motility and electromyography. The level of subjective activation was measured with a Likert scale. Another Likert scale for the subjective assessment of performance by the coach.
There were different conditions for the service: Warming up, Low Pressure and High Pressure. In the results, we found that the conditions presented differences in the following variables: electromyography F(2.28) = 4.29, p= .024, with high pressure, being more active than low pressure (DM= 2.36, p= .028). The peripheral temperature F(1.21,17.03)= 28.78, p <.001.
The level of subjective arousal F (2.28) = 28.78, p <.001. The performance F(2.28) = 3.89, p= .032. In general, we can say that the arousal level increases as the pressure of the conditions increases, but it only does it in the variables of EMG and peripheral temperature, as well as in the subjective response of arousal, being the equipment of high performance which is more active, but it also shows a better performance.
Possibly accustomed to high levels of pressure. Keywords: activation, badminton, serve, psychophysiological response, performance Effect of verbal feedback on the psychophysiological arousal of university athletes Omar Estrada Contreras, Macarena del Rosario Prado Salinas, Sara García García (CEU Cardenal Spínola) In a research carried out by Barbero-Alvarez, Gómez, Barbero, Granda and Castagna (2008) they measured the heart rate in young indoor football players during a football match, using heart rate monitors. The objective of that study was measuring the impact of verbal feedback on the psychophysiological arousal response during the execution of the indoor footlball circuit.
A number of 32 university athletes participated in this investigation (Mage= 20.66 years old, SD= 1.83) divided by sex (men and women) and type of feedback (possitive-negative and negative-possitive), There were 4 groups of 8 people each one. The feedback was administered to the subject during the execution of the indoor football circuit. The psychophysiological arousal was to measure with heart rate and subjective arousal level, in addition performance and run time were considered.
In the results we found significant differences in the next variables: in heart rate F(2.77,36.01)=109.65, p < .001. At the subjective arousal level F(3.64,47.35)=35.58, p < .001 and the arousal level of the groups F(3.64,47.35)=5.28, p= .002. The time of execution F(4,52)= 10.99, p < .001, in addition to the time of execution by groups F(4,52)= 3.218, p=.020.
In general, there were not differences in relation to the sex of the participants, but the feedback had an influence on the level of athlethe´s psychophysiological arousal as well as on the time of execution of the activity. Keywords: indoor football, psychophysiological arousal, heart rate, circuit Comparison of group cohesion between beginner and more advanced participants in music yoga classes Oliver Twizell (Brunel University) 440Posters Wednesday July 12th Lewin (1939) stated that cohesion is a cornerstone of group dynamics and, without it, it is doubtful that a group could be said to exist at all (as cited in Beauchamp & Eys, 2007, p. 142).
Despite substantial research on both cohesion and the physical and mental effects of yoga, the only study of note to assess the effects of group cohesiveness in yoga was by Bryan (2012), who found a positive correlation between yoga tenure and exercise adherence. The purpose of this study was to compare group cohesion between beginner and more advanced participants in music yoga classes. Based on the Bryan (2012) study and definitions of group cohesion (Bryan, 2012; Carron, Hausenblas, & Eys, 2005), it was hypothesised that group cohesion would be higher among more advanced yogis compared to beginner-level yogis.
Staff at four yoga studios were approached and two teachers agreed to cooperate in terms of availing attendees at their classes. Upon verbal request, 22 yogis volunteered to participate in a “sport psychology study to assess their opinions of yoga”. Each participant was asked to rate their yoga level as well as their experience of the present class (4 beginners and 17 intermediate/advanced yogis; Mage = 21.0 years; SD = 8.9 years) and confidentiality was assured.
Participants completed an informed consent form, provided demographic details and subsequently responded to the PAGEQ questionnaire prior to their yoga class. Institutional ethical guidelines were fully adhered to. In the comparison of the two levels of participants there were no statistical significance differences (p >.05) in their perceptions of group cohesion.
Therefore, the results did not support the research hypothesis, as differences between beginner and more advanced participants could not be found in a music yoga class. These results lend support to the notion that gaining inner tranquillity is a very individual process and therefore not conducive to group interaction. Keywords: group cohesion, yoga Health psychology in university students: exercise, physical health and nutrition Olga Mariela Mogollon Canal, Sonia Carolina Mantilla Toloza (Universidad de Pamplona, Colombia) This research ended in 2015 at the University of Pamplona, Colombia.
Its objective was to describe from the Psychology of health, using the belief model, the habits of exercise, physical health and nutrition in university students, in order to establish future strategies that will result in their health. The methodology used was a descriptive cross-sectional study with a sample of 836 students chosen by simple random sampling, who were given a validated questionnaire to evaluate physical health. In the statistical analysis, multiple correspondences were used.
The main results were: it was found a high consumption of junk food, considerable level of stress, Low consumption of fruits and vegetables; 85% perceive difficulties in maintaining their physical health and remain sitting between 1 and 10 hours; they follow medical recommendations, walk regularly, and they drink water frequently. Half take care of their weight and believe that the context allows them to maintain it; half consider it easier to find excuses for not exercising than to do so. 46% do not eat breakfast; some women practice basketball and swimming.
Some men practice tennis and soccer. 40% say that they do not do any sport, 23% do not engage in any physical activity; the preferred physical activity in women is aerobics, men prefer to ride a bicycle or walk. Most are striving to consume healthy food.
The conclusions found were that behaviors that could be considered as threats to the health of university students, and others, that could offer possibilities to diminish them, were identified. It is necessary to generate strategies in the context that offer healthy opportunities and facilitate the adoption of habits of exercise and feeding in favor of their health. Keywords: health psychology, exercise, physical health, university students Preference of leadership behaviour of coaches by by nigeria university athletes Olanrewaju Ipinmoroti (Tai Solarin University of Education) TThis study investigated whether gender and type of sport would moderate athletes’ preference of coach leader behaviour Two hundred (200) university athletes (male = 97; female = 103) volunteered to participate in 441Posters Wednesday July 12th the study.
These athletes have participated at Nigeria Universities Games (NUGA). Individual/ dual sport athletes were selected from athletics, table tennis and badminton while team athletes were selected from soccer, volleyball and basketball. The Leadership Scale for Sport (LSS) developed by Chelladurai and Saleh (1980) was adapted for use in collecting data.
24 items were selected from the original 40 items of the questionnaire. The reliability coefficient is r=0.58 The data generated were analysed using mean and frequency counts as well as Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and Pearson Product Moment Correlation (PPMC). Correlation was used to determine the relationship between the variables (gender and type of sport) and preference for coach leadership behaviour.
The results showed there were significant differences in the preference of male and female university athletes in all the five coach leader behaviour. There were significant differences between individual/dual sports and team sport athletes’ preference for Autocratic, Social Support and Positive Feedback coach leader behaviour. There was significant relationship in the preference of male and female athletes in all the five coach leadership behaviours.
There was significant relationship in the preference of individual/dual sport athletes and team sport athletes in autocratic, social support and positive feedback coach leadership behaviour. These findings were in agreement with results of the studies of Weinberg and Gould(2003), Beam, Serwatka, and Wilson (2004); and Sharma (2015). It was recommended that university coaches should be conscious of their leadership behaviour and be willing to align such behaviours to athletes’ needs.
Keywords: preference, coach leader behaviour, individual sport, team sport, university athletes Barriers to sports participation as a means of achieving sustainable social development in michael otedola college of primary education Olalekan Osifeko (Sport Psychology Associations of Nigeria), Bolanle Folarin (Health Educator), Christiana Osifeko Abstract During these difficult economic times, nations are looking for ways to improve their finances, preserve the environment as well as the socio-political climate and educational institutions, which are needed to increase their economy and preserve their sustainable development. Sport is one of the ways through which sustainable development can be achieved. The purpose of this study was to examine the barriers to participation in sport.
A total of 1,025 students were purposively selected from all the five schools (School of Arts and Social Sciences, School of Languages, School of Education, School of Sciences and School of Vocational and Technical Education) in MOCPED. A self structured questionnaire was the main instrument and was supported with oral interview,which contains two sections. Section A sought information on demographic data while section B focused on items dealing with barriers to sports participation.The modified Likert scale with four response options from Agree, strongly agree, disagree strongly disagree was adopted.
The analysis of reliability using split-half and Cronbach alpha coefficient was r=0.71.Descriptive statistics of simple percentage, mean and standard deviation and inferential statistics of Chi Square and Pearson's Product Moment Correlation coefficient were used in analyzing the data at alpha level of 0.05.Sport facilities, funding and lecture schedules were reported as important barriers to participation in sports as a means of achieving sustainable social development in Michael Otedola College of Primary Education . It was recommended that government and college authorities should bear in mind that sustainable social development can be achieved when there is sports facilities, funding and lecture schedules. Keywords: funding, sports facilities, lectures schedules, state government Emotional intelligence and coping strategies in sports: A review Obdulia Tejón López, Juan José Miguel Tobal, Francisco Miguel Tobal (Universidad Complutense de Madrid) 442Posters Wednesday July 12th The current study presents a descriptive review on emotional intelligence and coping strategies in sports with scientific works from 2007 to the present.
This will provide information on what has been investigated and what aspects are unknown in the last decade. Little by little it is been increasing the number of articles in the area and gaining major importance for the sports psychologists who work the day by day with the athletes. A great number of articles are based on the creation of questionnaires to measure emotional intelligence as trait or ability.
Sylvain Laborde and Andrew M. Lane are the authors who have done more research in the last decade studying the relationship between emotional intelligence and exercise. Also, we find studies that have begun to verify the efficiency of programs of training in the emotional intelligence.
With regard to coping strategies, we find have found works that develop three types of coping (focusing on emotion, focusing on the problem and avoidance of the goal). The databases used in the study are as follows: MENDLINE, PubMed, PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, Web of Science and Sport Discus. Keywords for the search were: emotional intelligence, coping strategies and sports.
The variables used for classification are: sports, related variables, instruments, method, year of publication and language. The practical implications of our study are as follows: 1) learn about current research on emotional intelligence and coping strategies, as well as its main results; (2) more understanding of the relationship between emotional intelligence and sport for their future practical application; 3) and provide new fields of research on the basis of the results obtained. Keywords: emotional intelligence, sports, articles, coping strategies Comparison of psychological performance strategies of elite athletes Nurullah Celik, Hakan Kolayis (Sakarya University), Omer Seydaogullari (Marmara University) The purpose of the study was to compare the psychological performance strategies of elite athletes.
The research sample consists of 145 elite athletes (Xage:19,64±4,70) aged between 14-35 who took part in international sport competitions. Personal information form and “Test of Performance Strategies” inventory, which was developed by Thomas et al. (1999) and adapted to Turkish by Miçooğulları (2015), was used as a measuring tool in the study.
For analysis, descriptive statistics and independent samples t-test tests were used. The statistical analysis was done by SPSS 16 packet program. According to the findings, significant differences were found between male and female athletes in emotional control sub-dimension of practice dimension (p=0.012); emotional control sub-dimension of competition dimension (p=0.034), relaxation sub-dimension of competition dimension (p=0.024).
Also, significant differences were found regarding branches in goal setting sub-dimension of practice dimension (p=0.004) and emotional control sub-dimension of competition dimension (p=0.012); regarding psychologist support in goal setting (p=0.003), automaticity (p=0.019) and negative thinking (p=0.004) sub-dimensions of competition dimension. As a result, it can be concluded that psychological performance strategies differs especially in goal setting and emotional control sub-dimensions of competition and practice dimension of Test of Performance Strategies inventory regarding gender, branches and psychologist support. Thanks to this study, athletes will be provided to know the best strategies for a better athletic performance.
Keywords: elite athletes, psychological performance, strategy Impact of the basic psychological needs on well-being and physical activity in older adults Nuno Couto, Raúl Antunes, Diogo Monteiro, João Moutão, Luís Cid (Sport Science School of Rio Maior (ESDRM-IPSantarém), Research Center in Sports Sciences, Health and Human Development (CIDESD)) As is known, the average life expectancy has been increasing, which leads researchers to be concerned about the way in advanced phases of life can live without health problems. Because of this, research has shown that physical activity is essential to older adults quality of life. We also know that Basic Psychological Needs (BPN) are essential to functioning, growing, integrity, being health and well-being predictors.
This way, the 443Posters Wednesday July 12th main goal of this work was to analysed the impact of older adults Portuguese individuals’ global perception of satisfying BPN, over physical activity practice and well-being variables (subjective happiness, subjective vitality) through a structural equations model. The way as feelings of well-being differ according to the amount of physical activity practiced in Portuguese older adults, was also analysed by mean of the test Anova one-way. Participants included 311 older adults (244 females, 67 males) of Portuguese nationality who practice different levels of physical activity.
Their ages range from 60 to 90 years old (M=68.59; DP=6.60). The obtained results show that the perception of basic psychological needs in Portuguese older adults lives are a positive predictor of subjective happiness and subjective vitality. Also, the results verified that older adults who perceive higher levels of competence practice more physical activity.
Consequently, it is also possible to conclude that older adults who participate in more physical activities perceive greater levels of subjective happiness and subjective vitality. Keywords: aging, well-being, physical activity, basic psychological needs "CIDADANIZA" - Planning, implementation and evaluation of a citizen education program in an African-based Portuguese school: an action research case study Nuno Antunes, Ana Besteiro, Alexandra Melo, Janaína Tomás (Portuguese School of Mozambique), Nuno Corte-Real (University of Oporto) It is believed that schools are responsible to prepare students for citizenship, and that almost every child goes through the school system. According to the Portuguese Ministry of Education, citizenship education aims to develop responsible and autonomous persons, who are aware of their rights and are able to discuss them with others, respectfully and democratically.
Thus, the purpose of this study is to describe the planning, implementation and evaluation of a citizen education program that helps students to become citizens, as defined above. The Portuguese School of Mozambique adopts a class tutor system, in which transversal goals are promoted by all teachers and coordinated by the class tutor. The present action research case study follows 12 class tutors who lead groups of 20 students, aged between 10 and 12 years old.
The research team is led by 2 school psychologists and 2 of the class tutors. During the period of the study, from November to June 2017, the tutors meet with the research team every two weeks. These meetings aim to plan activities, according to the feedback collected from students and the discussion between class tutors.
The progressive cycle of action research determines the following activities. The program integrated goal setting, performance profiling, consensus building, jigsaw problems and negotiations. Data was collected using a research diary and a student’s reflective sheet.
Preliminary results reveal that the program is beneficial for the students. The study confirms the importance of collaborative planning and discussion time between teachers. Finally, the results of the study support the multidisciplinary work approach between teachers and school psychologists.
Keywords: citizen education, positive youth development, teacher collaborative work, African-based school, action research Children’s body-image in their drawings －How is the characteristic behavior of children represented in their full-length self-portraits? Noriko Miyake (Tokyo International University) There are some psychological drawing tests. Draw-A-Man test by Goodenough(1926) is measures intelligence using drawings.
Moreover, Machover, K.(1949) wrote “－Personality Projection in the Drawing of the Human Figure”. I developed a technique for measuring body image using a child’s full-length self-portraits and a full-length photographs of themselves. A qualitative analysis was conducted using full-length self- portraits of the frontal and side view, drawn by 151 11-12-year-old elementary school children.
The characteristics of the children’s behavior were identified by their class teachers. Their teachers chose 39 444Posters Wednesday July 12th children who were hyperkinesis, lack of care, impulsiveness, violence, and resistance among their class. I focused on 39 drawings which were drawn by like these children.
I compared their drawings with other children’s drawings in the points of content analysis and features of strokes. The purpose of this study was to compare drawings made by children to the characteristics of their behavior. The characteristics of their behavior were reflected in their drawings.
For example, children whom their class teachers identified to be hyperkinetic scribbled their self-portraits. Their drawings had characteristics such as curved lines, and exaggerated fingers. Their drawings indicated that they were “child[ren] of impulse”; they had features such as large heads, two legs (in side view), and exaggerated fingers.
Their drawings were represented their body- image distinctly in a projective full-length self-portrait, because they drew their full-length self -portraits after they had their pictures taken. It was inferred from this study that drawings made by children represent the characteristics of their behavior. Keywords: body-image, self-portrait, children, characteristic behavior Parental profiles and their effects on elite adolescent athletes’ self-determination theory variables Noémie Lienhart, Virginie Nicaise (LVIS) Parents endorse several roles and provide emotional, financial, logistical supports throughout young elite athletes’ development.
However, parental involvement is not always favorable for youth elite athletes. Previous studies have only been investigated the relationship between specific parental behaviors with athletes’ motivation and emotion. The purposes of the current study were to: (a) identify parental profiles of elite adolescent athletes separately for the mother and the father and (b) examine how athletes in each of parental profiles predicted 7 months later, athlete’s self-determination theory variables.
A total of 221 elite adolescent athletes completed the Parental Involvement in Sport Questionnaire at the start of the season, and the sport motivation, satisfaction and thwarting of basic psychological needs questionnaires at the end of the season. The latent profile analyses were used to identify three parental profiles for both mother and father. Low scores in the 4-behaviors (i.e., pressure, directive behavior, praise and understanding, active involvement) characterized parental profile 1, in contrast with parental profile 3 including high scores for all parental behaviors.
The 2nd profile is represented by parent’s having high praise and understanding behaviors scores, moderate directive behaviors and active involvement scores and low-pressure scores. Analyses of variance indicated that the more adaptive profile for athletes was parental profile 2. Mother’s profile 2 predicted lower athlete’s controlled motivation and thwarting of competence need.
Father’s profile 2 predicted lower athlete’s controlled motivation and higher athlete’s satisfaction of competence need. In sum, the parental profile approach is essential to identify adaptive vs. non-adaptive parental involvement, to be able to implement training program for parents having elite adolescent athletes.
Keywords: mother, father, motivation, latent profile analysis Mental preparation guideline and workbook for young athletes in Hungary Krisztina Kovacs, Noémi Gyömbér The most dominant part of the sportpsychological counselling is to utilize and integrate the psychological skills into the the athlete’s preparedness. The aim is to establish the balance and to prepare the athlete to be able to perfom at the highest physical and mental level in competitions. The successful sport performance contains the ability of concentration, stress-management and anxiety reduction as well as the ability to integrate the psychological profil into the successful performance The more younger the athlete is at the time of the sportpsychological preparation, the more likely can the athletes take advantage of it.
Being a young athlete is a life-stage, which influences the behaviour and performance. As sportpsychologist we experienced, 445Posters Wednesday July 12th that the earlier age we begin the mental preparation, that more effective will be the utilization of the benefits of the psychological factors. Thus, it is highly recommended to begin the sportpsychological counseling even at young age.
The sportpsychology preparation should be age-specific, so we have to consider the special age- related features and problems and life-situations. Based on the research results and practical experiences we have developed a special mental preparation guideline and workbook for young athletes with several self- experience-based exercises. These exercises focus on the topics of abilities and possibilities; mental toughness; goal-setting; coping with anxiety; the attitude of winning; concentration; mental training; mental recovery; self- talk; self-confidence; routines and communication.
The aim of this workbook is to provide a sportpsychological insight and basis for young athletes (especially when they don’t have a chance to meet a sportpsychologist) to help them in the way of mental preparation and to develop co-operation among athletes, coaches and parents. For professional reasons a clinical children psychologist was involved in the process. Keywords: young athletes, mental preparation, workbook, coaches, parents Mindfulness training for Hong Kong elite athletes: A single-case designed study Ning Su, Gangyan Si (Education University of Hong Kong) Over the last 35 years, the traditional psychological skills training (PST) was predominately used to improve athletes’ performance in sport psychology, however, empirical support for the efficacy of PST was lacking.
In this study, the Mindfulness-Acceptance-Insight-Commitment (MAIC; Si et al., 2014), an alternative training of PST developed by Chinese indigenous sport psychologists, was applied among Hong Kong elite athletes, and the efficacy of the MAIC was examined. A multiple-baseline single case design was applied in this study. Four Hong Kong elite athletes, who were first exposed to mindfulness-based training, were recruited from Hong Kong Sports Institute as the participants of this study.
The study included three phases (i.e., baseline phase, intervention phase and post-intervention phase). Baseline phase lasted two weeks with no training, and four points data collections were conducted for all participants with their mindfulness, acceptance, commitment and training performance. Intervention phase lasted 3 weeks with training for all participants, and 6 points data collections were conducted.
Post-intervention phase lasted 2 weeks with no training, and four points data collections were conducted. Visual analysis and Non-Overlap of All Pairs analysis (Parker & Vannest, 2009; Parker, Vannest & Davis, 2011) indicated that the MAIC training had medium or high effect (rescaled NAP values between .32 - 1.0) on mindfulness level, acceptance level, commitment level, and performance for all four athletes. This study demonstrated that the MAIC training was effective for Hong Kong elite athletes.
It can benefit the athletes especially for enhancing their performance. In future, the author welcome more and more Chinese sport psychologists can apply and evaluate the MAIC training. Meanwhile, it is anticipated that more athletes can get benefits from the MAIC training.
Keywords: mindfulness training, mindfulness, acceptance, insight, commitment, elite athletes The construct validity and reliability evidence of Turkish version of sport multidimesional perfectionism scale in adolescents athletes Nükte Özgör,Nilay Hande Kocadag (Faculty of Sport Sciences, İstanbul, Turkey), Atahan Altintas (Başkent University, Sport Sciences Department, Ankara, Turkey), Fevziye Hülya Asçi (Faculty of Sport Sciences, İstanbul, Turkey) The aim of this study was to examine the construct validity of Turkish version of “Sport Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale” (SMPS) for adolescents athletes. The scale was developed by Dunn, Causgrove Dunn and Syrotuik (2002) and includes 30 items and four subscales -personal standards, concern over mistakes, perceived parental pressure, perceived coach pressure-. One hundred and twenty five females (Mage=14.62, SD=1.56) and 102 males (Mage=14.60, SD=1.64), totally 227 adolescent athletes (Mage=14.61, SD=1.59) 446Posters Wednesday July 12th voluntarily participated in this study.
Confirmatory factor analysis was used to test the construct validity of SMPS since it is one of the way to test factor structure of instrument. Confirmatory factor analysis results of 30 items with four factors showed the lower fit index values (x2/sd=3.43; IFI=0.59, TLI=0.54, CFI=0.58, RMSEA=0.09) and lower factor loadings for some items. Therefore, different models were tested and confirmatory factor analysis revealed adequate fit for 12 items with four factors structure (x2/sd=1.92; IFI=0.95, TLI=0.93, CFI=0.95, RMSEA=0.06).
The factor loadings of items were ranged from 0.51 to 0.76 for Personal Standards subscale, from 0.58 to 0.78 for Concern over Mistakes subscale, from 0.67 to 0.83 for Perceived Parental Pressure subscale and from 0.58 to 0.85 for Perceived Coach Pressure subscale. Internal consistency coefficients were 0.69 for Personal Standards, 0.70 for Concern over Mistakes, 0.77 for Perceived Parental Pressure and 0.66 for Perceived Coach Pressure subscales. The results showed that 30 items Turkish version of SMPS has no satisfactory factor structure.
However, 12 items version has acceptable reliability and validity evidence. Therefore, 12 items SMPS can be used to determine Turkish adolescents athletes’ perfectionism level. The validity of the scale should be investigated on another samples and by using different statistical analysis.
Keywords: sport, perfectionism, validity, reliability Development and validation of a new multidimensional measure of coach interpersonal behaviours Nikita Bhavsar, Nikos Ntoumanis, Eleanor Quested (Curtin University), Richard Ryan (University of Rochester), Johnmarshall Reeve (Korea University), Daniel Gucciardi, Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani (Curtin University) Self-determination theory (SDT; Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2002) postulates that an athlete’s behaviour reflects both, personal and socio-contextual motivational influences. To date, SDT based measures of the socio-contextual environment in sport have focused on need supportive and need thwarting behaviours of coaches. Existing measures tapping need thwarting behaviours have often included a combination of items reflecting active need thwarting behaviours as well as need neglecting behaviours, which are unsupportive, but potentially less motivationally damaging.
The distinction between need thwarting and neglecting behaviours is potentially important, as the former are more likely to result in need frustration, whereas the latter are more likely to lead to need dissatisfaction, thus warranting a separate assessment of this type of interpersonal behaviour. As such, the current study aims to develop a new multidimensional measure to assess need supporting, thwarting, and neglecting behaviours of coaches in the sport domain. In Study 1, quantitative and qualitative data was obtained from 20 competitive athletes and eight academic experts in developing and providing content validity evidence for the item pool of the new measure.
The final version of the questionnaire consisted of 54 items, which were deemed clear and applicable to the sport domain by athletes and academic experts. Study 2 is in progress and aims to provide evidence for the factor structure, discriminant validity and reliability of the subscales of the new measure. By demonstrating refined terminology and conceptualisation of the key constructs in this area, this new multidimensional measure can have widespread utility in examining need supporting, neglecting and thwarting coach behaviours and their independent contributions to need satisfaction, dissatisfaction, and frustration, as well as adaptive and maladaptive types of motivation, and various behavioural, cognitive, and affective outcomes.
Keywords: self-determination theory, scale development, coach interpersonal behaviours Career development of Swiss sport psychologists Nicola Jänsch (University of Bern) 447Posters Wednesday July 12th Although the reputation of sport psychologists is steadily growing and there is a current need for well- educated sport psychologists, only a few of the active Swiss sport psychologists invest most of their work time in this area and generate an appropriate income. This outcome was the motivation to further analyze the career development of established, practical working and, according to objective criteria, successful sport psychologists. The study was conducted in form of qualitative single-case analyses.
With the help of a self- developed guideline, the semi-structured interviews investigated four areas: career choice, career development and strategies, encountered barriers and resources and self-evaluated career success. The participants (N=10) reported to became aware of the area of sport psychology due to the own experience in competitive sports or to strong interest in this field. The career development mostly covered different task areas, in practice as well as research, and also included or still includes activities in other areas outside of sport psychology.
Career strategies cover proactive behaviors like acquisition of knowledge, increasing the own level of awareness and networking. The participants report mostly external career barriers like fixed-term job contracts, lacking motivation to invest money in psychological interventions, low flexibility due to family or gender stereotypes. Resources are found external in form of emotional and financial support from family, colleagues and network and professional training as well as internal in form of high adaptability and flexibility.
Most sport psychologists define their career success through personal task satisfaction and high quality of interventions. The analysis indicates critical issues in a sport psychologist’s career development which may be an important help for future candidates in this field as well as for the enhancement of sport psychological education and training. Keywords: sport psychologists, career development, career strategies Perceptual cognitive expertise and the role of anxiety in sport: A systematic review Niall Kelly, Dr.
Matthew Herring, Dr. Mark Campbell (University of Limerick) In recent years, researchers have been interested in the relation between anxiety and the execution of perceptual cognitive skills in sport. Developments in eye tracking technology have allowed us to explore the visual search of an athlete during complex motor tasks.
Previous literature suggests that under elevated anxiety conditions, accuracy, response time, and gaze behaviour can be altered. However, there is a paucity of reviews synthesising the effects of anxiety on such skills. We extend the findings of a previous meta-analysis on perceptual cognitive expertise (Mann, 2007), incorporating the effect of anxiety on similar outcome measures (reaction time, response accuracy, gaze behaviour).
We hypothesised that athletes would react slower and with less accuracy under elevated anxiety conditions. Further, we expected athletes would exhibit more fixations of shorter duration, and a shorter quiet eye period under elevated anxiety conditions. Last, and similar to the findings of Mann (2007), we expected experts to outperform controls specifically in the context of elevated anxiety conditions relative to novices.
Relevant databases (including Psych Info, Web of Science, Google Scholar) were searched in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Post hoc sub group analyses were carried out to explore potential expert/novice differences in response to elevated anxiety. We provide a synthesis of contemporary research on anxiety interventions in sport, and explore the influence of elevated state anxiety on the execution of perceptual motor tasks in a number of sports, and between different levels of expertise.
A central aim of this review was to generate a reference for the current state of knowledge with regard to perceptual cognitive skill and elevated anxiety in sport. Findings may inform future training interventions, and contribute to our knowledge of the mechanisms by which anxiety becomes debilitative to performance. Keywords: gaze behaviour, state anxiety, eye-tracking, reaction time, sport 448Posters Wednesday July 12th Physical activity attenuates negative affective responses during inactivity and hypoxic conditions Nektarios Stavrou (National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; Olympic Athletic Center of Athens “Spyros Louis”, Athens, Gre, Tadej Debevec (Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia), Ola Eiken (Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden), Igor Mekjavic (Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia) Hypoxia and inactivity have both been reported to influence emotional responses.
Hypoxia-related reduction in systemic O2 availability provokes a number of neuropsychological impairments and affects mood, and cognitive function. Inactivity either as a result of illness or experimental bed rest has also been demonstrated to increase the negative psychological responses. The purpose of this study was to investigate the separate and combined effect of inactivity and hypoxia on affective responses and fatigue.
Eleven healthy participants -day interventions using a cross-over design: 1) normobaric hypoxic ambulation (HAMB), 2) normobaric hypoxic inactivity (HI) and 3) normoxic inactivity (NI). Simulated altitude of 4000 m normobaric hypoxia was used for both hypoxic conditions, while experimental bed rest was used for inactivity. Affective and fatigue responses were investigated by the Activation Deactivation Adjective Check List, and Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory, respectively, which were completed 2-days before (Pre), during (Days 7, 14, 21) and 1-day after (Post) the interventions.
The most negative psychological profile appeared during the HI condition. Specifically, tiredness, tension, general and physical fatigue significantly increased on days 7, 14, and 21, as well as, during the POST measure. The levels of general and physical fatigue did not return to the initial level at POST following HI only.
Additionally, a deterioration of psychological responses was noted during the NI and HAMB interventions. Hypoxia and bedrest independently induced fatigue and negative affective responses. Inactivity exerts a moderate effect on sensation of fatigue, whereas exercise attenuates the negative effects of hypoxia as noted during the HAMB condition.
Our data collectively suggest that even habitual physical activity levels are sufficient to negate the fatigue responses and negative affect induced by a hypoxic inactive environment. Keywords: affect, fatigue, inactivity, hypoxia, bed rest Examining the relationship between basic psychological needs, mental toughness, motivation and young athletes’ exercise participation Nektarios Stavrou (University of Athens, Athens, Greece; National Sports Research Institute, Olympic Athletic Center of Athens “Spyros Louis”, Athens) Nikos Spiliotopoulos, Karla Santos (Municipal Organisation of Sports, Culture and Environment, Pallini Municipality, Athens, Greece) Motivation for sport is a crucial phenomenon, with athletes having multiple and different motives for engagement. These motives are linked to several other psychological indices, maintaining young athletes’ sport participation.
Based on self-determination theory, basic psychological needs satisfaction is explicitly linked to self-determined types of motivation, which had a positive effect in exercise participation. The purpose of the present study was to examine the relationship between psychological needs, mental toughness, motivation and young athletes’ sport participation. We surveyed 144 young athletes (78 boys, 66 girls) ranging in age from 9 to 12 years (M=9.50, SD=1.19).
The athletes completed the Sport Motivation Scale-2, the Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise Scale, and the Mental Toughness Inventory based on how they usually felt during their participation in their sport. The instruments indicated acceptable validity and internal consistency indices. In addition, the young athletes indicated their duration (in years) and frequency (times per week) of their exercise participation.
The correlation analysis results indicated significant positive correlations between intrinsic types of motivation and basic psychological needs (autonomy, competence) and mental toughness. Regression analysis results indicated that basic psychological needs serve as significant predictors of intrinsic types of motivation. In addition, exercise duration and frequency were positively correlated to intrinsic types of motivation (intrinsic, integrated, identified, introjected), while null correlation and negative correlations 449Posters Wednesday July 12th revealed to external motivation and amotivation, respectively.
The results indicated that competence and autonomy positively related to intrinsic exercise motivation in young athletes. Conclusively, self-determined types of motivation in young athletes can be helpful in the increase of their exercise sport participation, either duration or frequency. Keywords: motivation, psychological needs, mental toughness, exercise participation Stress, coping strategies and resilience of the Brazilian youth beach volleyball team summary Nayara Malheiros Caruzzo, Lucas Motta Palermo, William Fernando Garcia, Paulo Vitor Suto Aizava (State University of Maringá) Sporting context is pointed out as a potential stressor to the athlete.
However, there are coping strategies for adaptation to the contextual demands. The process of cognitive coping assists in the resilience development, a personal resource that explains favorable responses, even in adverse situations. The objective of this study was to analyze the stress, coping strategies and resilience of athletes of the brazilian national under-21 beach volleyball team.
All brazilian athletes (four females and four males) participating in the U- 21/2016 Beach Volleyball World Championships, were considered the most important competition of the category. It is noteworthy that four athletes were world champions. As instruments, the Recovery-Stress Questionnaire for athletes (RESTQ-76), the Athletic Coping Skills Inventory-28 (ACSI-28) and the Connor- Davidson Resilience Scale (CD-RISC).
For data analysis it was used the Shapiro-Wilk test, Anova of repeated measures with post-hoc Bonferroni, to verify if there is predominance of some of the dimensions of the instrument, Paired T-test and Independent T with Cohen's D and Pearson correlation. It was verified that the predominant coping strategies were confidence and motivation (p=0,003) and maximal performance under pressure (p=0,006). There was a high level of resilience and a positive correlation between resilience and goal formulation (r=0,88).
There was a significant difference between the sexes, in which males showed a higher rate of confrontation with adversity (p=0,04) and resilience (p=0,04) when compared to females. It was concluded that these word-class athletes, use as coping strategy confidence and performance under pressure, presenting a resilient profile and better recovery levels in relation to stress. Keywords: stress, coping, resilience, sport Ironic or overcompensating error in golf putting: The importance of attention imbalance Nataniel Boiangin, Gily Meir, Jean-Charles Lebeau (Florida State University), Itay Basevitch (Anglia Ruskin University), Christina Todd, Sicong Liu, Kimberly Cologgi, Gershon Tenenbaum (Florida State University) Ironic errors predicted by the Ironic Process Theory (IPT) and overcompensating errors predicated by the Implicit Overcompensation Hypothesis (IOH) under a suppressive goal were observed in golf putting.
Specifically, after being told to “not putt short,” novices could make either an ironic or overcompensating error by putting shorter or longer than the target. The present research aimed at clarifying this conflict between IOH and IPT by manipulating a plausible moderator, attention imbalance. Attention imbalance was introduced by placing a red dot in front of the target on the green, and by telling novices to “not putt onto the red dot.” A 2 (attention imbalance or not) x 2 (suppressive goal or not) design in two sequential studies was employed.
In Study 1, 76 novices were randomized into four conditions to perform 30 trials (i.e., three 10-trail blocks). The first block formed the baseline and the later blocks were coupled with cognitive load (i.e., rehearsing a 6-digit number) and condition-wise manipulations. To prevent visual feedback from confounding results of Study 1, 72 novices were collected in Study 2, where participants followed identical experimental procedures of Study 1, except that visual feedback after putting was now rendered impossible.
Results of both studies revealed that, although the generation of attentional imbalance led to an ironic effect, the ironic effect was weaker than the 450Posters Wednesday July 12th overcompensating effect in a way that the overcompensating tendency under the suppressive goal decreased but not eliminated or reversed compared to the control condition. This result supports that attentional imbalance is a necessary factor for observing ironic errors in motor tasks. It also implied that other moderators should be considered when predicting motor errors under suppressive goals.
For example, given the support evidence of IPT in some motor tasks, the automaticity of task execution may act as another key moderator. Keywords: golf putting, attention imbalance, ironic error, overcompensating error, task execution automaticity Relationship of motivational climate and self-determined motivation: A study of mediation of needs satisfaction Nallely Castillo Jimenez, Jeanette Magnolia López Walle (Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo León), Ines Tomás, Isabel Balaguer (Universitat de València) Within the framework of Self Determination Theory (SDT, Ryan & Deci, 2000), the aim of this study was to test two mediation models examining the relationship between: (1) empowering climate developed by the coach, athletes’ needs satisfaction, and athletes’ self-determined motivation; and (2) empowering climate developed by the coach, athletes’ need satisfaction dimensions (autonomy satisfaction, competence satisfaction, and relatedness satisfaction), and athletes’ self-determined motivation. The participants were 381 Mexican young soccer players (Mage = 12.41; SD = .89) who completed a questionnaire package including the variables of the study.
Mediated regression analyses were carried out with PROCESS macro for SPSS (Hayes, 2013, 2015). Results from the first model revealed that empowering climate positively predicted athletes’ need satisfaction (b=.37, p.05) and relatedness satisfaction (b=-.04, p>.05) were not statistically significant predictors of self-determined motivation. Finally, the indirect effect of empowering climate on self-determined motivation through autonomy satisfaction was statistically significant (IE=.12, 95% BCI= [.05, .20]).
In sum, basic psychological need satisfaction plays a mediator role in the relationship between empowering climate and self- determined motivation. Keywords: motivational climate; basics psychological need; soccer, self-determined motivation The attitudes of exercisers in wellness and fitness centers towards leisure activities and the problems they encounter Murat Uygurtas (Kirikkale University), Ozbay Guven (Gazi University) The purpose of this study was to determine attitudes of exercisers in the wellness and fitness centers towards leisure activities and to identify the problems they encountered. Secondly, we aimed to examine attitude differences in terms of some socio-demographic variables among exercisers.
Total 428 exercisers (Mage = 26.39, Sd = 6.14 years, n women=206, n men=222,) participated in this study. The participants were classified into three age groups as 18-24, 25-30, and 31 and older ages. Data were collected by using “Leisure Activities Attitude Scale (LAAS)” and “Leisure Activities Problem Questionnaire (LAPQ)” developed by the researcher in December, 2016.
Besides descriptive statistics, we used independent sample t-Test, One-way ANOVA and Chi Square Test to analyse the data. t test results indicated that male participants had positive cognitive attitudes towards leisure activities than female participants (p<0.001). Participation in leisure time activities increased cognitive attitudes and decreased affective attitudes with age (p<0.001).
Also unmarried participants had positive cognitive attitudes than married participants (p<0.001). In particular, public sector employees were found to be in positive affective attitude compared to other occupational groups (p<0.05). Negative behavioral attitudes have been observed in working people who are more experienced in terms of working time (p<0.05).
Chi Square Test results indicated that regarding problems encountered in participation of leisure activities, we found age group differences in subscale of time and economical problems (p<0.001). 25-30 years of age group had higher scores on this subscale than those of other age groups. In addition, results 451Posters Wednesday July 12th showed significant differences in the subscales of individualized, psychological and economic problems in terms of residence zones of participants (p<0.05).
Regions with high socio-economic level had higher scores in these subscales than those of low ones. Keywords: wellness and fitness centers, leisure, recreation, attitude, problem The effectiveness of aerobic exercise on improving quality of life of patients who have suffered a stroke Montserrat Grau (Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa) The amount of people who survive a stroke is increasing annually. Patients with stroke suffer neurological deficits and a physical deconditioning that compromise walking ability, basic activities of daily living (ADL) and health-related quality of life (HRQOL).
The aim of this study was to determine the effects of a 12-week community-based rehabilitation program based on aerobic exercise (RPAE), among people who had suffered a stroke, on their walking speed, physical condition, activities of daily living (ADL) and health-related quality of life (HRQOL). An observational repeated-measures design was used. Participants were evaluated at baseline, post-intervention and at six months.
31 participants underwent the RPAE twice a week. Physical outcome measures assessed were: walking speed (10MWT), physical fitness (6MWT), ambulation capacity (FAC) and ADL (Barthel). HRQOL was assessed with the Euroqol-5D (EQ-5D-5L).
Data analysis: The nonparametric Friedman’s test was used to compare means of the three repeated measurements. The effect size was estimated using Cohen’s d. Twenty-five participants completed the rehabilitation program.
Improvements were significant in all outcomes measures at the end of the intervention and those were retained six months later. Comfortable walking speed increased an average of 0.16 and 0.23m/s, respectively. At the end of the intervention, all the participants achieved independent ambulation both indoors and outdoors.
In ADL, 40% were independent at baseline vs. 64% at the end of the intervention. HRQOL improvements were significant.
Before the intervention, participants identified important limitations that affected their HRQOL, which improved substantially after the intervention and allowed patients to accomplish a better self-perceived HRQOL. The results obtained demonstrate that aerobic exercise improves walking speed, walking independence, physical fitness, ADL independence and HRQOL of people with stroke. Keywords: exercise, quality of life, rehabilitation, stroke Coaches’ interpersonal style, frustration of the basic psychological needs, and affects in university athletes Monica G.
Flores-Ibarra, Jeanette M. Lopez-Walle (UANL), Gilda Moheno Gurza (UACJ), Michaela Cocca (UANL) The Self-Determination Theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985, 2000) explains people's motivation applied to human behaviors different contexts. In the field of sports, athletes' behaviors are related to the interpersonal coaching styles, either supporting or controlling.
A supporting style allows athletes to give their opinion and to choose; a controlling one is based on restraining athletes’ conducts. The aim of this study is to test a structural model focused on coaches' interpersonal styles. The model studies the interaction among coaches’ controlling style, composed by 4 sub-scales (controlled use of price, negative conditional attention, intimidation, and excessive personal control), frustration of athletes’ basic psychological needs (autonomy, competence, and relatedness), and positive or negative affects in Mexican sportsmen.
The sample was composed by 485 university students aged 17 to 28 years (M = 21.19, SD = 2.01). Questionnaires were employed in order to assess the variables included in the study. Results from structural equation modeling showed acceptable indexes of goodness of fit: GFI= .978; CFI= .975; RMSEA= .095.
The outcomes also showed that negative conditioned attention (β = .27) and coaches' controlling style (β = .19) act as positive predictors of basic psychological needs frustration; while 452Posters Wednesday July 12th the frustration of psychological needs increases athletes’ negative affects at the same time as it reduces positive affects. This research promotes the implementation of psychological intervention programs contributing and supporting coaches' work when they use a controlling style, in order to reduce future negative affects in their athletes. Keywords: coaches, controlling interpersonal style, basic psychological needs, self-determination theory, university athletes Employment status and physical activity among Japanese mothers of preschoolers Mitsuhiro Amazaki (Aichi University), Chihiro Kemuriyama (Gifu Shotoku Gakuen University) This study examined whether the employment status was a factor that increased physical activity (PA) in Japanese mothers of preschoolers.
We did a cross-sectional survey in the two municipalities of Aichi Prefecture, Japan. The participants included 1865 Japanese mothers of preschoolers, ages 18 to 52 years (M = 35.14, SD = 4.89). We assessed the employment status (workers: full-time or part-time job, non-workers: housewives), the time spent playing with own children (e.g., game of tag), and the International Physical Activity Questionnaire short form.
The results showed that the workers had more PA levels (high, moderate, and low) than the non-workers (p < 0.001). The time spent in sedentary behavior had a non-significant difference between workers and non-workers. However, non-workers spent more time playing with their children than the workers (p < 0.001).
In this region, the non-working Japanese mothers had low levels of PA, but they had more time to play with their children. This finding implies that the promotion of PA among Japanese non-working mothers may require a place to play with their children or keep their children in affordable temporary care. Keywords: physical activity, mother of preschooler, employment status, IPAQ-SV Effects of internal versus external focus of attention on the learning of a balance task without and with a secondary visual task Miriam Palomo-Nieto (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Palacky University), Ludvik Valtr, Adrian Agricola (Palacky University, Olomouc) The advantages of external focus (e.g., concentration on intended movement effects) rather than internal focus (e.g., concentration on body movements) of attention has been shown for performance and learning of a different types of motor skills.
The constrained action hypothesis (CAH) (Wulf, McNevin, & Shea, 2001) was proposed to explain the underlying mechanisms of these benefits in which when attentional focus is directed internally the automatic control processes of skill execution will be more constrained and disrupted. In contrast, when attentional focus is directed externally the automatic control processes will be more automatic and less conscious. The purpose of the current study was to test the CAH via examining the effects of external versus internal focus of attention on the learning of a balance task on stabilometer in a dual-task paradigm which test inattentional blindness.
Participants were undergraduate students who were randomly divided into two groups. First day they performed acquisition trials under external focus (concentrate on keeping the markers horizontal) or internal focus (concentrate on keeping your feet horizontal) instructions. Second day retention and transfer tests were carried out.
For transfer test a secondary task was used in which participants were asked to count the number of bounces of same figures from the edges of screen among four different types of figures. Primary results showed some evidence for advantages of external focus compared to the internal focus group in both retention and transfer tests. The current results support CAH showing that the beneficial effects of external compared to internal focus remains constant for the learning of a balance motor skill regardless of increasing attentional load with a secondary task.
This work was supported by the Czech Science Foundation [registration number of the project 16-24281Y] 453Posters Wednesday July 12th Keywords: vision, balance, attentional focus, secondary task Athlete´s path to excellence: The role of mother´s sacrifice Miriam Palomo-Nieto, Luis Miguel Ruiz (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid) The purpose of this study has been to determine the negative impact on mothers while providing support for their child to become a top athlete. The negative impact associated with this support from mothers is called ‘emotional investment.’ We applied a qualitative, inductive and interpretative methodology following the procedures and techniques of grounded theory . The research involved interviews with 17 mothers and their 20 top athletes sons and daughters .
At the end of it, we formulated a theory which we call Mothers' Negative Emotional Investment in their Children's Sporting Excellence. Our theory relies on three main themes: 1. Pain, fear, and anxiety of the mother, 2.
Negative impact on the family, 3. Sacrifice, renunciations, and effort on the part of the mother. i.
These three themes are not only interrelated and hierarchically arranged, but also show a dynamic evolution along with the child's athletic and personal development. Keywords: family, sacrifice, anxieties, emotions, grounded theory Study on influence of the square dance to climacteric women’s physical and mental health Minjie Zhang, Xiadan Zhang (Inner Mongolia Normal University) This research has followed up 35 climacteric woman volunteers aged between 43 and 57 in Hohhot of Inner Mongolia for 20 weeks. The research items include their physical functions, body shape, and psychological healthy conditions (SCL-90 as the instrument).
During the research, pretest the participants and then set up personal files for the participants; the frequency of the participants’ dancing is three times a week, and 40-60 minutes each time; physical functions, body shape and SCL-90 test are done in every four weeks, and all the data is analyzed with the software SPSS22.0. The results show that the square dance is helpful in shaping the body of the climacteric women, namely, in their weight loss and BWH reduction （P＜0.05）, reducing glycemia and blood lipids (P＜0.05) and increasing their myocardial contraction force, and effective prevention and treatment for cardiovascular disease; meanwhile, the square dance obviously improves climacteric women’s respiratory system and their lung capacity is stronger than other same aged women, （P＜0.05） ，even more importantly, the square dance can adjust climacteric women’s psychological pressure so that they have less negative emotion. The SCL-90 results show that the levels of factors in obsession, anxiety, depression, interpersonal sensitivity are lower than normal.
So, the results confirm that the square dance, as an easily learned aerobic exercise combined with music, gymnastics, and dance, is helpful in improving the climacteric women’s physical functions, body shape, and psychological healthy conditions and makes contributions to the climacteric women’s both physical and psychological health. Keywords: square dance, climacteric women, mental health Relationship between organizational stressor and athlete burnout: Regulatory effect of perceived social support and mental toughness Min Wu (Dalian Ocean university), Le Wang (Dalian Ocean university), Bin Wang, Lv Ye (Central China Normal University) Organizational stress is an ongoing transaction between an individual and the environmental demands, individual will be stressful by various stimulating factors,which are called organizational stressors.Organizational stressors are the environmental demands, which are from leadership, culture, team, logistics and operation, interpersonal relationship and sports career and so on. Stress will cause much negative 454Posters Wednesday July 12th impact on individual, such as anxiety, which will affect their performance and well-being.
When the athletes fail to cope with the environmental demands of competition within their abilities and resources, they probably become burnout or drop out from the sports event. In present, organizational stress has become an important research area.The study discussed the relationship between organizational stressors and athlete burnout and the regulatory effect of perceived social support. It used OSI-IP, PSSS and ABQ questionnaires to investigate 692 Chinese professional athletes and utilize SPSS 18.0 and AMOS18.0 to make data analysis.
The Result shows that there is significant positive correlation between organizational stressor and athlete burnout. Social support can negatively predict athlete burnout. Information support and emotional support, esteem support and tangible support play the role of the regulatory effect on goals and development stressor and athlete burnout.
Emotional support and tangible support have regulatory effect on the relationship between logistics and operation stressor and athlete burnout. Emotional support has regulatory effect on the relationship between selection stressor and athlete burnout. Mental toughness can negatively predict athlete burnout.
Regulatory effect of various dimension of mental toughness has differences in different organizational stressors.It suggests that we need to reinforce mental toughness training and cultivation for different organizational stressors,which can have better buffering effect. Keywords: organizational stressor，athlete burnout，social support，mental toughness，regulatory effect Investigation on the influence of involvement in exercise on physical self-concept of high school student Min Wang Physical self-concept is the individual cognition and evaluation on their bodies, which is the earliest part that sprouts in individuals’ self-consciousness and a critical section of self-concept. Physical self-concept is an important origin of perception of self-worth.
Studies show that the participation in physical activity can lead to the improvement of physical ability, thus increasing the sense of self-worth, which can inspire the enthusiasm of individuals’ involvement in Exercise. The evaluation of fitness and the interesting of activity can lead to sport participation. The adolescent period is a special time easy to become anxious in people’s life, whose main reasons can be the development of the secondary sex characteristics and the confusion brought by the physical changes in the course of one’s being mature.
This study aims to help teenagers to establish the correct view of their bodies and exercise by discussing the relation between Physical self-concept and Involvement in Exercise. Make them know how to exercise their body through studying the relationship among sport participation and physical self-concept, thus helping them to form healthy and positive attitude towards life. Questionnaire method was adopted.
730 students were selected from four schools of Shanghai city, which consist of a grade one and a grade two in junior middle school and high school. The four schools are the attached middle school of Shanghai International Studies University, Fudan High School , No.10 High School and Yuntai High School.730 questionnaires were sent out and 721 available questionnaires were retrieved, in which 17 were valid. The effective recover rate was 96.4%.
The measure tools were The Behavior of Physical Exercise Questionnaire and PSDQ. 1. Physical self-concept of middle school students increases with the advance of age, but begins to fall in Senior 2.
2. The development of Physical self-concept of boys is higher than girls. Keywords: exercise, physical self-concept, high school student Academy athletes’ perspectives on the role of a coach-created motivational climate in their dual career pursuits Milla Saarinen, Tatiana Ryba (University of Jyväskylä), Noora Ronkainen (Shanghai Jiao Tong University), Harri Rintala (University of Jyväskylä) 455Posters Wednesday July 12th Recent studies on athletes’ dual career suggest that when athletic and educational demands increase, youth athletes struggle to sustain high levels of motivation in both sport and school simultaneously.
It has also been found that the coach-created motivational environment is an important determinant of such psychological outcomes as athletes’ enjoyment, autonomous motivation and engagement. However, the impact that the coaching climate might have on young athletes’ dual career behavior has not been investigated. Grounded in Duda’s (2013) theoretical tenets of Empowering Coaching, this study examined how former academy athletes perceived a motivational climate created by their coaches, and whether they found the coach-created climates supportive of their dual career.
In this retrospective interview study, 15 male and 7 female, Finnish cross-country skiers were interviewed about their dual career experiences in elite sport high schools. The participants, aged 22-34 at the time of the interview, had studied in ten different academies for talented athletes and coached by 19 different coaches. The semi-structured interviews were subsequently transcribed and thematically analyzed (Braun and Clarke, 2006).
The results showed that the majority of the athletes in this sample perceived the coach-created environment as disempowering characterized by such ego- involving and controlling features as rivalry, unequal recognition and punishment. Coaches who provided empowering motivational climate were still not perceived as supportive of athletes’ dual career. We conclude that in order for the motivational environment to be conducive of athletes’ dual career, coaches need to extend their social support to school-related and vocational aspects of athletes’ lives.
This is especially pertinent to coaches working with talented athletes in dual career environments. Coaching education should involve more focus on dual career support from the perspective of motivational climate. Keywords: dual career, motivational climate, empowering coaching, adolescent athlete, coach Identification of psychological markers for detecting climbing talents among young practitioners Miguel Santolaya (University Autonoma Madrid, Spain), Victor Rubio (Dpt.
Biological and Health Psychology. University Autonoma Madrid, Spain) Sports climbing has proven to be a highly demanding activity. Coaches usually claim that mental skills are as important as technical and physical skills and use estimations of such variables to predict success and drop out of young practitioners.
However, estimations are based on implicit expert knowledge, making difficult replicability and validity of such estimations. The aim of this study is to identify and operationalize psychological variables estimated by coaches and supposedly needed for high performance climbers in order to design a talent detection system. For that purpose, a sample of six expert climbers and coaches in collaboration with Madrid’s (Spain) Mountaineering Association were interviewed and participated in a focus group.
After five rounds a set of dimensions regarding physical (i.e. low body fat percentage, prehensile strength), technical (i.e. movement coordination, precision) tactical (i.e.
rapid response and decision making) and psychological dimensions (i.e. motivation, spatial awareness, self-control) and their operationalized outcomes were identified. The system has been retrospectively and prospectively used for detecting talents among young practitioners.
Results regarding the validation of the system, feasibility and the future trends are discussed. Keywords: sport climbing, psychological skills, talent detection, expert groups Psychological characteristics in swimmers from Rio Esgueva Sport Performance Centre (Castilla y León, Spain) Miguel Aranzana Juarros, Alfonso Salguero, Olga Molinero González, Abel Nogueira, Sara Márquez (University of León, Spain) To optimize performance and achieve better sports marks, it is necessary to study the characteristics of athletes, their skills and their knowledge of them (Godoy-Izquierdo, Vélez & Pradas, 2009). The present 456Posters Wednesday July 12th research is part of a psychological intervention program developed with 19 swimmers from the Sport Performance Centre, aged between 14 and 20 years old (M= 16.47, SD= 1.775).
The aim of the program is to introduce swimmers to specific work, as well as to optimize psychological variables that influence sport performance. As a starting point for the subsequent intervention, an initial evaluation was carried out using "Psychological Characteristics related to Sport Performance Questionnaire" (CPRD) (Gimeno, Buceta & Pérez- Llantada, 2001), elaborating the psychological profile of each swimmer of assessed variables that influence on performance (Stress Control, Performance Evaluation Influence, Motivation, Mental Skills and Team Cohesion), and which was later compared with Spanish competitive athletes provided by Gimeno (1999), and high performance paddle players (Ruiz & Lorenzo, 2008). This assessment could be an initial overview, which showed the absence of statistical differences on the five scales scores according to the gender of our swimmers.
Significant differences were found with the study by Ruiz and Lorenzo (2008) (Team Cohesion, p= .033*) and Gimeno (1999) (Motivation, p= .015*; Team Cohesion, p= .024*), reflecting the lack of adequacy in group and motivational aspects to desirable characteristics in high performance athletes. This preliminary assessment suggests the need to focus and improve those variables with inappropriate levels, which would facilitate the development of effective intervention strategies by the sports psychologists (Fenoy & Campoy, 2012), and it would have an effect on sports records. Our study would confirm the usefulness of this questionnaire to measure a wide range of psychological variables which determines athletes’ performance.
Keywords: swimming, psychological skills, sport performance The relationship of sport career at childhood with later sport talent －Systematic sport training at childhood－ Mieko Ae (Tokyo Women's College of P.E.) The 32nd Olympic Games will be held at Tokyo in 2020. Japanese Olympic Committee (JOC) and many sports societies have begun to train talented young athletes. Many studies pointed risks of early training.
The purpose of this study is to examine effects of early training to children. Two studies were planned. Study 1: Female students majored physical education were surveyed how their sport careers were at elementary school ages.
The participants were 355 females and the survey was carried out at 2016. Study 2: T Prefecture’s athlete development projects were searched for recent a decade. The results in Study 1 were follows: 94% of participants started systematic sport activities, and 38% (n=131) of them did only one type of sports.
Study 2 showed that the projects were selected about 600 children for a decade and 74 children participated in national competition games. It noted that 38% of female college student participants did only one type of sports and most of them have continued same sports. In T Prefecture’s case six students became student athletes among 180 first selected members.
Two results disagreed about the effects of early training. Japan representative athletes of 31st Olympic Games were examined their sport starting ages (Yoshikawa, 2016). The mean age of sport stating was 9.3 years, forty-two athletes started 15 of age, and 15 athletes started 6-years, 12 athletes were 12-years (these numbers calculated by only 275 athletes’ descriptions among 338 athletes), respectively.
Olympic athletes showed two important ages, 6-year and 12-year. T Prefecture tried 11-year and 12-year selected children motivated to sports. Female sport majored students who continued only one sport failed to be Olympic athletes.
However, these data might not be enough to decide how we will train and develop children at elementary school age. This study was supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research named “KAKENHI”, the number is 30192942. Keywords: systematic training, childhood, toraning start age 457Posters Wednesday July 12th An exploratory study of the situations and process that evoke pride of athletes Midori Kondo (Osaka University of Healty and Sport Sciences) The purpose of this study is to explore essential situations and the process that evoke pride of athletes.
In Study I, 559 pride experiences in the sports were collected through an open-ended questionnaire and categorized into 64 situations. Then, each situation was evaluated by 317 college students for the degree of contribution to the process to evoke pride of athletes. Factor analysis revealed the following five factors to be essential to evoke athletes’ pride.
These are (1) to make oneself master of their respective sports, (2) to obtain satisfactory results, (3) to observe successful activities of team mates, (4) to belong to a team with a high-level training environment, and (5) to have a circle of friends to compete to each other. We found that athlete have the feature of evoking the pride to challenge the limit and to grow humanly. In Study II, I interviewed one college student athlete, a player in a team sport, about the process to evoke pride during his competitive career.
Date were analyzed qualitatively by means of Trajectory and Equifinality Model (TEM). The results indicate that the athlete wavered between the identity of the team and that of himself, and that the pride of athlete was deeply involved in the process to harmonize the team identity and the athlete identity. This exploratory study suggests that Furthermore, an athlete player in the team sport appears to be motivated to harmonize the identity of the team and that of the player.
Finally, we suggest that an athlete may try to raise the pride of player, when pride of the team is higher than that of the player, contrary to that try to raise the pride of team. Keywords: pride, athlet, interdependent theory The relationship between mental arousal and performance Changzhu Qi The object of the paper is to explore the relationship between mental arousal and performance is one of the most important topics concerned by sport psychologists, and many hypotheses and theories focus on the topic. But the meaning of “medium strength” and “optimal arousal intensity” ,which have been widely used in previous models, is still unclear.
Second, there are many inconsistencies in the definition and measurement of the concept of mental arousal. The present model is to clarify the concept of mental arousal and offers a new perspective and a theoretical basis for the research related to mental arousal and sports performance. This paper summarized a series of researches carried out by the authors and the research team, which focused on the concept of mental arousal and the arousal-performance relationship.
The intensity-direction model indicates that mental arousal contains both intensity and direction dimensions. Mental Arousal Scale for Athlete (MASA) is developed to measure both the dimensions. Based on the model and systematic integration of previous theories related to the arousal-performance relationship, a new hypothesis is proposed: higher mental arousal is necessary for all physical activity tasks while different tasks call for different directions to enhance performance.
The more delicate and complex a task is, the higher need for positive mental arousal will be. To test the model,a study about the the relationship between the decision-making and mental arousal was conducted .The study found that direction (positive or negative) influences athletes’ intuitive decision- making significantly. For both the expert and novice, intuitive decision-making and sports performance in positive arousal status are significantly better than negative arousal state.This result supported the hypothesis of the present model.
Keywords: mental arousal, intensity-direction model, MASA, hypothesis 458Posters Wednesday July 12th Impact of emotional pictures with different valence on attentional bias of tennis plays: behavioral and ERP evidence MengYang He To contrast the attentional bias characteristics of the experts tennis players and the novices players, the present study uses event-related potentials (ERP)technique which has the high-time-synchronic characteristic. The purpose is to explore tennis players' attentional bias characteristic, and revelate the brain mechanism of tennis players' attentional bias. This experiment uses 2 (group:expert-novice) x 3 (picture priming type: positive, neutral, negative) mixed design.
The emotion valence is within-subject factor, and the group is the between-subject. The dependent variables were response time.Measures were recorded as response time, latency and amplitudes of N1,P1,P2 . Three types of picture(positive,netural,negative) were used in present experiment ,the valences are evaluated by 40 students and they have siginificant differences statistically.
First, Compared with novices tennis players,the expert tennis players had faster RT(reaction time).Both the experts and novices tennis payers had faster RT(reaction time) toward negative words under negative pictures. Second, the experts showed smaller P1,N1,P2 amplitude and shorter latencies ,which means greater ability of attention. Third, Both he experts and novices tennis payers displayed smaller P1, P2 amplitude on positive and negative words following negative pictures.
The novices tennis payers showed a lower P300 amplitude on positive words and a larger amplitude on negative words following positive pictures . Tennis players dispayed a lower P300 amplitude toward negative words following positive pictures. N1 is mainly concerned with the processing process, and its amplitude generally represents the allocation of individual attention resources.
P1 is an exogenous component, which is related to the processing of visual information, and is affected by attention. Numerous studies show that the P2 was highly related to automatic allocation of attention and attentional blink. Keywords: attentional bias, affective priming effect, ERP, tennis player, college students, P1, N1, P2, P300 Chinese calligraphy practice: A new way of athletes' mental training MeiLing Li, Liwei Zhang, ChaoHui Zhang (Beijing Sport University) The best sport performance essentially required effective self-control in competitive sport (Englert, 2016).
Self control training should focus on both the improvement of mental skill and the improvement of ideological level (Zhang, 2013). Previous studies have shown that Chinese Calligraphy practice could improve attentional control, emotional stability and relaxation level (Kao, 2006). In addition, Chinese Calligraphy practice contains rich humanistic ideas, which favors the training of dialectical thinking and self actualization belief.
Given that, Chinese Calligraphy practice could be a kind of mental training that favors both skill and ideology. In the present study, Chinese Calligraphy practice was employed as mental training method, and one Rio Olympic Games sailboard athlete was required to conduct Calligraphy training for 6 months. The goal of training was to improve the athlete’s ideological level and abilities of emotional regulation and thought control.
The training process contained learning, familiarization and habituation.Quantitative and qualitative analysis were conducted, results showed that the emotional regulation, thought control and ideological level were improved, and the performance of self-control was outstanding in the adversity of Rio Olympic Games. The present finding indicates that calligraphy training can improve athletes’ self control. Thus it provide a new way for athletes who need improve emotional stability, attention focusing or improve the self actualization belief under the pressure of competition.
Keywords: Chinese calligraphy practice, mental training, self-control, case study, Olympian 459Posters Wednesday July 12th Legitimacy of anti-doping policies - athletes as researchers Meike Kolb, Dennis Dreiskämper (University of Münster, Germany), Andrea Petróczi (Kingston University, UK), Bernd Strauss (University of Münster, Germany) The project which involves six countries (Germany, Greece, Italy, Russia, Serbia and the UK) and aims to explore the perceptions of clean athletes towards the legitimacy of anti-doping policies, their trust in organisations responsible for implementing anti-doping and the support of anti-doping policies by clean athletes in order to advance the anti-doping policies. The unique feature of the project is the active involvement of athletes as researchers in all participating countries. The present study focuses on results from Germany.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted in groups of six to seven elite athletes (M=25.1 years, SD=4.28 years; N=19, 47.4% male; individual and team sport mixed; actual or former member of the Registered Athlete Testing Pool for example of National Anti-Doping Agency Germany). The 2h focus group interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim and coded using qualitative data analytical software (MAXQDA) for a thematic analysis. The qualitative results indicate that elite athletes are aware of legitimacy problems of national and international sport federations regarding appropriateness and fairness in methods and procedure of anti-doping policies.
At the same time the athletes say that Anti-Doping policies preserve “clean sport”. They feel that they have to bring a high level of commitment to being clean which they are fullfilling although they feel that only a few supported in doining so. Individual athletes take a high level of responsibility for getting informed while team sport athletes are not as proactive and feel a gap in information.
Recent scandals in doping seem to influence athletes' trust in relevant anti-doping policies. Also, their perceptions of the national federation differ to those of other countries, exhibiting the typical ingroup/outgroup bias. Such disparity in anti-doping legitimacy perceptions poses a significant challenge to globalised anti-doping.
Keywords: legitimacy, trust, anti-doping, elite athletes, semi-structured interview Effects of imagery and augmented imagery training programme on direct free kick accuracy of juvenile football players Mayowa Adeyeye, Kehinde Adeyemo (University of Lagos) One of the major challenges facing Nigeria football players is the inability to convert direct free kick at a crucial moment of most competitions. It is assumed that they lack the use of psychological skills specifically mental skills. This study therefore applied mental skills training programme to the football players’ free kick accuracy training for the period of eight weeks.
The mental skills training served as the independent variable while the free kick accuracy served as the dependent variable. The study test if there will be difference in the number of accuracy through goals scored when the kicks were taken by the participants in three groups (imagery: n = 30; augmented Imagery – imagery + self-talk: n = 30; control: n = 30). During the eight weeks free kick training, the participants in the imagery group were exposed to an imagery training programme, while those in the augmented imagery group were also exposed to imagery training alongside self-talk training programme.
The participants in the control group were not exposed to treatments but were just going through their normal free kick accuracy training. A t-test and ANCOVA revealed that the participants from the imagery group significantly performed better in free kick accuracy than did the participants in control condition while the augmented imagery group (imagery + self-talk) performed significantly better in accuracy than did the participants in the imagery group and that of control condition. These results further highlight the usefulness of augmented imagery (imagery + self-talk) as most important to accurate delivery of direct free kick during competitions.
Keywords: imagery, augmented imagery, self talk, footballers 460Posters Wednesday July 12th Determinants of social loafing among team-sport players of tertiary institutions in Lagos State Mayowa Adeyeye, Kehinde Adeyemo, Gretter Ehizibue (University of Lagos) This study investigated the determinants of social loafing among team-sport players of tertiary institutions in Lagos state, Nigeria. The survey research method was used for this study. Three hundred (n=300) elite university athletes who participate in active sports competition for their institutions were selected using simple random sampling technique from six state and federal tertiary institutions in Lagos state.
The research instrument used for collection of data from the respondents was Social Loafing Tendency Questionnaire (SLTQ). Out of the 300 copies of the questionnaire administered, only 286 were found useable and coded for analysis. The descriptive statistics of frequency counts, percentages and bar chart were used to analyse the demographic information of the respondents while the inferential statistics of linear regression was used to test all hypotheses at 0.05 alpha level.
The result revealed that the three hypotheses (group size, diffusion of responsibility, and motivation) generated for the study were rejected. This implies that the three independent variables significantly determined social loafing tendencies among team sport players of tertiary institutions in Lagos state, Nigeria. Keywords: social loafing, group size, diffusion of responsibility, motivation, team sport The contribution of early auditory and visual information to the discrimination of shot power in soccer and volleyball Mauro Murgia, Fabrizio Sors, Ilaria Santoro, Tiziano Agostini (University of Trieste) In sport, rapidly and accurately reacting to external stimuli is important to perform effectively.
In particular, in ball sports it is fundamental to be able to perceive all the information related with the ball, in order to prepare an appropriate motor response. There is a vast literature dealing with these issues, which are typically studied in the framework of interceptive actions and anticipation skills. While visual information has been widely investigated in this regard, the contribution of early auditory information is still unclear.
To compare the role of the auditory and visual modalities, two experiments were conducted, in which athletes had to discriminate the shot power of kicked and smashed balls through a two alternative forced choice paradigm. The task was carried out in three conditions: Audio-video, Audio, and Video; in all the conditions, auditory and/or visual information was temporally occluded at the moment of the impact between the foot/hand and the ball. Results revealed that, for soccer, response accuracy was above chance in all three conditions, with no difference among them; concerning response times, faster discriminations were observed both in the Audio-video and Audio conditions compared to the Video condition.
For volleyball, response accuracy was above chance in all three conditions, and in the Audio-video and Audio conditions participants were more accurate than in the Video condition; concerning response times, the same results described for soccer were observed. The results suggest that for discriminating the power of penalties and smashes, early auditory information would provide more relevant cues than the respective visual information. Further research is needed to evaluate if the same happens also in other sports.
If so, new training paradigms could be developed and tested, to investigate whether they can promote improvements in athletes' performances. Keywords: temporal occlusions, early information, auditory information, visual information, shot power, discrimination 461Posters Wednesday July 12th Comparing exercise enjoyment and preferences for interval exercise and endurance exercise among inactive adults Matthew Stork (University of British Columbia), Martin Gibala (McMaster University), Kathleen Martin Ginis (University of British Columbia) Interval exercise has been advocated as a time-efficient alternative to traditional endurance exercise. Although interval exercise training can elicit important physiological benefits, there is concern that people may find it unpleasant.
Thus, psychologists should consider whether these protocols should be promoted to largely inactive populations. This study compared the enjoyment of, and preferences for, moderate-intensity continuous training (MICT), high-intensity interval training (HIIT), and sprint interval training (SIT) among inactive adults. Thirty inactive men and women (21±4 y; BM=63±11 kg; VO2max=31±6 ml/kg/min), unfamiliar with interval exercise, completed three acute exercise protocols: MICT (45min continuous at ~70%HRmax), HIIT (10x1min bouts at ~85-90%HRmax, separated by 1-min rest), and SIT (3x20-s “all-out” sprints, separated by 2- min rest).
Heart rate and ratings of perceived exertion were measured throughout the exercise protocols and exercise enjoyment was measured immediately and 20 minutes following each session. Following completion of all three exercise sessions, participants rank-ordered the exercise protocols (#1-3) according to preference. There were no significant differences in participants’ exercise enjoyment between the three exercise protocols immediately post-exercise (means: MICT=83.7, HIIT=84.4, SIT=81.6 out of 126), F(2, 58)=0.274, or 20-minutes post-exercise (means: MICT=83.4, HIIT=83.7, SIT=81.0 out of 126), F(2, 58)=0.304, ps>0.05.
Based on #1-ranked protocols, 43.3% of participants preferred HIIT, 33.3% preferred MICT, and 23.3% preferred SIT, with no significant differences in the frequency of #1 ranking, χ2(2)=1.80, p=0.41. Further, there were no significant differences in overall rank-ordered (#1-3) exercise preference between the three exercise protocols, χ2(2)=0.20, p=0.94. Inactive individuals can equally enjoy and prefer HIIT or SIT protocols as much as MICT protocols, despite the high-intensity nature of the exercise.
Keywords: interval exercise, inactive, acute exercise, enjoyment, exercise preference Sport burnout inventory — dual career form (SPBI— DC) for adolescent student-athletes: Validity and reliability Matilda Sorkkila, Tatiana Ryba, Kaisa Aunola (University of Jyväskylä), Harri Selänne (Mehiläinen Sports Medical Clinic, Jyväskylä), Katariina Salmela-Aro (University of Jyväskylä) The challenge of combining education with a sport career may make student-athletes susceptible for sport and school burnout. Nevertheless, so far there has not been an instrument for investigating sport burnout in a dual career context. The aim of the present study was to introduce a novel sport burnout measure for student-athletes which can be used in parallel to the school burnout measure, and examine its validity and reliability.
Sport burnout was defined as consisting of: (a) exhaustion at sport (b) cynicism towards the meaning of sport, and (c) sense of inadequacy at sport. The participants were 391 student-athletes (51% females) who filled in a questionnaire of sport burnout and background variables in the beginning of upper secondary school. A confirmatory factor analysis was used to analyze the data.
The results showed that the three dimensions of sport burnout were separate, but closely related constructs. A second-order-factor model or a three-factor model or described the data better and gave better reliability indices than a one-factor model. Convergent and discriminant validity was examined by correlating the three sport burnout dimensions with depressive symptoms, sport task values, and self-esteem.
The more depressive symptoms the athletes showed the more exhaustion they reported; the higher sport interest values the athletes had the less overall sport burnout and cynicism they reported; the higher sport utility values the athletes had the less cynicism they reported; and the higher self-esteem the athletes had the less over-all sport burnout and exhaustion they reported. The SpBI-DC is a valid and reliable instrument for assessing student-athletes’ sport burnout symptoms in a dual career 462Posters Wednesday July 12th context and can be used, for example, in upper secondary sport schools for early detection of student-athletes at sport burnout risk. Keywords: sport burnout inventory, dual career, validity, reliability Action-respiration coupling in Japanese archery (Kyudo) Masakazu Nemoto, Kudo Kazutoshi (University of Tokyo), Hiroki Takase (Faculty of Arts, Shinshu University) In some sports or art requiring high concentration and precise motor control, even a small perturbation could be non-negligible (Kuznetsov, Shockley, Richardson, & Riley, 2011).
For example, many instruction books and experts of Japanese archery (Kyudo) have emphasized the importance of coordinating action and breathing (e.g., All Nippon Kyudo Federation, 1953). However, only a few studies have scientifically investigated the difference in action-respiration coupling between unskilled and skilled performers. In this study, we examined the action-respiration coupling in novice and expert archers of Kyudo, Japanese archery.
Ten novice archers and 12 expert archers participated in this study. Each participant shot 5 arrows at a target situated 2 meters away. The shooting motion and breathing was recorded using a motion capture system and a thermistor respiratory monitor, respectively.
The whole shooting motion was divided into 6 segments (this segmentation is commonly used in Kyudo training). To define the action-respiration coordination pattern, we analyzed if more than 0.6 seconds of first 1 second of each motion segment was accompanied by inhalation or exhalation. We then analyzed if each participant took the same action-breathing pattern in 4 or more out of 5 trials.The experts showed more consistent breathing pattern in action segments when they raised their arms.
It is known that thoracic movements affect shoulder range of motion (Kebaetse, McClure, & Pratt, 1999). Taking a consistent action-respiration coupling might be a strategy to reduce unanticipated error caused by thoracic movements of breathing. These results suggest that the experts' sequence of Kyudo movements is a seamless integration of limb action and respiration.
It may be advantageous for coaches to mention action-respiration coupling because beginners tend to pay dominant attention to obvious limb action, but not to non-obvious respiration. Keywords: breathing, shooting motion, skill acquisition, expertise A diary study of within-person relationships between regular distance running and well- being Marzena Cypryanska (University of Social Sciences and Humanities University of Poznan), John Nezlek, Karolina Jenczylik (SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Poland), Karolina Chlebosz (University School of Physical Education, Poznan, Poland) The present study examined relationships between regular distance running and well-being. Participants in the study maintained a weekly diary with which they described their daily “runs” each week.
These diaries also contained measures of well-being including the emotions people felt during the week and measures of self-evaluation. Participants: Participants were residents of Poland who were recruited via the internet and running magazines. The present analyses were limited to the 180 individuals (50% women Mage = 34.0, SD = 8.3) who provided 5 or more weekly reports (Mreports = 11.7, SD = 3.9).
Each week participants logged onto a website and described how far they had run each day during the week. They also answered three questions about their well-being representing “Beck’s Triad” (evaluations of self, present, and future), they described the emotions they felt that week (6 positive and 6 negative), and they answered single questions about their self- esteem, satisfaction with life, meaning in life, and how well they could meet challenges in their lives. Other data were collected that are not described in this abstract.
The data were analyzed using multilevel modeling in which weekly reports were nested within persons. Participants reported running an average of 2.59 days per week, and the average run was 10.7km. The number of days people ran was positively related to all measures 463Posters Wednesday July 12th of well-being (all ps < .01).
Moreover, each of these relationships remained significant after controlling for other measures, e.g., relationships between affect and days run remained significant after controlling for self- esteem. The present results suggest that increases in regular distance running are associated with increased well-being, broadly defined. Supported by Grant NSC 2013/11/B/HS6/01135, National Science Centre, Poland.
Keywords: training, self-evaluation, well-being, diary methods, multilevel modeling Mental robustness – Concept and operationalization of a Scale (MR2B) Martin Klämpfl, Dieter Hackfort (Department for Sport Science, University FAF Munich) The action-theory concept of mental fitness considers the person-task-environment constellation in an action situation and follows concepts of physical fitness. Three potentials turned out to be essential components of mental fitness as they refer to performance, resistance and recovery. Mental robustness comprises resistance and recovery by integrating relevant constructs characterizing the cognitive and affective facets of this concept such as resilience, mental toughness, self-regulation and recovery competence.
Based on this conception, the purpose of the present study was to develop and to validate an appropriate operationalization and economic instrument to capture mental robustness. The original scale comprised 13 items, designed by the combination of three adjectives. These adjectives represent three marker items of factors from various inventories including emotional stability, resilience, mental toughness, self-efficacy, self- regulation, reinvestment and the ability to recover.
For validation purposes, participants (N = 503; age: M = 34 years, SD = 14.3) completed a survey consisting of the MR2B and the inventories reflecting the facets. The repeated extraction of binary factors by means of a corresponding factor analysis using an oblique rotation resulted in a 6-factor solution. One item was removed due to ambivalent factor allocation.
Consequently, mental robustness is subdivided by robustness barriers (emotional instability, recovery insufficiency) and robustness booster (self-assurance, self-esteem). The internal consistency with Cronbach’s α = .78 is sufficient. Significant correlations between MR2B and various compatible inventories regarding convergent and discriminant validity have been proven.
The developed MR2B represents an efficient and construct-validated instrument for measuring the mental robustness of a person. Test-retest reliability and criterion validity of the instrument are work in progress. Keywords: mental fitness, mental robustness, mental toughness, resilience, recovery, psychometric instrument Study at the Pablo de Olavide University (Seville, Spain): Physical activity and healthy habits Marta García-Tascón, José-Angel Díaz-Cabrera, Lucía Carmona-Álamos, Jaime Torres-Pinazo, Pedro Cornejo- Daza, David Blanco-Luengo (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) The objective of the study is to describe the practice of physical activity in university students of the Universidad Pablo de Olavide (UPO) in Seville (Spain) related to sex, career and healthy habits.
The university period is related to the abandonment of physical activity (Ruiz & García, 2007). The adolescents become part of adulthood and lose certain healthy habits (Navarro, 2008). A total of 2,014 students have participated (57.7% female and 42.3% male), with a margin of error of 1.92 and a 95% confidence level.
The age is between 17-57 years old, from all degrees. For the study, was used the physical activity subscale of the "Questionnaire on lifestyles in university students" (Salazar et al., 2010). We find that 32.62% of the participating university students “always” practice their physical activity or physical activity for at least 30 minutes three times a week, while 17.18% of university students respond “never”.
The students of the Degree in Sciences of Physical Activity and Sport, followed of the students of Degree in Nutrition and Dietetics are those that register a greater percentage of practice to the week, in front of the students of the Degree in Social Work that obtain 464Posters Wednesday July 12th higher percentage of not performing corporal practice. The 11.57% of university students have been practicing some sport with competitive ends “always” during the last 6 months compared to 58.54% of the university students that it has responded “never”. It stands out the value of 20.77% of men who “always” train to compete, compared to 4.82% of women.
The students of the Degree in Sciences of Physical Activity and Sport, maybe because of the sports adherence, registered a higher percentaof competitive practice (53.7%), followed by the Degree in Economic Analysis (36.1%). In all degrees with the highest number of women enrolled, there is a lower participation in corporal practice. The University Sports Service has to alleviate these deficiencies of participation.
Keywords: university, sedentary, lifestyle, exercise, competition The effect of emotional intelligence on collective efficacy in collegiate athletes Yuki Hongo, Hideaki Takai (Nippon Sport Science University) Studies in the field of sports to verify the relationship between collective efficacy and team performance (e.g., Chaw and Felts, 2008), shown that increasing collective efficacy is a primary factor in improving team performance. However, in order to consider the detailed characteristics of an outstanding team, it is necessary to focus on collective efficacy together with the abilities of the individuals in the team. In addition, clarifying a definite image of these abilities may be expected to lead to the discovery of practical suggestions for interventions that will give improved collective efficacy.
The present study focuses on emotional intelligence with respect to the ability to control emotions, which has recently attracted attention in the field of sport, in order to investigate the effect on collective efficacy of emotional intelligence. The survey subjects were 1,253 students specializing in physical education at A University, of which 817 students who joined a sports club with the main aim of improving competitive ability were analyzed. The survey comprised the Emotional Intelligence Scale (EQS) and the Collective Efficacy Scale.
The results of partial correlation analysis showed a strong positive correlation between collective efficiency and the EQS fields of intrapersonal, interpersonal, and situational. In addition, the results of path analysis indicate that collective efficacy is influenced by the EQS fields of intrapersonal and interpersonal. The goodness of fit indices of the model were GFI=.940, AGFI=.902, CFI=.966, and RMSEA=.067.
These results indicate the possibility that acquisition of the intrapersonal field, in which the athlete recognizes his or her own emotions and acts appropriately on that basis, and the interpersonal field, in which the athlete is able to communicate with others and to form and maintain good interpersonal relations, can improve collective efficacy and thus team performance in collegiate athletes. Keywords: collective efficacy,emotional intelligence, collegiate athletes Low objectively assessed vigorous-intensity physical activity is associated with increased adrenocortical reactivity to psychosocial stress in students with high stress perceptions Markus Gerber, Sebastian Ludyga, Manuel Müecke, Flora Colledge, Serge Brand, Uwe Pühse (University of Basel) The pathways by which physical activity impacts on participants’ health are still not fully understood. The purpose of the present study was to go beyond existing research by combining methods from survey-based and experimental stress research and by examining whether the potential of vigorous physical activity (VPA) to attenuated physiological and psychological stress responses is moderated by participants’ subjective stress perceptions.
The sample consisted of 42 undergraduate students (M=21.2 years, 52% women). Participants self-reported their stress and wore an accelerometer device for seven consecutive days. To examine differences in the adrenocortical, autonomic and psychological stress reactivity, salivary free cortisol, heart rate, state anxiety, mood and calmness were assessed prior, during and after the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST).
The cut-offs of the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) were used to distinguish between students 465Posters Wednesday July 12th below/above current VPA recommendations. High levels of perceived stress combined with VPA levels below the ACSM’s standards (< 3x 20min/week) were associated with an increased salivary cortisol response to the TSST (p <.05). Importantly, the differences in cortisol reactivity remained after adjusting for age, sex, and BMI.
No significant group differences existed for heart rate. However, students with high stress/low VPA experienced less favourable affect throughout the entire testing session (p<.05). Our study suggests that VPA has the highest stress-protective potential among undergraduate students with high stress levels.
Our findings highlight that promoting VPA in young adults seems to be a promising strategy to increase physiological and psychological stress resilience. Keywords: cortisol, heart rate, stress, TSST, vigorous physical activity Social identities and social identity leadership promote health-related outcomes in exercise settings: evidence from parkrun Mark Stevens (University of Bournemouth) Emerging evidence suggests that developing a strong social identity as a member of an exercise group is associated with health-related benefits. However, real-world examinations of this effect have been lacking, while the importance of exercise leaders in enhancing members’ group identification and contributing to the associated benefits is unclear.
This study examined associations between group identification and key behavioural and affective outcomes in exercise groups with and without formal leaders. A model was hypothesized in which group identification was positively associated with participation, enjoyment, group cohesion, and satisfaction; and participation was positively associated with self-esteem and life satisfaction. In the leader group, positive associations were also hypothesized between identity leadership and group identification, enjoyment, group cohesion, satisfaction, and satisfaction with progress under the leader.
132 parkrunners who stated the parkrun they attend most regularly has a clear formal leader (M=53, F=79; Mage=43.67±12.04), and 157 parkrunners who stated the parkrun they attend most regularly does not (M=77, F=80; Mage=44.10±9.99), completed questionnaires measuring all variables except participation, which was assessed objectively. Separate path analyses were conducted for each group. All hypothesized relationships were significant except those between participation and self-esteem in both groups, and participation and life satisfaction in the no leader group.
In the leader group, stronger effects were observed between group identification and participation (leader: β=.51; no leader β=.17), satisfaction (leader: β=.35; no leader β=.19), and enjoyment (leader: β=.55; no leader β=.45). Results suggest that developing a strong social identity as a parkrunner is associated with positive health-related outcomes. By engaging in identity leadership, parkrun leaders may enhance members’ group identification and facilitate these outcomes.
Keywords: social identity, leadership, participation, health Motives of pro-healthy behaviors of ex-athletes Mariusz Lipowski (Gdansk University of Physical Education and Sport), Malgorzata Lipowska, Anna Ussorowska (University of Gdansk), Magdalena Jochimek (Gdansk University of Physical Education and Sport) Competitive sport is not limited to participation in training and competition, it also represents specific lifestyle. This lifestyle should be characterized by particular care for health and physical condition. However, the slogan “Sport equals health” refers rather to recreational sport activities and health-oriented training.
The term “training” is typically associated with competitive sports, and its effects are evaluated in context of achieved results and won medals. Competitive training differs from the recreational one, mostly it terms of predefined goals. Sport career termination induces changes in athletes’ lives, research reports indicate that transition from intensive training to recreational physical activity is typical only for part of the former athletes.
466Posters Wednesday July 12th Researchers analyzing factors determining regular participation in physical exercise postulate multidimensional and general approach to the question of starting, continuing and withdrawing from physical activity. Health- seeking behaviors are determined by goals defined by an individual. Sport career termination requires reformulating goals of participation in physical activity from "championship" to "pro-healthy" ones.
The study included 613 individuals (310 female, 303 male), between 24 and 45 years:291 ex-athletes and 322 persons with no history of competitive sporting. Involvement in health-seeking practices was determined with Health Behavior Inventory by Juczyński, while motives for physical activity were measured with Inventory of Physical Activity Objectives by Lipowski & Zaleski. Ex-athletes presented different motives of pro-healthy physical activity then members of control group.
Also involvement in health-seeking behaviors of ex-athletes like: proper nutrition habits, positive psychological attitudes and health practices differs them from non-athletes. The gender of participants moderates the motivational value of the specific objectives of physical activity, and persistence in action. Keywords: ex-athletes, objectives of physical activity, pro-healthy behaviour Negative addiction scale: an evaluation of Brazilians amateur runners Maristela Padilha de Souza, Fernando Falavigna Vianna Falavigna Vianna (Centro Universitário Metodista IPA) Exercise training can induce numerous benefits to the physical health of its practitioners.
Among these, the decrease in the incidence of non-communicable diseases. In addition, regular physical exercise helps modulate body composition and decrease symptoms of anxiety and depression. On the other hand, prolonged exposure to training, especially aerobic exercise may induce a pattern of addictive behavior that may be harmful mainly to amateur athletes.
The Negative Addiction Scale (NAS) (Haley & Bailey, 1982) is an easy-to- apply instrument that helps to identify this condition. The purpose of this study was to verify the level of dependence on running practice and its possible association with the physical training characteristics of amateur runners of both genders. We evaluated 37 amateur runners (37 ± 10 years) of both genders, with a training history of at least two years, through a self-administered questionnaire (NAS).
The SPSS-17 for windows was used to statistical analysis. The NAS mean values were 5.8 ± 1.8, with no significant difference between the genders. The highest values were positively associated with a higher frequency (p <0.004) and weekly training volume (p <0.002).
Although there is no cut-off point for evaluating the values obtained in the scale applied in this study, our results corroborate those already described in the literature that relate a greater dependency behavior to the practitioner's experience. Running events have become a worldwide phenomenon in recent years, attracting more and more adepts. The observation of a correct training orientation of these individuals can minimize the possible adverse effects of a negative dependence on this sport.
Keywords: exercise training, long distance runners, physical exercise addiction Pain catastrophizing on high performance athletes Marisa de Mello Santiago, Camila Castro Barros Valicente, Carla Tavares, Felipe Vieira, Murillo Lemos Nogueira (Minas Tenis Clube) Understanding pain perception is essential in high performance sports. Catastrophizing is one of cognitive distortions proposed on cognitive behavioral theory (Beck, A., 1976; Burns, D., 1980). Links between catastrophizing behavior and perception on pain in athletes have already been the subject of different studies.
Results that show connection between catastrophizing and perception of pain in athletes have been recurrent in a sequence of works conducted by Sullivan et.al. (1995, 2000, 2001). Also, catastrophizing was related to increased pain and poorer treatment outcomes in general patients (Edwards et.
al 2006 and Gracely et al, 2004) and identified as a frequent result of injuries in athletes (Udrey et. al. 1997).
This paper objective is to 467Posters Wednesday July 12th help to understand the high performance athletes’ pain perception and its connections to improve performance, in search for increasing the availability to train and compete. Throughout the 2016/17 season, the Sports Health Department of Minas Tênis Clube was responsible for evaluate 124 volleyball, basketball, futsal, swimming and judo high performance athletes - 85 men and 39 women, with average age 22.43. Along the research process, it was applied B-PCS (Brazilian version of Pain Catastrophizing Scale),SWBS (Subjective Well-Being Scale) and VAS (Visual Analogue Scale) evaluating questionnaires to the mentioned athletes.
After collecting and analyzing data, it was noticed that athletes that present catastrophizing behavior showed higher levels of negative affects on SWBS (mean values=50,78±16,21) compared with non catastrophizing behavior(mean values=44,97±13,08)(p=0,045). With regards the team sports results, when considered the athletes who report pain perception, there is a bigger proportion of younger athletes than the older ones who feel pain(p=0,023). Considering individual sports, there was no significant difference between the groups.
These data allow the sports psychologists to better understand and help athletes. Keywords: pain, catastrophizing, athletes, affects High levels of kinesiophobia in painful elite athletes during competitive season Marisa de Mello Santiago, Camila Castro Barros Valicente, Natalia Franco N Bittencourt, Marcela Mendes Almeida Gomide Leite (Minas Tenis Clube) Kinesiophobia is described as an excessive fear of movement resulting from feeling of vulnerability to painful or re-injury (Österberg et al., 2013). This causes negative attitude toward the body and engaging in daily activities and sports.
Chronic pain is common in athletes (ex: tendinopathy) and often cannot be only explained by tissue damage. Psychological factors might influence pain perception2. Therefore, is necessary to identify people with a continued high kinesiophobia level and then address them to specific intervention.
The purpose of this study was to analyze the difference of kinesiophobia levels in elite athletes who report pain during a competitive season. 45 elite athletes (28 male and 17 female) from volleyball and basketball were assessed (age 24.4+5.9; height 188+9 cm, body mass 83+14.3 kg). They were asked if they feel pain at the moment of the data collection, and also pain intensity was measured with a numeric rating scale.
Kinesiophobia was assessed with the Tampa Scale (TSK) (Wiljma et al. 2016). Athletes were classified as pain-free/ painful and kinesiophobia /non-kinesiophobia.
Fisher’s exact test was used to evaluate the association between pain and kinesiophobia classification significance. Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS version 15. Painful athletes had higher TSK score than those pain-free (p=0.049).
The present study showed that athletes who reported pain were classified with kinesiophobia. Kinesiophobia was also associated to patients who do not return to pre-injury sports participation level after a knee Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) surgery (Lentz et al., 2014). Consequently, psychological factors related to fear of movement may influence injury recovery/ rehabilitation and pain perception (Chmielewski et al.2008).
Therefore, psychological assessment might be an additional determinant of rehabilitation and pain management in elite athletes. Keywords: pain, kinesiophobia, athletes, injury Mindfulness-based intervention program to reduce anxiety levels in martial arts athletes Daniel Trujillo Torrealva, Mario Reyes-Bossio (UPC) The practice of mindfulness is considered a high impact tool for athlete performance (Palmi & Solé, 2016). The purpose of this study was to examine the efficacy of a psychological intervention program with mindfulness component, “MFAW” (Mindfulness for Athletes Wellbeing) for the reduction of precompetitive anxiety, which was adapted from MAC and MSPE programs.
The intervention consisted of 12 sessions, of 1 hour each, which also included practices of mindfulyoga and self-compassion. The sample consisted of 33 athletes of both sexes (69.7% men and 30.3% women), ranging in age from 17 to 23 years, belonging to the 468Posters Wednesday July 12th martial arts selection of a Peruvian university. They were assigned, according to the level of exposure to the intervention, to a Control Group (GC, n = 17) or to an Experimental Group (GE, n = 16).
For pre and post test measures, the CSAI-2R was used to assess precompetitive state anxiety based on three dimensions: intensity of somatic and cognitive anxiety and levels of self-confidence. The results evidenced highly significant differences and with large effect sizes in the posttest measurement of the EG, as a decrease in the levels of somatic anxiety, cognitive and an increase in the levels of self-confidence were reached. While, in the CG, no significant differences were obtained and the effect sizes were irrelevant.
Keywords: mindfulness, self-compassion, psychological intervention, pre-competitive anxiety, sport, martial arts Motivational climate and physical self-concept in equestrian jumping competition adult athletes Luciana Benavides-Aramburu, Jessica Vilchez Vivanco Ordoñez, Mario Reyes-Bossio (UPC) The basic objective of this research is to understand the relationship between motivational climate and physical self-concept in adult athletes competing in equestrian jumping of various equestrian clubs of Lima city. The participants consists of 91 horsemen and women (46 women and 45 men) aged between 19 and 74 (Media = 39.85; SD = 13.92). They written replied to a questionnaire about personal aspects of their lifes and completed the PMCSQ – 2 of Motivational Climate perceived in individual sports (Balaguer, Atienza, Castillo, Moreno and Duda, 1997) and the CAF physical self-concept questionnaire (Goñi, Ruiz de Azua and Rodriguez, 2006).
It was found as main finding that greater motivational climate, task oriented, perceived by athletes, leads to greater self-concept. Keywords: motivational climate, physical self-concept, high-performance athletes, equestrian jumping Goal orientation and mental resilience in elite sport Marijana Mladenovic (College of Sport and Health, Belgrade) It is assumed that two orientations, ego and task, depict the ways in which a person defines and experiences success and failure and evaluates personal competence (Duda, 1989). Mental resilience is defined as personal capacity to sustain cognitive self-control and overcome stress during competition (Mladenovic, 2016).
Some latest research in neuroscience indicate that cognitive self-control is overrated and that sportsperson might overestimate conscious capacity to control activation level at the competition (Damasio, 2010). It is assumed that development of task orientation contributes more to mental resilience in competitive situations. The aim of this research was to explore relation between task and ego orientation and mental resilience in competitive context.
The research was conducted during senior European handball championship for women 2016. Sample included 17 participants, players of Serbian national handbal team (N=17). Applied instruments were TEOSQ and Color association method (CAM).
TEOSQ consists of 13 items in the form of Likert scale. Six items belong to task orientation scale, while seven items measure ego orientation. CAM measures mental resilience during the competition by exploring subjective sense of pain, effort, fear, injury, readiness for competition and training, ability to take a risk during the match, relying on habits in sports context (www.camethod.com).
Like Lüscher’s color test (Lüscher, 1971), CAM is based on palette of eight colors, but combined with words. Association (James, 1890, Wundt, 1902) between certain word related to competition and color, might provide insight into non-conscious mental state. Results on CAM vary from zero to one hundred.
ANOVA was applied. Results indicate significant relation between task orientation and measures of mental resilience: pain (F=12.280; p<0.001), fear (F=12.061; p<0.001), tiredness (F=4.260; p<0.028), injury (F=14.543; p<0.001), habit relation (F=10.707; p<0.002). Keywords: goal, resilience, motivation, colors 469Posters Wednesday July 12th Imagery use in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Maria-Christina Kosteli , Jennifer Cumming, Sarah Williams, Nicola Heneghan, Carolyn Roskell, Peymane Adab, Sheila Greenfield, Kate Jolly, Rachel Jordan (University of Birmingham) Exercise imagery is potentially beneficial for insufficiently active people as a means to boosting self- efficacy and promoting physical activity (PA) engagement.
Despite the fact that imagery is a successful cost- effective technique that been shown to promote self-efficacy in clinical populations (e.g., cancer, stroke), to date there are no studies that have examined exercise imagery use in individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Twenty-six individuals between the ages of 50-89 years (Mage = 69.50, SD = 27.57; males = 15) with mild to moderate COPD were recruited from the BLISS primary care COPD cohort to participate in one of four focus groups. Thematic analysis revealed key themes, with motivation, planning, skill improvement, and relaxation identified as the most common imagery functions, and scenery, reward, goal, and health images as the most commonly reported imagery content.
Interestingly, some participants felt imagery could be debilitative as they got discouraged imagining themselves doing something they used to do in the past but cannot achieve anymore (e.g., going up the stairs). Imagery would need to be carefully tailored and introduced in people with COPD to encourage rather than discourage participation in regular PA. Although imagery could be a useful technique to help people with COPD manage their symptoms, for imagery to be effective it must be meaningful and personalized to fit the specific needs of the population using imagery.
Therefore, future imagery interventions should focus on what individuals with COPD can currently do (e.g., arm and upper-body movements) and help them create new experiences reflecting their skills at the present, rather than re-creating what they used to do before they got diagnosed with COPD. Keywords: imagery, exercise, self-efficacy, pulmonary disease Factors that promote or hinder physical activity participation in patients with colorectal cancer: A systematic review Maria Romero Elias (Universidad Miguel Hernandez) Different studies of patients with colorectal cancer have shown that physical activity has positive physical and psychosocial effects. However, most patients don't comply with the recommended criteria of physical activity.The aim of the present study was to analyze,by means of a systematic review of the literature, the factors associated with physical activity participation in patients with colorectal cancer.
For this purpose, we conducted a search in the databases WEB OF SCIENCE,SCOPUS and SPORTDISCUS up to February of 2016.After the selection process,23 full-text articles were retained. The results allowed identifying four large categories of factors related to physical activity participation in this population:sociodemographic factors,health factors(specific and nonspecific to the disease), prior experience and preferences,and motivational factors.Among the results obtained,the sociodemographic factors that favor participation in physical activity in this population were: being male, white,younger, having a higher educational level and higher economic status, having a job that does not involve a very extensive work schedule, or being retired.Moreover,comorbidity(e.g.,obesity,anxiety,and depression)and the receipt of adjuvant therapy (with its corresponding side effects,such as fatigue and nausea) were related to less physical activity. Variables such as positive attitude,social support from family,friends and health professionals,satisfaction of basic psychological needs,and self-determined motivation were shown to be facilitators of physical activity.It is necessary to develop programs of physical activity adapted to the particular characteristics of this population and based on motivational strategies that promote adherence to physical activity.
Professionals from the sport sciences should be incorporated into the multidisciplinary medical team so that they could advise patients about the best physical activity options, and design healthy training programs. Keywords: physical exercise, motivation, barriers, treatment, health 470Posters Wednesday July 12th Physical activity in health sciences students of Uruguay: Practices, motives and resources Flavia Vique (Universidad de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay), Maria Noel Givogre (Sociedad Uruguaya de Psicología del Deporte) Introduction: The presented is part of a larger study in which eight dimensions related to the lifestyle were investigated; One of which is physical activity. The characterization of the students is taken as an advance to develop a program of health promotion in the university.
In the results in relation to this variable; practices, motives, motivation for change and the resources available to carry them out are identified. Possible interventions that arise from the analysis are considered. Material and method: The Universe are students of admission 2016 to careers of health sciences of a Headquarter of the Universidad de la República.
A cluster sampling was made taking career and sex; and by simple random sampling the sample was defined in 226 students. It is a quantitative, descriptive, transverse and correlational design; Obtaining the data through the CEVJU-R Questionnaire. 19th version of SPSS was used for the analysis; determining frequencies and summary measures; parametric and non-parametric tests were performed in the correlation of some variables.
Results: 50.4% of the population has unhealthy practices; being greater in women than in men. Of this population, 56.2% is distributed between the stages of precontemplation and contemplation. The main reasons for the practice are "to benefit health" and "improve mood"; The main barriers are "laziness" and "lack of time".
Almost 70% of the population says that the University does not offer spaces and offers for physical activity. Conclusions: The results indicate low levels of practice and low perception of the risk of "sedentarismo" in this population. It's recommended to work on awareness-raising workshops on the subject, to investigate the interests of this population with regard to activities that can carry out and develop proposals, optimizing available resources (locative, curricular).
Keywords: physical activity, university students, health, motivation, healthy university Decisional balance, self-efficacy and it´s predictive effect on the exercise enjoyment on a Mexican sample María Marentes Castillo, Jorge Zamarripa, Maritza Delgado (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León), Isabel Castillo (Universitat de València) Many persons know the benefits of the regular physical exercise; however, few are those who decide to benefit from this behavior. The decisional balance as a decision-making process, involves the evaluation of the pros versus cons of performing a behavior (e.g., physical exercise), It has even been shown that the predominance of advantages over disadvantages facilitates the decision to perform exercise. Considering that self-efficacy represents and individual’s belief in maintaining his or her ability to achieve a particular goal despite the amount of physical exercise disadvantages, positive decision-making balance and high levels of self- efficacy are two aspects that can contribute to adherence and enjoyment of physical exercise.
The purpose of the present study was to examine the predictive role of decisional balance and self-efficacy on exercise enjoyment in a sample of 530 people (48.2% males) between the ages of 11 and 76 (M = 33.22; SD = 15.27) from the metropolitan area of Monterrey (Mexico). The Decisional Balance Questionnaire, the Self-Efficacy for Exercise Questionnaire and the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale were administered. We conducted a hierarchical regression analysis to predict enjoyment.
The balance decisional was entered in step 1 and the self- determination in step 2. The results indicate that the decisional balance account for 27.4% of the variance (F=200.24, p <.00) of the enjoyment. In the step 2, the results indicated that the decisional balance and self- efficacy accounted for 33.8% of the variance (F=135.61, p <.00) of the enjoyment.
In conclusion, developing the self-efficacy of the people involved in physical activity can predict in a significant way the enjoyment of physical activity over the decisional balance. Keywords: decisional balance, self-efficacy, enjoyment, adherence, exercise 471Posters Wednesday July 12th The influence of motivational climate in engagement of Argentinean athletes from Youth Olympic Games María Julia Raimundi (CONICET - University of Buenos Aires), María García-Arabehety, Darío Hernán Iglesias, Mauro Pérez-Gaido (University of Buenos Aires), Marcelo Morillo (Universidad Abierta Interamericana), Vanina Schmidt (CONICET - University of Buenos Aires) Elite sports are characterized by the high degree of personal commitment necessary to achieve high levels of performance and succeed. Indeed engagement is the essence of participation in elite sports.
It becomes a key issue in this level of competition because high levels of engagement prevent drop out. The social environment surrounding young athletes has an important influence on their experiences in sport because significant others (parents, coaches, professors, teammates) acquire a determining role in the enjoyment of the activity. The aim of this work is to study the influence of perceived coach’s and parents’ motivational climate on engagement and intentions to drop out on young elite athletes from National Teams from Argentina.
Two hundred and thirty four athletes (47.9 % male, 52,1 % female) aged between 12 and 16 years (M = 14.48, SD = 1.09) that were selected to represent their nation in different sports at the Youth Olympic Games (YOG Buenos Aires 2018) participated in the study. They completed a sociodemographic questionnaire, the Spanish Sport Climate Questionnaire (S-SCQ), the Perceptions of Parents Scale (POPS), the Athlete Engagement Questionnaire (AEQ), the Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ) and the Intentions to Drop Out Questionnaire. Multiple linear regressions were performed to study the effect of perceived motivational climate provided by coaches and parents on athletes’ engagement.
Autonomy support provided by coaches has greater influence on engagement in males than in females and it has a greater influence on intentions to drop out in females. Regardless of gender, coach’s motivational climate is a stronger predictor than parents’ for both engagement and intentions to drop out. These results show the impact that significant others have in adolescents’ participation in sport.
They also help to better understand an aspect that fosters positive development thus contributing to the psychologist’s work with elite sports. Keywords: adolescence, elite sport, engagement, motivational climate Exploring participation bias in Canadian sport across competitive levels Lindsay McCardle (University of Ottawa, Canada; York University, Canada), Amy M. Gayman, Joseph Baker (York University, Canada) In high performance sport, certain segments of the population are overrepresented (e.g., Cobley et al., 2009; Côté et al., 2006).
Sport policy in Canada (Cragg et al., 2016) and elsewhere (Eime et al., 2016) emphasizes inclusion and equal opportunity across levels and contexts. The extent to which participation biases in sport are found across the levels of competition is relatively unexplored. Our purpose was to explore four potential sources of bias in Canadian sport: (a) sex, (b) age (in 10-year categories), (c) income (personal and household), and (d) visible minority status.
Participants (n = 1524) were from the Statistics Canada General Social Survey of 2009-2010 and included those aged 15-80 years who indicated participating in a range of sports (e.g., basketball, ice hockey, soccer) in the last 12 months. For each potential source of bias, we compared rates of participation across four levels of competition: (a) recreational (n = 938), (b) local (n = 334), (c) regional (n = 83), and (d) provincial/national (n = 125). Chi-square analyses indicated no significant difference for sex (χ2 (3) = 4.54, p = .208) or household income (χ2 (12) = 17.27, p = .138), although significant differences were observed by sport level for age (χ2 (15) = 90.56, p < .001), personal income (χ2 (12) = 36.37, p < .001), and minority status (χ2 (3) = 19.01, p = .001).
Post-hoc analysis indicated self-reported visible minorities participated more frequently at recreational level than expected and the youngest participants (15-24 years old) competed more frequently at provincial/national level than expected. Surprisingly, there was a trend towards more participation at provincial/national level for individuals in the lowest personal income bracket. 472Posters Wednesday July 12th Discussion centers on the implications of these findings for policy and program development that aims to reduce systemic bias in Canadian sport.
Keywords: sport, participation, competition, bias Self-regulatory processes, acculturation and sport Marcio Domingues (ULHT) Immigrants generally arrive in a new country with a strong sense of their national or cultural origin and with varying degrees of willingness to adopt the identity of their new society (Liebkind, 2001). Immigration and ethnic minority issues pose major social, political and intellectual challenges to contemporary Europe. There are important links between cultural context and individual behavioral development as migrants face the need of maintenance of original cultural identity and maintenance of relations with other groups.
The main objective is to explore from a longitudinal pathway how youth migrants use sport to create socially desirable skills through immersed reciprocity and verify which personal and contextual variables created in the sport environment are decisive to their integration in the host society. The investigators will proceed with a correlational and quantitative analyses: 150 migrant athletes from different clubs and 150 non-athlete migrants; 14-17 years of age divided according to different levels of sport participation. For this purpose the researchers will employ the Self-regulation of Learning Self-Report Scale – SRL-SRS (Toering et al., 2011) and the Revised Sociocultural Adaptation Scale (SCAS-R) (Wilson, 2013).
The linkage between sporting environments and positive impact to attitudes and adaptive behaviours in youth migrants has yet to be confirmed. Furthermore, sport can produce outcomes, both psychological and sociocultural that has influence on the individual’s adaptation and posterior integration. Exploratory and descriptive findings tell us that there is an overgrowing number of athletes in clubs that have professional teams in Portugal and that these athletes come mainly from Africa and Brazil.
Sporting context can positively influence and promote the process of learning self-regulation skills in young migrant athletes. Keywords: immigrants, self-regulatory skills, sport Olympic athletes’ development. An ecological understanding Marcio Domingues (ULHT) Recent research (Martin, McCaughty, Murphy & Kimberlydawn, 2011) brought evidences that different ecologies of practice produce different personal outcomes for the athletes who engage in competitive settings for long periods of time.
What characterizes a talented athlete who further develops to an elite level? Hence, the study of ecological contexts is especially relevant in order to clarify the effects of sport engagement and to highlight the factors that can optimize the positive influences associated with sport participation. The aim of this study is to explore Portuguese youth Olympic athletes and elite Olympic athletes from two perspectives.
First, analyzing the athlete’s personal dispositions, researchers will try to determine their attitudes, beliefs and engagement in their Olympic project, culminating with the participation in the 2016 Lillehammer Young Olympic Games (YOG); second is related to the trickle-down effect, i.e. can the senior Olympic athletes inspire youth Olympic athletes’ engagement in through their sporting success. Researchers will employ the Sports Attitudes Questionnaire (SAQ) and Perceives Motivational Climate Questionnaire (PMCSQ) to youth Olympic athletes from different Olympic disciplines and retrospective interviews to elite athletes regarding their developmental trajectories.
Domingues & Gonçalves, 2014) have focused part of their work upon (a) achievement settings and talented athletes’ development, (b) the impact of sport participation and context on young athletes’ sport career, and (c) the construction of values and moral reasoning. The study will try to analyze the development of sport participation as a phenomenon of proximal processes and their interactions with personal attributes, ecological context and time dimensions. Researchers will attempt to identify the 473Posters Wednesday July 12th properties of the environmental context who intentionally interacts within sport context regarding specifically sport attitudes and motivational climate.
Keywords: Olympic athletes, ecology, development, sport Goal orientation, self-rated soccer abilities, and perceived coach behaviours among adolescent male and female soccer players from Germany and Japan Dorothee Alfermann, Marc-Oliver Löw (Leipzig University), Guido Geisler, Yoshinori Okade, Masao Nakayama (Tsukuba University) The primary objective of this study was to look for differences and similarities in goal orientation, fear of negative evaluation, self-rated soccer abilities, and perceived coach behaviours between adolescent German and Japanese soccer players. The comparison was carried out within the cross-cultural framework of individualism/collectivism (Hofstede, 1991) with German players regarded as representatives of an individualistic country (cf. Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002).
The Japanese players, on the other hand, were assumed to stem from a less individualistic but more competitive culture in which winning is of paramount importance. Participants were 216 male and 115 female players from U15 to U18 teams, and measures included subscales of the Task and Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire (TEOSQ), Fear of Negative Evaluation Questionnaire (FNE), rating scales of self-rated abilities, Perceived Motivation Climate in Sport Questionnaire (PMCSQ), Leadership Scale for Sports (LSS), and Coach-Athlete Relationship Questionnaire (CART-Q). As expected, the Japanese players reported higher ego and lower task orientation than the Germans as well as a higher performance climate, less training and instructional behaviour from their coaches, and less closeness in coach-athlete relationships.
In addition, the German players rated their abilities more highly than the Japanese cohort. There were no differences in other coach behaviours and an interaction effect of Gender x Nation in FNE. Discussion of the results is based on the framework of individualism and collectivism and on the competitive ethos, both in sport specifically and in cultures overall.
Keywords: collectivism, cross-cultural comparison, individualism, soccer Psychological well-being of athletes associated with the prevention-intervention programme for sports injuries conducted in the Academic Sports Centre in Gdańsk Marcin Krawczynski (Academy of Sport Education in Warsaw, Atheneum University in Gdansk) The issue of sports injuries constitutes a very important subject both in theory and in practice (Blecharz, 2008). Sports injuries constitute a threat to athletes’ careers and their successes. Some injuries may be slight and not have any lasting effects.
However, others may finish a career and influence a sportsman’s quality of life. However, not many academic research papers address this issue from the perspective of sport psychology and the holistic intervention models (in Poland e.g. Blecharz, 2008; abroad e.g.
King-Chung Chang & Hagger, 2012; Podlog, Dimmock & Miller, 2011; Santi & Pietrantoni, 2013; Wiese-Bjornstal, 2014). To assess the effects of a multi-modal intervention programme, including psychological trainings, with injured athletes. Design: Longitudinal pre-experimental design with 2-weeks follow-up.
The programme was designed to improve physical, mental, and spiritual well-being and incorporated rehabilitation and relaxation training, combined with seminars that addressed issues of sport psychology, philosophy of life, and social support. Programme participants (n=60) were involved in activities for 10 h a week over a period of 2 weeks and were examined two times: before the programme began and immediately after its completion. Three psychological parameters were assessed: depression (polish modified version Geriatric Depression Scale by Brink, Curran, Dorr, Janson, McNulty, Messina, 1985), hypochondria (polish modified version Hypochondriasis Scale by Brink, Belanger, Bryant, Capri, Janakes, Jasculca, Oliveira, 1978) and feelings of the purpose of life (Purpose in Life Test by Crumbaugh & Maholick, 1964).
Participants demonstrated statistically significant improvements in all 474Posters Wednesday July 12th measured psychological variables between the first and second assessment. Within the limitations of the research design, the programme appeared successful in improving the quality of life of injured athletes. Keywords: injury, prevention-intervention programme, quality of life Effect of an intervention program on motivation and basic psychological needs in School Physical Education classes Marcelo Callegari Zanetti (Universidade Paulista, São Judas Tadeu University), Graziela Néspoli Feltran, Luis Felipe Tubagi Polito, Helton Magalhães Dias (São Judas Tadeu University), Angela Nogueira Neves (Physical Education College of Brazilian Army), Maria Regina Ferreira Brandão (São Judas Tadeu University) Motivation is a variable that influences the behavior of physical and sports activities, directly interfering with their intensity and frequency, as well as promoting positive consequences such as pleasure, fun, and well- being.
The objective of this study was to verify the effect of an intervention program on motivation and basic psychological needs (BPN) in School Physical Education classes. We investigated 42 students from a state public school, divided into two different groups (Control Group (CG) and Intervention Group (IG)). The CG was composed of 18 students (mean age 13.39 ± 0.49) and IG by 24 students (mean age 13.48 ± 0.49).
Students from both groups answered at the beginning and at the end of the intervention program two different questionnaires (BPNES, PLOCQ). After the initial application of the instruments, a weekly orientation intervention was carried out for 10 weeks only with the IG School Physical Education teacher, who sought to adapt the class in order to bring the students to the BPN (greater autonomy, competence, and social relation). After the intervention, there was a decrease in IG in three factors, with high effects sizes, indicating a high practical significance.
The factors that underwent intervention in the IG were: introjected extrinsic motivation (t(23)=3,18; p=0,004; d=0,66), external extrinsic motivation (t(23)=2,78; p=0,011; d=0,90) and amotivation (t(23)=2,67; p=0,014; d=0,80). In the CG, no significant change in the variables was observed. We also explored the percentage of variation (relative delta) of the post-test for the pre-test among the variables measured, noting that only in the amotivation variable there was a statistically significant difference between the CG and IG groups after the intervention (t(40)=2,06; p=0,004; d=0,63).
The program provided changes only in the dimensions of self-determined motivation (with no significant effect on BPN). The duration of only 10 weeks may have been a limiting factor of bigger effect. Keywords: interventional effects, motivation, basic psychological needs, school physical education classes Are motivation questionnaires inefficient to explain PA levels during PE lessons?
Differences depending on how PA is assessed using accelerometers Marc Yangüez Escalera, Julien Chanal (University of Geneva) The aim of this work was to explore the links between self-reported measures of motivation using the Self-Determination Theory perspective (Deci & Ryan, 2000), and measures of physical activity (PA) obtained through accelerometers. In a recent project, we studied the trajectories of PA and self-determined motivation during physical education (PE) lessons, and we found relationships between these constructs to be weak. Among the possible explanations, we could question either the reliability of the motivation questionnaire or how PA was assessed.
Therefore, in this study, we investigated more in depth the links between PA and motivation by refining our measurement of PA during the PE lesson. 319 children aged 8 to 12 from schools of Geneva participated in this study. PE lessons were filmed and accelerometers were used to record children’s PA level.
The video-recording enabled us to cut the data of the PE lessons in different parts: time spent on activity vs. time spent on other situations (warming up, teachers’ explanations). Students’ PA levels were calculated twice: 1) for the entire lesson and 2) only during the “activity” period.
Finally, we measured students’ motivation via a questionnaire. Correlations between motivation and students’ PA levels were obtained. 475Posters Wednesday July 12th Results show strong differences depending on whether motivation was correlated with PA levels obtained from the entire PE lesson, or only during the “activity” period.
More specifically, we found significant and theoretically grounded correlations between autonomous motivation and PA levels during the “activity” period for sedentary, moderate and vigorous activity. Motivation questionnaires might be a reliable tool to measure students’ motivation for PA. However, how PA is assessed may account for the link between motivation and PA levels.
This work shows that such relationship is stronger when only the “activity” period is considered rather than the entire PE lesson. Keywords: physical education, motivation, accelerometer, physical activity Analysis of the efforts within the body movement provides new perspective of the burnout syndrome – a controlled study Manuela Pfeffer (University of Graz) The definition of burnout syndrome is still vague, although there have been numerous scientific burnout surveys. This indicates that new perspectives are essential.
One such perspective would be the body movement of burnout patients, which has not been investigated yet. The aim of this study is to arrive at a deeper understanding of burnout syndrome by obtaining knowledge of the body movement of burnout patients. Hospitalized burnout patients (n = 22; ∅ 47,2 ±9,1 years) and a healthy control group (n = 20; ∅ 41,5 ±15,0 years) who met the inclusion criteria (Burnout Inventory Scale, Geuenich & Hagemann, 2014; psychiatrists) were analyzed independently by two certified movement-analysts via video.
The video shows the participants in a standardized movement sequence with verbal instructions. Laban Movement Analysis (1960), with its Effort system, was the instrument of analysis and it is also an instrument of movement therapy and behavior observation. Cohen’s kappa and Mann-Whitney U test were calculated.
The inter-rater reliability was substantial to almost perfect: Kappa = .66-.92 (p < .001), 95% CI (≥.457, ≤1.009). The results illustrate significant differences between the burnout patients and the healthy control group in all four Effort elements of the Laban Movement Analysis (Flow, Space, Time, Weight). I.e.
burnout patients move in a different way than healthy subjects. Burnout patients show less frequent Indirect, Light, Sustained and Bound movements. Literature (Welsche, 2010) indicates that depressive patients have also deficits in their Indirect, Light and Sustained movements, however not in their Bound movements – but they have a preference for Bound movements.
Therefore our findings lead to a further perspective for investigating the differentiation between burnout and depression. Keywords: burnout syndrome, body movement, body language, laban movement analysis, effort system Influence of physical activity on cognitive performance and brain oxygenation in children aged 10-11 years Manuel Mücke (University of Basel), Christian Andrä (University of Leipzig), Markus Gerber, Uwe Pühse, Sebastian Ludyga (University of Basel) Studies have shown that high physical activity in childhood can have a positive influence on higher cognitive functions and academic achievement and might enhance brain development. The objective of this study was to examine the influence of objectively measured everyday physical activity on childrens’ cognitive performance and blood oxygenation in the prefrontal cortex during cognitive tasks.
In 55 children (age: 10-11 years) attending the 5th classes of 2 German high schools, moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA) was recorded with actigraphy over the course of one week. Subsequently, they performed a semantic and a phonetic verbal fluency test (VFT) and a mental arithmetic task (MAT) to assess cognitive flexibility and working memory capacity, respectively. Changes in cerebral blood oxygenation (ΔHbO2) from a 2 min resting period to cognitive tasks were measured using functional near-infrared spectroscopy across the prefrontal cortex (PFC).
476Posters Wednesday July 12th For statistical analyses, a median split was performed to differentiate between children with higher (Mean (SD): 1342 (204) min/week) and lower MVPA (Mean (SD): 810 (222) min/week). Using analyses of variance (ANOVA), cognitive performance (correct answers on VFT and MAT) and concentration changes in cerebral blood oxygenation were compared between groups. ANOVAs showed no significant differences between lower and higher MVPA group in terms of task performance and ΔHbO2.
With regard to oxygenation of different subdivisions of the PFC during the tasks, a main effect of region in the semantic VFT (p=.020) and the MAT (p=.002) and an interaction of region and hemisphere in the phonetic VFT (p=.050) were found. Our results indicate task specific increases of HbO2 in PFC regions related to cognitive flexibility (VFT) and working memory (MAT), but no influence of the amount of MVPA on PFC oxygenation or cognitive performance. Examining the effects of acute exercise may lead to different results.
Keywords: near-infrared spectroscopy, working memory, task-switching, actigraphy, verbal fluency, mental arithmetic Analyzing bad conducts in 14-16 year-old boys and girls football Manuel Naranjo, Joaquin Luque, Javier de la Mata, Alex Torres, Alvaro Redondo, Julian Paul (Facultad del Deporte) In order to fight fighting against violen ce, discrimination, intolerance and others negatives behaviors in grassroots sports , we need to analyze the current situation . As far as we can re ad in newspapers and wa tch on television , every weekend we observe some kind of incidents and according to European Union we don’t have enough data about the situation in Spain. The aim of this study is to present data of incidents in the Andalucian football League (age 14 - 16).
By analyzing the Andalucian Footbal l Federation (Spain) Computer System , where referees save t he information after ev ery game. 95 days of competit ion in 4 groups where examined (more than 100 hundred matches). The results demonstrate that is necessary to implement educational programs for players and parents in order to cope the negative consequences of every kind of incidents.
This study is part of the European Erasmus Project PSYTOOL Sport Psychology as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroots sports . An educational and innovative tools based on sport psychology to promote integrity and to tackle violence, discrimination, intolerance and match - fixing, including a specific website tool providing information about the situation and procedures, offering guidelines to promote good practices as well as proposing direct instructions about how to react and make an intervention. Keywords: red cards, yelow cards, grassrroots sports, incidents Intervention procedure and protocol to reduce the number of incidents in boys and girls football matches between the ages of 14 and 16 years old Manuel Naranjo, Joaquin Luque, Alex Torres, Javier de La Mata, Alvaro Redondo, Julian Paul (Facultad Del Deporte UPO) The aim of this work is to present a protocol to reduce the number of incidents in boys and girls football players between the ages of 14 and 16 years old.
Based on the analysis of the yellow, red cards and incicidents of the Sevillan football league 2015-2016 (14-16 year old players, male and female)More than 85 football matches with more than 350 players have been analyses based on the Sevillan Football Federation Computer System where referees save data about cards and incidents after every game. The results suggest that a protocol to educate, learn and display fair play hehaviours, and protect grassroots players is necessary. This sudy is part of PSYTOOL, an Erasmus + project entitled “Sport Psychology as a strategic tool for prevention and training on grassroots sports” and try to solve one problem according EU request that they don´t have enough data about incidients in football at that age.
The application of this protocol intend to help grassroots participants when they play football. 477Posters Wednesday July 12th Keywords: grassrroots, football, intervention, protocol, incidents Determinants of psychological wellbeing among active adolescents Malgorzata Walczak, Maciej Tomczak (University School of Physical Education) Quality of life depends on many different factors as its definition is quite complex. The self-determination theory relates it to general wellbeing adequate to psychological needs' fulfillment while salutogenic approach refers it to the sense of coherence.
The main purpose of the research was to analyze and understand the factors which may influence one's wellbeing considered both from SDT and salutogenic perspective. Assumed as independent variables biologically determined temperament, self-assessed body image, incorrect eating behaviors and the attitude towards physical activity, were determinants potentially engaged in the process of fulfilling one's psychological needs (relatedness, autonomy and competence) or constituting the sense of coherence. The material (N=141) consisted of male and female students of University of Physical Education professionally or recreationally engaged in sports, polish adolescents.
In order to asses dependent variables the Basic Psychological Needs Scale (BPNS) and the short version of sense of coherence questionnaire (SOC-13) were used. The instruments which allowed evaluating the independent variables were temperament inventories (EPQ-R and EAS), Body Esteem Scale," My Eating Habits" questionnaire and Sport Motivation Scale (SMS). The results showed that the temperamental factors playing important role in conditioning active adolescents' wellbeing were neuroticism and extraversion referring to Eysenck's assumptions, but also activity, sociability or emotionality established by Buss & Plomin.
Body self-perception, emotional eating and the attitude towards psychical activity appeared to determine psychological state of young sportsmen as well, showing the possibility of multifaceted affect generated by teachers or parents in order to manage adolescents' wellbeing. Keywords: wellbeing, motivation, physical activity, temperament, body image, eating patterns Presentation and comparison of two research-based models of sport talent development environment designed in different cultural contexts Malgorzata Siekanska, Agnieszka Wojtowicz (University of Physical Education in Krakow) There is an increasing interest in optimizing sport talent development (Martindale et al., 2011). One of the crucial factors that influence all talented athletes throughout their careers is the quality and the appropriateness of the coaching environment (Bloom, 1985; Martindale et al, 2005).
Numerous research show that specific needs are associated with culture (e.g. Sproule et al., 2007). The purpose of this presentation is to describe and compare two research-based models of sport talent environment designed in different cultural contexts.
In the group of 496 Polish athletes (Mage=19.32, Nf=181, Nm=315) analyses were conducted to adapt and verify psychometric properties of the scale measuring sport talent development environment (Martindale et al., 2010). The original model was designed in the UK context, and was modified due to the very low reliability of two factors: Quality Preparation (αCronbach's=0.43) and Challenging and Supporting Environment (αCronbach's=-0.013, after modification 0.31). Factor analysis showed that in Central European context the six- factor model (loads from 0.35 to 0.67) was more suitable, unlike the original seven-factor model (loads from 0.29 to 0.66).
The extracted factors were: Communication (12 items), Lack of Supporting Environment (inverted,11 items), Support Network (8 items), Individualized Approach to Athlete (11 items), Understanding the Athlete (7 items), Long-term Development Fundamentals (3 items). Cronbach's alpha for the new factors ranged from 0.66 to 0.88. This indicates a better reliability than in the original model, with Cronbach's alpha of 0.62.
for two factors: Quality Preparation, Challenging and Supporting Environment. The authors of the original model suggested that there could be context-specific requirements within a talent development (Martindale et 478Posters Wednesday July 12th al., 2010), what was confirmed in this study. This is particularly important for practitioners, for whom the coach-athlete cooperation has international basis.
Keywords: effective coaching, sport talent development, social support 4 ways of thinking that can change the way of tennis training Maite Iriarte Rego (Flowandgrow) I present four distinctions and ways of thinking that open new perspectives for coaches and their athletes. These new and interesting ways of approach can make a difference on thinking, emotions, and how to act. In this way, it is possible to overcome mental and emotional limits that will bring an improvement in the quality of work as a coach and as a player.
Craemer's contextual coaching model (Craemer 2014) explains what is happening when someone repeatedly has results that they don´t want or when someone doesn´t get the results they want. This approach is not based on changing methods of training, but rather on changing convictions and conscience, which is the basis for success and achievement of new results. Contextual Coaching® has its roots in Ellis's Rational-Emotional Theory (2005) for psychology.
It is influenced by different philosophical currents such as skepticism, stoicism, epicureanism. It uses, among other philosophical methods, the famous allegory to the cavern of Plato, the Socratic dialectic, and the dialectical triad of Hegel. The aim is not to bring more methods and tools to the psychology of sports nor to mental training.
The aim is to explore the personal beliefs and social convictions that prevent us from reaching the next level in our performance and results. Twenty four players were involved in contextual coaching. As a result of their involvement there was a paradigm shift (from lack, fear and distrust to abundance, love and confidence) that led to a change of consciousness and new ways of thinking.
Preliminary results indicate that this change of consciousness allowed 69% of athletes to obtain new results, such as winning more desired tournaments and playing with less pressure. Keywords: contextual coaching, improve performance, success, new mental approach Enhanced mental strength of professional junior handball players: Experiences from a mindfulness training program Line Maj Nielsen, Kristoffer Henriksen (SDU), Walter Staiano, Ulrich Kirk (SDU) The present study investigates 8 Danish handball players’ subjective experience of a Mindful Performance Enhancement, Awareness and Knowledge (mPEAK) training program. The overall study was a randomized control study.
The intervention consisted of an introduction to mindfulness, a seven-week program with 20 minutes mindfulness training five days a week, and a pre and post test. The intervention training was carried out with the app Headspace. The players could do their training when it best fitted their everyday life.
The players met with the practitioner and lead scientist every Sunday via Skype to discuss developments and challenges. In this poster, we present data from a qualitative follow up study based on interviews with 8 out of the 15 male youth national team players of Danish team handball who participated in the program. To collect a representative impression in the study, the 8 players were selected after answering a questionnaire.
Data was generated by applying a semi-structured interview guide. All players participated voluntarily. Deductive and inductive thematic analyses were used to systematically evaluate the data.
The players experienced different improvements in relation to their sport performance, in training and game settings. They felt they could keep concentration longer and improved their decision-making. They also experienced improvement in the school setting, such as increased focus, memory and performance.
Finally, they reported improvements in their private life, such as increased presence in the company of friends and partner, a decrease in stress, and better 479Posters Wednesday July 12th sleep quality. The study points to the value of teaching young athletes mindfulness, and demonstrates how such skills transcend contexts and are of value for the athletes in school and private life. Keywords: sport, athletes, mPEAK, meditation, intervention, qualitative Burnout in young Swiss elite athletes and the role of mental toughness as a stress buffer Markus Gerber, Simon Best, Fabienne Meerstetter, Sebastian Ludyga, Serge Brand (University of Basel), Renzo Bianchi (University of Neuchâtel), Sandrini Isoard-Gautheur (University Grenoble Alpes), Henrik Gustafsson (University of Karlstad) Among young elite athletes, competitive elite sport can be a stressful experience.
The exposure to chronic athletic stress has been associated with negative consequences such as burnout. Accordingly, provisional estimates of the prevalence of athlete burnout generally range from 1-5%. However, these numbers are difficult to interpret because they are based on sport-specific burnout measures, which do not refer to clinically relevant criteria.
Therefore, the aims of the present study were to estimate the prevalence of burnout in young elite athletes using an established burnout measure, and to examine whether the relationship between stress and burnout is moderated by participants’ mental toughness. A representative sample of 257 young elite athletes (M=16.82 years, SD=1.44, 36% females) was recruited in Northwestern Switzerland. Burnout was assessed with the Shirom Melamed Burnout Measure (SMBM).
Values of ≥4.40 were indicative of clinically relevant burnout. Subjective stress was assessed with the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), and mental toughness with the Mental Toughness Questionnaire (MTQ). Hierarchical regression analyses were used to test multivariate relationships.
In total, 31 participants (12%) reported clinically relevant burnout symptoms. Stress (β=.42, p<.001), mental toughness (β=-.19, p<.01), and the 2-way interaction between stress and mental toughness (β=-.19, p<.001) were associated with participants’ burnout levels. Athletes with higher mental toughness had significantly lower burnout levels when reporting high stress compared to peers with lower mental toughness levels.
If stress was low, mental toughness was unrelated to burnout. One of eight youngsters in this sample of young elite athletes reported clinically relevant burnout symptoms. Perceived stress was strongly associated with athlete burnout.
Mental toughness appeared as a protective factor associated with stress resilience. Keywords: adolescents, athlete burnout, mental toughness, stress, Switzerland Preliminary design of a post-sports injury psychological rehabilitation program María Clara Rodríguez, Laura Arenas, Lina María Rodríguez, Laura Santamaria, Lina María Urrego (Universidad el Bosque) Sport injuries are the study field of different kinds of sport sciences, including psychology due to the fact that it is considered a significant event and an extremely common one too during the career of an athlete. The rehabilitation process comes with physiological and psychological implications that require specialized intervention on the athlete in order to achieve optimum recovery and to be able to regain his sport’s career with the same performance level or capacity as before the injury took place.
The main goal of this research is to design a post-injury psychological rehabilitation program, based on four fundamental psychological components: adjustment of objectives, coping, self-efficacy and security when facing the injury; those psychological components must be transversal to the physical rehabilitation, as well as to the returning to both training and competition. The program is based on an exhaustive review of the literature and the results of focus groups performed with athletes, coaches, physicians and physiotherapists; also is based on third generation therapies, mainly mindfulness and the Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) because of its exponential development and evidence about its effectiveness. The program’s duration will depend on the time of incapacity of the athletes according to the criteria of Timpka et al.
(2014), which may vary between 19 480Posters Wednesday July 12th and 56 sessions. Based on the results of this investigation, the aim is to offer a valid intervention program found on scientific evidence that allows athletes to return to competition successfully, given that there is not enough evidence in scientific literature of any structured programs of injury focused on psychological rehabilitation. This represents a useful and valuable input for athletes, for psychology and for sport sciences in general.
Keywords: sports injury, psychological intervention, coping, self-efficacy, fear to a re-injury Theory of planned behavior among athletes from two regions of Mexico Luis Alonso Rosales Delgado (Universidad de Guanajuato) The research seeks to understand the behavior of the high performance athlete through Ajzen's theory of planned behavior (2005). In order to guide the motivation in athletes to achieve high performance status by means of the factors of the theory that are attitude, subjective norm, perception of control and intention. The objective of this study was to evaluate the variables of the theory of planned behavior between two samples of athletes in Mexico.
The first sample consisted of 166 (46.8%) athletes from Guanajuato and the second from 189 (53.2%) athletes from Baja California. Men and women, between 11 and 18 years old, participated. In order to achieve the objective, the EIARD was constructed and validated, consisting of 35 reactants distributed in five factors: (i) Perceived control, (ii) Intention to sport, (iii) Subjective rule, (iv) Attitude towards high performance and (v) Volition to be a high-performance athlete.
Subsequently, the means were compared by factor according to the sex and the athlete's state of residence. Significant differences were found between the Intention, Attitude and Perceived Control factors among athletes from Guanajuato and Baja California. As well as in the factors of Attitude, Subjective Norm and Control Perceived according to the sex of the athlete.
Finally, through a linear regression analysis, a new model was formed based on the theory of planned behavior, but which arises from the results of this research, which explains 35% of the variance. The factors that were significant were volition, attitude and perceived control. This information allows to understand the differences between athletes according to sex or even to the region to generate interventions specific to their particular needs and characteristics.
Keywords: planned behavior, athletes, motivation, high performance, intention to sport Analysis of a football team psychological training programme Juan Tomás Escudero (Universidad Islas Baleares) The aim of this work was to assess the effects of psychological training carried on with a young amateur players’ football team of Mallorca. Taking into account theoretical frame used in similar previous studies (Weigelt, et al.; 2000; Lameiras, et al., 2014) we proposed a football situation in which a football player (football player target) received ball near the corner area. He must throw the ball closest to penalty point area allowing to a partner football player try to finish play with his head.
We measured two outcomes on the team in pre-post design. These outcomes were a) football players’ attentional focus while football player target throw ball and, b) football players’ performance that was measured by different parameters: b.1) height that ball arrive to partner football player and; b.2) area in which he has thrown ball in order to partner football player perform it. We registered five trails at Pre and Post experimental situation to evaluated measures.
Psychological training programme were five sessions where football players trained attentional focus and performance throught different exercises made “ad hoc”. Results have shown that players’ perfomance improved their attentional focus (Z = -2.032; Sig = .042) and also tended to improved their performance related with where heigth ball was thrown (Z = -1.901, Sig = .057). These results support benefits of psychological training to sport performance.
Also demonstrate to football players and football coaches that sport psychology 481Posters Wednesday July 12th could improve football player performance. We also expose some aspects and considerations to bear in mind in future research lines. Keywords: football, psychological training, attentional focus, performance Effects of mass media on high performance sportsmen.
Study with Uruguayan Footbal Selection Patricia Domínguez Pérez (Facultad de Psicología de la Universidad de la República) The research presented was carried out within the framework of the thesis of the Magister in Psychology Applied to the Physical Activity and Sport of the University Central de Chile and University of the Islas Baleares. General Objective: To understand the effects of mass media on athletes of a national professional soccer team. The study’s population was constituted by players of the Uruguayan Soccer Team that participated in the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil.
The sample, non-probabilistic and for convenience, was composed of 11 football players. The reason for choosing the members of a national soccer team were because they constitute a group that represents the highest level of professionalism; they are the focus of mass media, particularly on the eve of a world event. The instrument used was the semi-structured interview.
The interviews were conducted at the High Performance Complex of Uruguay in May 2014, prior to the world competition. The research was determined that mass media affects: 1. The identity and affective bonds of the athletes.
2. The positioning of athletes in the media and in implementing of certain coping strategies. Footballers who accept to be part of the media scaffold soften the unfavorable effects of the mass media, can even benefit from them as long as they take an active stance.
That is, they can establish adaptive and functional strategies for media productions and be co-managers of their own digital identity. Keywords: high performance sportsmen, mass media, identity, coping Professional football psychological intervention in Uruguay. Club Atlético Rentistas María Noel Givogre (Universidad de la República) The central idea of this poster is to report the practical experience in a professional football team from Uruguay.
The intervention went through several stages and modalities. In our country today there are no sports psychologists working in coaching staffs of the professional teams or in the national teams. The reality is quite different in the formative categories of those same clubs, where there are sports psychologists integrated to their work.
The present intervention begins in 2013, responding a request of the junior categories coordinator recently hired in the referred institution. Despite being convinced of the need to have a sports psychologist, he did not have a thorough knowledge of our work, nor how it would be implemented. Thus, it began to work with two categories, the U-17 and the U-19.
In 2016, seeing the necessity of the different categories that demanded the inclusion of mental training, a practice is established, from the Faculty of Psychology of the University of the Republic, with students of last year of the Degree in Psychology, that lasts the whole year and includes two students for each category. That same year, the principal coach of the main team, requested the incorporation of the psychologist to his staff. They were at the beginning of the championship in a position of descent to the second category and sought to escape from it.
In 2017, a psychologist who is doing the practice to finish her master's degree in sports psychology joins the formative categories. This paper presents some of the evaluation techniques used and their results, as well as some exercises, and some conclusions of these years of work. Keywords: Professional practice, professional football, evaluation, intervention, mental training 482Posters Wednesday July 12th Sports values training program linked to fair play.
An experience at the Montevideo Wanderes Football Club Pablo Ferreira (Universidad Uruguaya de Psicología del Deporte) The excessive emphasis on sports results and exit are two great enemies of holistic athlete’s training. Violence and unsportsmanlike conducts are regrettably common in football at the level of formative divisions. Before this panorama a multidisciplinary team conformed by Coaches, Physical Education Teachers, Sports Psychologist and Medical Team, all professionals of the Montevideo Wanderers Futbol Club, team of Football of Montevideo - Uruguay, we diagrammed a program of "Training of Values".
Values are defined as the desirable transituational goals, which vary in importance and serve as guiding principles in people's lives. These guiding principles were associated with fair play behavior standards, sports values training exercises, recreational spaces for reflection, preparation of manuals for athletes, psychoeducational meetings for parents, awards sessions among other actions. As a result of this experience, significant changes were generated at the behavioral level, registering a very good adhesion to the sports behaviors related to the fair game.
The category selected for the development of the program, achieved the lowest rate of warnings of the club, among other achievements linked to comprehensive training. Aspects that will be shared in the posters session. Keywords: sports values, fair play, junior football players 483Posters Thursday July 13th Thursday July 13th Posters Session 4.
(9.30-10:30) The pictorial scale of physical self-concept for young children (P-PSC-C): A feasibility-study Maike Tietjens (University of Muenster) Children’s self-perception of motor skills and physical fitness is said to be an important mediator between skills and physical fitness and physical activity (Marsh et al., 2007). Questionnaires regarding perception of their physical competence do exist (Harter, 1981; Barnett et al., 2015), but these instruments are not linked to the concept of the multidimensional physical self-concept. To understand the development and the differentiation of the physical self-concept of children and its components an age-appropriate self-perception scale is needed.
The objectives of this study were (1) to develop a pictorial scale of physical fitness for pre-school children (3-6), and (2) to describe the face validity and feasibility of the scale. The study sample included 27 kindergarten children (Mage=4.93, SD=.87). Validity was assessed through administration of the Pictorial Scale for Physical Self-Concept in pre-school age (P-PSC-C) compared with children’s fundamental movement skill competency (TGMD)-3, children’s perceived movement skill competence (Barnett et al., 2015), height, weight, and demographics.
The face validity was favorable. Expectable negatively skewed response distributions in all items were found. The perceived physical fitness is significantly correlated with perceived locomotion (r=.478, p<.01) and perceived object control (r=.413, p<.01), whereas perceived locomotion and perceived object control correlate with r=.740, p<.01.
No significant correlations with motor performance and physical appearance were found. However, a significant positive correlation between perceived physical fitness and enjoyment in sports (r=.453, p<.01) was observed. The graphical illustrations within each domain facilitated children’s participation in the study.
The correlation pattern might represent a hierarchical and multidimensional structure (Marsh et al. 1994). But, children in this age group might not be able to accurately report their skill and fitness level.
Keywords: physical self concept, kindergarden, test of gross motor development Physical activity and sport as a protective factor against health-threatening experiments with adulthood Magdalena Jochimek, Daniel Krokosz, Mariusz Lipowski (Gdansk University of Physical Education and Sport), Anna Ussorowska (University of Gdansk) The aim of this research is to specify to what extent goal orientation in physical activity and sports constitutes a protective factor against involvement in risky behaviors. The research group consisted of 430 eighteen-year-old high school students (Females = 203; Males = 227) who completed the Inventory of Physical Activity Objectives (IPAO), as well as a questionnaire concerning their involvement in risky behaviors such as alcohol abuse, cigarette smoking, drug abuse and risky sexual behaviors. A total of 137 individuals practiced competitive sports (Females = 39; Males = 98), 198 individuals were assigned to the physically active group (Females = 103; Males = 95), and 95 to the physically inactive group (Females = 61; Males = 34).
The inactive group was excluded from the analyses regarding the motivational functions of physical activity goals. Males were more often involved in every kind of risky behavior than were females, athletes smoked cigarettes less frequently than do non-athletes (in the case of the remaining risky behaviors, no significant discrepancies were noted). It was found that the type of goal and purposeful actions have a protective role against risky behaviors.
In the case of young male athletes, persistence in action was a protective factor against cigarette smoking (β = –0,29; p = 0,020) and illicit drug use (β = –0,30; p = 0,012), the latter being also associated with time- 484Posters Thursday July 13th management (β = –0,28; p = 0,035). In the case of young female athletes, in turn, the importance of heterogeneity of objectives turned out to be a buffering dimension protecting them against alcohol drinking (β = –0,38; p = 0,030). Physical activity and practicing competitive sports may constitute a protective factor, especially among young women.
Further exploration of issues concerning adolescents' purposeful actions may enrich our knowledge about the prevention of risky behaviors. Keywords: sport psychology, self-regulation, risky behavior, physical activity, goal-oriented behavior The motivational function of an objective in physical activity and sport Mariusz Lipowski (Gdansk University of Physical Education and Sport), Anna Ussorowska, (University of Gdansk), Magdalena Jochimek (Gdansk University of Physical Education and Sport) As a conscious activity of an individual, physical activity (PA) constitutes an element of the free-time dimension. The type of goal allows us to distinguish between sport and PA: sport performance vs.
psychophysical health. Drawing on theory of the motivational function of an objective, this study examined the motivational function of an objective in physical activity and sport. The sample consisted of 2141 individuals: 1163 women aged 16 - 64 (M = 23.9, SD = 8.3) and 978 men aged 16-64 (M = 24.5, SD = 9.4).
These were recreationally physically active individuals (n = 1733) and individuals engaging in competitive sports (n = 408). Participants were recruited from randomly chosen fitness and sports clubs throughout Poland. Participants completed The Inventory of Physical Activity Objectives (IPAO) (Lipowski, Zaleski, 2015), which include the following scales: 1) motivational value, 2) time management, 3) persistence in action 4) motivational conflict.
There are also a questions that allow one to control for variables such as the variety of forms, duration, and frequency of PA, and socio-demographic variables. Males presented different motives of physical activity than females. Motives related to health, fit, shapely body and wellbeing were more important for female.
The most important motives for male were: fulfilling the need for activity, and promoting PA by setting a behaviour example. The gender of participants moderates the motivational value of the specific objectives of physical activity, and persistence in action. With knowledge about the purposefulness of actions, it is possible to support and shape additional motivation experienced by an individual, by setting new, realistic objectives.
Keywords: motivation, sport psychology, exercises, pro-healthy behaviour, goal-oriented behavior Development of a revised self-efficacy scale for collegiate competitive swimmers Madoka Nishida (Tenri University), Kenta Kusanagi (Chukyo University) The aim of the present study was to identify factors influencing an attitude toward training of the competitive swimmers. A scale for measuring self-efficacy during training for competitive swimmers in collegiate swimming clubs was developed and factors and items of the scale were examined. A preliminary survey was conducted with swimmers (N = 138, 77 men and 61 women) and coaches (N = 7, 6 men, and 1 women) in collegiate swimming clubs.
The survey inquired their attitudes to training and thoughts when they achieved their best performances. Their responses were analyzed and 66 items were extracted. A questionnaire survey was conducted with competitive swimmers in collegiate swimming clubs, by using these items (N=229, 144 men and 85 women) and factor analysis of their responses extracted three factors and 28 items.
The factors were: Approaches to self- regulated efficacy, Approaches to maintenance efficacy and Approaches to autonomic efficacy. In order to examine the internal consistency of these factors, Cronbach’s coefficient α was calculated, which indicated that three factors had sufficient internal consistency: Approaches to self-regulated efficacy (αcoefficient＝.89), Approaches to maintenance efficacy (α coefficient ＝ .76) and Approaches to autonomic efficacy (α coefficient ＝ .74). Moreover, the comparison of sex differences indicated that Approaches to autonomic efficacy and Approaches to self-regulated efficacy were significantly higher in women than in men.
485Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: self-efficacy, attitude toward training, competitive swimmer, exploratory factor analysis Effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills in volleyball Madhusudhan Reddy Pothula (National Institute of Technology) The effect of mental and physical practice on learning motor skills of volleyball was studied by carrying out experiments with randomly selected men subjects. They were divided into three equal groups of thirty each named as group of mental practice, physical practice and control group. The subjects were administered mental practice and physical practice for duration of thirty minutes over a period of twelve weeks.
The AAPHER volleyball skill test was selected as criterion variable to test the skills ability of subjects for the experiment. Mental practice and physical practice methods were found to be significantly better in improving learning motor skills i.e., volleying, serving, passing, and setup in comparison to control group. The effect of mental practice and physical practice methods on the learning rate in the motor skills of volleyball at periodic interval of first two weeks of duration of an experiment revealed that there was no significant improvement in any of the skill mentioned above due to mental practice, physical practice and control group.
However significant improvement was found in all the skills performance due to mental practice and physical practice methods, from fourth week onwards. The findings revealed that there was no periodic significant improvement in volleying and serving due to mental practice method between the fourth week and sixth week, sixth week and eighth week, eighth week and tenth week, and tenth week and twelfth week. However, periodic significant improvement was noticed in passing and setup skills due to mental practice method between the above mentioned training phases.
The findings also revealed that there was no significant improvement in learning of motor skills of volleyball neither over a period of twelve weeks duration nor at a periodic interval of two weeks duration in the case of control group. Keywords: mental practice, physical practice, imagery, relaxation, motor skills, volleyball Women in refeering: Profesional and sports career through two life stories Mª Dolores González Fernández (COP-Galicia), Clara Selva Olid, Miquel Torregrossa, Susana Pallarès (Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona) The narrative of life stories has gained importance in the field of social sciences, mainly because it is understood as the ontological condition of social life (Delgado & Gutiérrez, 1999; Sparkes & Devis, 2007). Therefore, the narrative is presented as a useful tool that allows to deepen in the professional and sports career of the different protagonists in the vital and/or sports contexts.
The objective of the present study is to find and expose the common points and the differences regarding the profesional career experiences of both,an international female hockey referee and an female athletics judge.In both life stories, reconstructed through interviews, each step was placed in a broader social context. To do this, the axes of analysis to which the life stories of the participants would be subjected were delimited, to know what to look for and how to structure the narrative information in thematic and temporal categories. Also, the information collected through this series of interviews was completed with other sources, such as news and press articles, systematically collected, to account for some of the events or transitions that occurred throughout their careers.
The axes of analysis were: a) Sport-work reconciliation; b) Barriers in their sporting career; c) Unequal view of gender and; d) Internal and external resources. The results show differences regarding the barriers found in her career and in her unequal view of gender. In resources and challenges, the similarities between the two stories become more visible.
Keywords: women, refeering, sports career, life stories 486Posters Thursday July 13th Stressors, coping, and well-being among sports coaches: A systematic review Luke Norris, Faye Didymus, Mariana Kaiseler (Leeds Beckett University) Sports coaching can be an inherently stressful occupation because coaches must fulfill multiple roles and cope with various expectations. Stress and well-being have implications for coach and athlete performance yet there is no published systematic review that has comprehensively identified, evaluated, and summarized the research on stress and well-being among coaches. Objectives: The objective of this study was to conduct a comprehensive systematic review of literature on stressors, coping, and well-being among sports coaches.
Method: Using PRISMA guidelines, thorough and systematic literature searches of PsycINFO, SPORTDiscus, and Web of Science were conducted. To be eligible for inclusion, papers had to be published in the English language between January 1994 and March 2016 and as full papers in peer-reviewed journals. Results: The final sample consisted of 38 studies that were conducted with 4,188 sports coaches.
This sample consisted of 19 qualitative, 18 quantitative, and one mixed methods study. The findings demonstrate that coaches experience stressors relating to their performance and that of the athletes they work with in addition to organizational stressors. The findings also highlight that coaches use a variety of coping strategies to reduce the negative outcomes of stress.
Five studies that were included in this review focused on coaches’ well-being and found that basic psychological needs satisfaction, lack of basic psychological needs thwarting, and self-determined motivation are needed for coaches to be psychologically well. Conclusion: This research is the first systematic review to explore the stressors that sports coaches’ experience, the coping strategies that they use, and their well-being. Future research should use longitudinal study designs and qualitative methods to explore coping effectiveness, social support, and well-being among this unique population.
Keywords: cognitive-affective, high performance, transactional Brazilian high performance athletes: A personality traits and positive psychology study Luiza Santos D'Azevedo, Caroline Tozzi Reppold (Federal University of Health Sciences of Porto Alegre) Personality is one of the most studied constructs in Sport Psychology. Previous researches indicate that athletes of different sports modalities present a typical profile in relation to personality traits and constructs from Positive Psychology. The purpose of this research is to evaluate the profile of the athletes of the Southern Brazil in relation to personality and typical constructs of Positive Psychology.
The sample consisted of 86 participants, aged 14 to 24 years (SD. = 16, 8). The instruments used in the research were: Bateria Fatorial da Personalidade, the Rosemberg Self-esteem Scale, Life Orientation Test Revised, Positive and Negative Affect Scale, the Life Satisfaction Scale, the Cognitive Hope Scale and General Self-efficacy Scale.
The analysis of the results indicated that the scores obtained by the athletes were significantly higher than those of non-athletes in neuroticism and lower in socialization and openness. Due to the exhaustive routine of training and importance of discipline in high-performance sports, these results are considered consistent. Higher scores than non-athletes in self-esteem and self-efficacy, showed in this research, are considered important, given the frustration that athletes spend most of the time and the high competitiveness that high-performance sport generates.
We also found lower levels in optimism and hope-self than people who do not practice sports. This results differ from previous international surveys. How is this about the brazilian context, the difference in results may be due to the difficulties and little incentive that high-performance athletes have in this country.
Regression analysis was performed and its results indicated that neuroticism and conscientiousness factors explained 31% of self-efficacy. From this mapping of the characteristics of the athletes, the work of the area professionals becomes more assertive to deal with the psychological factors that can interfere in the athlete's life. Keywords: personality, athletes, evaluation 487Posters Thursday July 13th Competion trait anxiety of under-12 soccer players.
Inflence of competition level Luis M. García-López, Juan A. Simón-Piqueras, David Gutiérrez, Ricardo Cuevas-Campos (Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha) We have carried out a research project that has analyzed the technical, tactical and conditional difficulties of under-12 players, as well as differences in the adaptive capacity between those who have managed to play in federated competition and those who participate in local competitions.
Here we show the pilot study performed in relation to this adaptive profile, measuring under-12 soccer players’ ability to adapt to competitive stress. One hundred under-12 soccer players were selected from different teams in Castilla-La Mancha. Sixteen players played at the regional level, and 84 in local leagues.
The players completed the Sport Competition Anxiety Test (SCAT, Martens, Vealey and Burton, 1990). Statistical analysis was performed by IBM SPSS 23.0. One-way analysis of variance was conducted to stablish differences between the competition levels.
The median SCAT raw scores for the total local competition group was 20.37. In the case of the regional federated competition group, the median raw score was 21.25. No significant differences were found.
The levels of precompetitive anxiety found in this study indicate intermediate values and are similar to those found in other works such as those of Swain and Jones (1993), Wiggins (1998) or Guillén and Álvarez-Malé (2010). Specifically, Wiggin's work was done with young athletes from school competitions in football, swimming and athletics. In our geographic and cultural context, Pozo (2007) also analyzed competitive state anxiety in swimming and athletics.
The working hypothesis, the fact that subjects with a higher level of competition had a greater capacity to assume the competition with less anxiety of trait, has not been fulfilled. It is probably due to the great youth of all subjects, which leads them to live competitive stress at similar levels, regardless of the competitive context. Keywords: competition, trait anxiety, soccer, under-12 players Athletic identity moderating effect on social support influence on serious injuries rehabilitation process in soccer player´s Luis González Barato, Víctor Rubio Franco, Laura Segovia (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid) Research has shown the influence of psychological factors on the rehabilitation process of sport injuries.
Therefore, some studies have posed that the Social Support buffering effect may differ according to the type of support or the source the support come from. Nevertheless, it is hypothesized that this influence could vary depending on athletes’ individual differences, particularly athletic self-concept. Thus, this study is aimed at testing whether social support effect on cognitive, emotional and behavioral responses to the rehabilitation process following a severe sport injury is moderated by the athletic identity.
We postulate that athletes with high level of athletic identity take more into account sources of social support from the sport setting such as teammates or coaches than other relevant sources such as family or friends. Thirty severely injured (4+ weeks out of training and/or competition) soccer players from 18 to 27 years old were followed up from the moment they sustained the injury till the end of the rehabilitation process. Social support and athletic identity were assessed.
Cognitive, emotional, and behavioral responses to sport injury and the rehabilitation were also assessed. The previous results revealed that players with higher scores on AI take more into account social support from sources like teammates or coaches. Also, these athletes showed that emotional support mainly came from the sport context.
Further studies including larger samples may confirm these results, which can contribute to design specific psychological intervention programs aimed at improving the athletes’ return to play after a severe injury. Keywords: athletic identity, sport injuries, social support, rehabilitation process 488Posters Thursday July 13th Recovery-stress balance and perception of internal training load in university endurance runners Germán Hernández-Cruz, Jeanette López-Walle (Autonomous University of Nuevo León, Mexico), José Carlos Jaenes (Pablo de Olavide University, Andalusian Center of Sport Medicine), Abril Cantú-Berrueto), Blanca Rangel-Colmenero, Luis-Felipe Reynoso-Sanchez (Autonomous University of Nuevo León, Mexico) Improving athletic performance in endurance runners requires coaches to increase training volume, intensity and density, resulting in an increase in athletes' physical stress. The use of instruments such the RESTQ-Sport and s-RPE to monitoring the athlete's psychological response to training load has increased in its acceptance by providing reliable and immediately information at low cost.
The aim of the research was to analyze the response in the perception of the recovery-stress balance and the internal load of the training in resistance runners. 18 trained runners (age: 20.1±2.7 years, weight: 64.2±7.63kg, height, 174.32±6.2cm, VO2max: 57.54±7.34L), participate in tests of 800m (5), 1500m (4), 3000m steeplechase (1), 5000m (6), 10,000m (1) and 21km (2). A daily monitoring was performed during three weeks of training, in which two were of moderate load and one of intense load.
The s-RPE was evaluated according to the protocol of Foster et al. (2001). The RESTQ-Sport was applied in 5 times to evaluate the perception of stress-recovery.
The Shapiro-Wilk normality test was performed. A variance analysis was applied through the Friedman test, with post hoc Wilcoxon. The Spearman correlation coefficient between the RESTQ-Sport scales and the weekly s-RPE was analyzed.
The results indicate that the s-RPE presented significant variations between the weeks, with week three reflecting the greater internal training load perceived. With respect to RESTQ-Sport, only the scale Disturbed Breaks (DB) shown significant differences, being this a specific scale of the sport, reflecting an increase in the perception of stress by the intensity of the training. There were no significant correlations, however, the s-RPE and the Disturbed breaks scale increased in week 3.
The results coincide with other previous investigations in which the relationship between the increase in the training loads and the perception of this by the athletes. Keywords: RESTQ-Sport, S-RPE, monitoring, training loads, athletics Active lifestyles and self-rated health in adolescents Luis Calmeiro (Abertay University), Margarida Matos (Faculty of Human Movement) The purpose of this paper is to explore the mediating role of body mass index and weight perception on the relationship between physical activity and sedentary behaviour and self-rated health. A nationally representative sample of 6026 students (mean age = 13.77 years, SD = 1.68 years) completed a wider HBSC survey which included questions related to demographic information, physical activity, electronic media use, self-rated health and weight perceptions.
After controlling for gender, both physical activity (standardised beta = .90) and sedentary behaviour (standardised beta = -.051) were significantly associated to self-rated health. In addition, significant but small indirect effects of physical activity in self-rated health through body mass index Sedentary behaviour did not have any indirect effects on self-rated health. The full model explained 13.4% of self-rated health [F(5,5091) = 157.41, p <.001].
Results underline the need to promote physical activity and reduce sedentary behaviour as forms of influencing quality of life. Although only physical activity influences self-rated health indirectly through changes in body mass index and weight perceptions, which related negatively to self-rated health, the perceived negative health effects of sedentariness accentuates the need to target decreases of sedentary behaviour alongside the promotion of physical activity. Keywords: physical activity, sedentary behaviour, body mass index, weight perception, mediation analysis 489Posters Thursday July 13th Healthy lifestyles and body mass index as correlates of body image in a primary schoolchildren Luis Calmeiro (Abertay University), Carlos Pereira (Vila Real de Santo Antonio City Council) Poor body image in children may be associated with negative health outcomes later in life.
Maintaining a healthy lifestyle may influence children’s perceptions of their own body. The purpose of this study was to explore the relationships between body image and healthy lifestyles in primary school children. A sample of 786 primary school children (mean age = 8.48 years; SD = 1.32; 48.3% girls) from a South east region of Portugal, answered a survey about their eating patterns and body image, while their parents answered questions concerning children’s physical activity and sedentary behaviour.
Two hierarchical regression analysis with current body image and body image discrepancy as dependent variables were conducted. After controlling for age and gender, physical activity, sedentary behaviour and adherence to a Mediterranean diet were entered in step one; body mass index was entered in the final step. Boys were reported to be more active than girls, while girls adhered more to the Mediterranean diet and reported higher body image discrepancy than boys.
About 22.5% of the students who had a normal BMI considered to be overweight or obese. Lifestyle variables were not significant predictors of body image or body image discrepancy. However, age (beta = .16, p < .001) and BMI were associated with body image (beta = .48, p < .001).
Approximately one in four children wrongly perceive to be overweight may encourage the adoption of strategies that may lead to unhealthy body composition. Also, the older the students the more likely they are to perceive to have a larger body image, either due to the growth process or the internalisation of media-driven beauty ideals. The lack of predictive power of lifestyle variables in body image and body image discrepancy may represent cognitive limitations of abstract thought.
Hence, BMI emerges as the main indicator of children’s body image. Keywords: body image, body mass index, children's health, physical activity, sedentary behaviour, diet Marathon Seville: the experience as a determining reason for the volunteer’s participation Lucía Carmona-Álamos, Jaime Torres-Pinazo, José-Ángel Díaz-Cabrera, Jesús Rico-Ballesteros (Student Science of Physical and Sport Education), David Blanco-Luengo, Marta García-Tascón (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) Volunteering is a social phenomenon that covers all areas of life (Observatorio del voluntariado, 2013). In Andalusia, according to Law 45/2015, October 14th, about volunteering (...) in concrete programs organized by non-profit organizations.
Their implication allows the realization of great tests, the volunteer’s experience and their participation can ensure their survival (Finkelstein, 2008; Koutrou, 2015). The objective of this paper is to analyse the motivation and experience of the volunteers in this type of events. The Volunteer Satisfaction Index (Vecina, Chacón and Sueiro, 2009) has been passed to 130 volunteers (38% men and 62% women) in the Marathon test (Seville-2016), analyzing the Motivation Subscale that consists of 6 questions measured in Likert Scale 1 to 7 (1 nothing according to 7 totally agree).
The experience is measured in 4 items (first time; 3). Regarding the experience in the organization, 36% is the first time and less than a year that they collaborate, 37% takes between 1 and 3 years, and 27% takes more than 3 years. 66.49% would repeat the experience with a score of 5 out of 7.
Volunteers between 1 and 3 years of experience, have a motivation above 6.2, while those who volunteer for the first time are the least motivated in all areas. Training, in general, is the worst rated item (5.2/7) for all groups except the group of 1 to 3 years. The volunteers who have between 1 and 3 of experience are the most motivated in the management of the organization, valuing all the items above 6/7.
Volunteers with more than 3 years of experience are less satisfied with the fluency and management of the organization, feel that the tasks entrusted to them do not correspond to their previous skills or experience. The experience of volunteering in the organization must condition the planning of specific training programs and the allocation of specific competencies that guarantee the motivation of the volunteer. 490Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: seville, marathon, volunteers, motivation Strategies to foster life skills and transfer in social inclusion programs using football Lucas S.
Capalbo (Michigan State University) Social inclusion programs use football as a platform to incorporate or re-incorporate individuals into a group or society. Programs within this scope work with the resettlement of refugees, the inclusion of minorities into the mainstream society, the social re-inclusion of prisoners, and the incorporation of females into male- dominant areas or vice-versa. However, the role of football alone is limited if individuals running the program are not specifically trained to foster inclusion.
Therefore, it is crucial that coaches and program leaders are trained to positively facilitate inclusion and effectively deliver necessary life skills and life skills transfer to participants. With that in mind, the goal of this study was to identify the most common life skills fostered and strategies used in programs using football for social inclusion. Thus, list the main outcomes observed by research assessing programs within this scope.
After an extended review of the literature based on an inclusion and exclusion criteria, 9 studies were selected. From these studies, it was identified that the life skills taught in social inclusion programs using football included resilience, leadership, teamwork, and respect. A wide variety of strategies were found but not a single strategy was identified as the most prominent.
The strategies mentioned in all studies were grouped into 7 categories under the following themes: psychological, communication, visual aid, leadership, general activities, environment, and awards. Lastly, research observed that individuals who participated in programs for social inclusion using football alleged to have obtained more opportunities in life, perceived change of mood and attitudes, increased sense of control over their lives, and engaged in more jobs. Sport and Exercise Psychology in 21st Century | Gender, cultural diversity, and social/cultural inclusion in sport and exercise.
Keywords: life skills, life skills transfer, football, social inclusion, programs, strategies Predicting moral attitudes and behaviour in young team sport athletes: A self- determination theory perspective Luca Mallia (University of Rome Foro Italico- Italy), Fabio Lucidi (Sapienza University of Rome-Italy), Arnaldo Zelli (University of Rome Foro Italico- Italy), Martin Hagger (Curtin University- Australia) The study was aimed to test the hypothesis that social-contextual (social support) and personal motivational (need satisfaction and motivation) factors are related to prosocial (keeping winning in proportion) and to antisocial (acceptance of cheating and gamesmanship) attitudes in youth sport, as well as to negative behaviors in sport. The study included a first sample of Italian young team sport athletes (N = 355; 81.4% male; Mage = 18.98 years, SD = 4.35) and a second sample of Italian young male futsal players (N = 296; Mage = 21.09 years, SD = 7.56). Athletes in Sample 1 completed validated measures of perceived autonomy support, basic need satisfaction, autonomous and controlled motivation, prosocial and antisocial attitudes, as well as their self-reported past (six months) cheating behaviors during their sport activity.
With the exception of the measurement of perceived autonomy support, athletes in Sample 2 completed the same set of psychological and behavioral questionnaires utilized with the first sample of athletes. Athletes in the second sample also provided an additional behavioral measure by indicating the number of penalties (i.e., yellow cards) they had received during games in the last six months. This self-report measure was complemented by the actual number of yellow cards athletes received from referees during all matches in the subsequent two months.
Findings from Variance-Based Structural Equation Modelling analyses supported our hypothesized relations between motivational factors (i.e., psychological need satisfaction and self-determined motivation) and athletes’ prosocial and antisocial attitudes. Findings also provided important extensions on previous tests of the model evidencing that the model effects held when controlling for past behaviour. Finally, findings 491Posters Thursday July 13th concerning longitudinal prediction of actual penalties, are of significance as they indicated that early cheating attitudes contributed to athletes’ later moral behaviour.
Keywords: perceived autonomy support, needs satisfaction, motivation, cheating, gamesmanship, penalties, team sports, young athletes Comparing interventions with youth and senior elite athletes: Insights from expert sport psychology practitioners Louise Kamuk Storm, Kristoffer Henriksen, Carsten Hvid Larsen (University of Southern Denmark), Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University) Meaningful sport psychology practice requires a context-sensitive approach. Competitive youth sport and senior elite (professional) sport can be seen as two different contexts that require different applied approaches; however we know little about the differences, and we are in lack of studies that directly compare interventions from these two contexts (Henriksen, Larsen, Storm & Ryom, 2014). Literature on applied sport psychology with senior athletes is far richer than corresponding literature on working with youth athletes.
The objectives were: (1) to identify key themes that expert practitioners used to communicate their experiences of sport psychology interventions, and to integrate them into an empirical framework, and (2) to explore the experiences of these practitioners in their successful and less successful interventions in youth and senior sports using the framework. Twelve internationally recognized sport psychology practitioners (SPPs) were involved in semi-structured interviews (Smith & Sparkes, 2016). The data were thematically analyzed (Braun, Clarke & Weate, 2016).
The SPPs’ intervention narratives contains eight themes integrated into two categories: (1) content and focus, with themes concerning e.g., adaptation of content, targeted mental skills, and beyond mental skills. (2) The organization and delivery with themes concerning e.g. the settings and ways of delivery, the nature of the athlete-practitioner relationship, the involvement of the athletes’ significant others.
There were significant qualitative differences between competitive youth and elite senior contexts regarding how the interventions goes beyond mental skills and in how the SPPs involved the athletes’ significant others. From an overall perspective, the present study supports a key notion: talented youth athletes are not miniature versions of their elite adult counterparts. Working in these two different contexts requires specific approaches and should follow different guidelines.
Keywords: applied sport psychology, expert practitioners, youth athletes, influential relationships Stress and effort markers in sports using video from the face Lluís Capdevila (UAB), Andrés Cencerrado (Health&SportLab), Jordi Moreno (UAB), Juan Ramos-Castro (UPC) On the one hand, Heart Rate Variability (HRV) is an indicator of health status in the general population and of adaptation to stress in athletes. On the other hand, the emotions can be analysed using face recognition through computer vision systems. Our purpose is to explain both markers: (1) A system that uses standard video images of the face to estimate RR from changes in skin colour of the face.
This system performs surprisingly well in a sample of 8 participants (age: 34.2 ± 11.1 yr). A video of the complete face was recorded during a HRV-5min test and was saved in a non-compressed RGB format. Its analysis permits to calculate HRV parameters in a non-invasive manner with error levels comparable to those achieved by a physiological based system.
(2) A face recognition system that uses video images to estimate emotions. 48 participants (age: 22.4 ± 1.2 yr) were video recorded throughout 5 sessions while carrying out an effort test. Some HRV parameters and POMS scales showed correlation with some action units and emotions obtained by the video analysis.
Additionally, we performed a machine learning analysis of facial expression to estimate the fatigue or effort. We tested the analysis of some classification techniques to choose the most suitable method to estimate the degree of human fatigue or effort in a completely non-invasive manner. As a result, the classification method 492Posters Thursday July 13th that presented best performance, both in accuracy and time-consumption terms, was the k -Nearest Neighbors algorithm.
We conclude that the video from the face is a promising non-invasive instrument to analyse psychophysiological aspects related with stress, effort and emotions. Video based HRV analysis and face recognition could be relevant in applications that require monitoring of stress induced by effort like high performance sports. Keywords: stress, HRV, computer vision, face recognition, emotions, machine learning Monitoring stress-recovery process and psychological aspects at real time in individual and team sports Lluís Capdevila (UAB), Jordi Moreno, Andrés Cencerrado (Health&SportLab), Miguel A García-González (UPC), Joan R Tarragó (Futbol Club Barcelona), Juan Ramos-Castro (UPC), Gil Rodas (Futbol Club Barcelona) The monitoring and the evaluation of stress indicators in a sports context present several difficulties.
The diversity of these indicators, the situational conditions in which they have to be evaluated, and the difficulty of integrating these evaluation processes into the dynamics of training and competitions require innovative evaluation systems. In this sense, technologies based on mobile devices (smartphones) offer new paradigms for the evaluation and open new directions to be applied in the fields of sport and health (mHealth). We are using a mHealth system based on the integration of psychological (mood, effort and recovery perceptions), behavioural (analysis of recovery behaviours), and physiological parameters (Heart Rate Variability analysis) for the evaluation and monitoring at real time of the stress-recovery process of the athlete.
The whole system is composed of two applications (Apps): 1) The first one (FitLab® Test; HealthSpotLab.com) allows individual monitoring; and 2) The second one (FitLab® Team; HealthSpotLab.com) allows multiple and synchronized recordings. Both apps permit to obtain combined recordings and analysis for psychophysiological and behavioural data at real time in sport natural situations. We will present the uses of both systems in two practical and real cases: 1) an entire season data for a basketball player of Futbol Club Barcelona, showing the stress index evolution and the recovery behaviours related with training sessions; and 2) HRV, stress index, internal load and cognitive data monitoring several training sessions for FCB basketball team.
We will present detailed analysis and reports used by sport professionals (coaches, physical trainers, doctors, etc.). We will also indicate the guidelines for a correct integration of data provided by this system in the daily dynamics of trainings and competitions. Keywords: stress, recovey, team sports, high performance, HRV, mHealth, FitLab, basketball Research of psychological variables of personality readiness for sports performance in young footballers Liudmila Rogaleva, Valerii Malkin, Zvezdin Anton (Ural Federal University), Kim Alla, Khon Natalia (Al-Farabi Kazakh National University) One of the factors determining sports performance is personality readiness for accomplishing sports activity (A.Puney, N.Stambulova).
The problem of personality readiness for the sports activity has been studied less than needed. This is the reason why this problem became the topic of our research: our aim is to define criteria of personality preparedness in young footballers and to recognize the level of its development. The following criteria of personality preparedness of young footballers have been recognized: inner motivation for football playing; conscious revealing of the personality traits, which provide success in football playing; ability to adequately evaluate own possibilities and ambition for their development.
81 young footballers, 8-10 years old, from beginners groups of 4 coaches took part in the experiment. It has been revealed that in 58.0% of young footballers prevails motivation closely connected with sports activity, e.g. inner motivation, while 41.9% reveal outer motivation.
It has been revealed that 60% of young footballers consider the narrow specific sports 493Posters Thursday July 13th traits (such as fully be active in the event, to control the ball, knowledge of rules of play, achievement of team goals) as the most important for sports performance. Only 40% mark as very important the following personality traits: following every advice of the coach, being strong and skillful, practicing more and not missing the practice). The data on self-esteem of the young footballers allow to conclude that only 30.9% of them show an adequate self-esteem, while 69.1% reveal non-adequate self-esteem.
We can specify the current level as insufficient and conclude that the development of personality readiness should be increased via practice and event participation. Development of personality readiness for sports performance in young footballers goes spontaneously in the beginners and the coaches practically do not manage this process. Keywords: young footballers, the personality readiness Emotional stress of young 6-7-year-old hockey players after their participation in competitions Liudmila Rogaleva, Valerii Malkin, Yuliya Tyagunova, Ekaterina Fedai (Ural Federal University) Over the last years hockey witnesses considerable increase of preparative training groups with the age of young athletes diminishing to 3-4 years.
This trend was caused by requests from parents and the growing up rivalry in picking out talented children to study at sports schools. The goal of the research was to study psychologic emotional stress of young 6-7-year-old hockey players. Experimentation facility is the «Yunost’» Children’s Sports School, hockey department, city of Ekaterinburg.
The research involved 20 young hockey players at the age of 6-7 having length of hockey training of 3-4 years and competitions experience of 1 year. Methods: supervision of the children, interviewing, talks and projective. The method of unfinished sentences, pictorial test.
Results and discussion. It was found out that taking part in competitions causes to young athletes various emotional stresses, mostly (45% of the children) positive ones connected with expectation of victory and deserved award (cups, medals etc.) or joy (15% of the children). At the same time 30% of the children showed negative emotions connected with aggression or frustration caused by the necessity to engage the rival.
It was found out that almost 100% of the young hockey players were upset after defeats, also expecting negative reaction from their coach and parents. Conclusion. Young 6-7-year-old hockey players’ commitment to win and gain the upper hand in competitions creates a strong mental tension which means strong emotional stress (joy or grief), negative stresses emerging in the case of defeat, that are connected with expectation of reaction from coach and parents as well as with the competition result itself.
Given that, it is needed to develop a strategy of coach and parents’ behavior during young 6-7-year-old hockey players’ preparation and participation in competitions. Keywords: emotional stress, young hockey players Exploring participation bias in Canadian sport across competitive levels Lindsay McCardle (University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; York University, Toronto, Canada), Amy M. Gayman, Joseph Baker (York University, Toronto, Canada) In high performance sport, certain segments of the population are overrepresented (e.g., Cobley et al., 2009; Côté et al., 2006).
Sport policy in Canada (Cragg et al., 2016) and elsewhere (Eime et al., 2016) emphasizes inclusion and equal opportunity across levels and contexts. The extent to which participation biases in sport are found across the levels of competition is relatively unexplored. Our purpose was to explore four potential sources of bias in Canadian sport: (a) sex, (b) age (in 10-year categories), (c) income (personal and household), and (d) visible minority status.
Participants (n = 1524) were from the Statistics Canada General Social Survey of 2009-2010 and included those aged 15-80 years who indicated participating in a range of sports (e.g., basketball, ice hockey, soccer) in the last 12 months. For each potential source of bias, we compared rates of participation across four levels of competition: (a) recreational (n = 938), (b) local (n = 334), 494Posters Thursday July 13th (c) regional (n = 83), and (d) provincial/national (n = 125). Chi-square analyses indicated no significant difference for sex (χ2 (3) = 4.54, p = .208) or household income (χ2 (12) = 17.27, p = .138), although significant differences were observed by sport level for age (χ2 (15) = 90.56, p < .001), personal income (χ2 (12) = 36.37, p < .001), and minority status (χ2 (3) = 19.01, p = .001).
Post-hoc analysis indicated self-reported visible minorities participated more frequently at recreational level than expected and the youngest participants (15-24 years old) competed more frequently at provincial/national level than expected. Surprisingly, there was a trend towards more participation at provincial/national level for individuals in the lowest personal income bracket. Discussion centers on the implications of these findings for policy and program development that aims to reduce systemic bias in Canadian sport.
Keywords: sport, participation, competition, bias Red effect in romantic context: take sport dancers as participants Lina Hu (Wuhan Sports University) In color-in-context theory, the effect of color on humans’ psychological function and behavior depends on peoples’ context(Elliot, 2012).In romantic context, red signify health,strong, and attractive, and induce approach motivation. Some study findings have shown that viewing red on or near a female to increase attraction in heterosexual males(Elliot,2008; Roberts,2010). Unlike combat event, aesthetic events’ performance depends on athletes’ movement difficult,beauty, and temperament.
It is in line with romantic context. Thus, the present study try to examine the effect of red priming on judging on sport dancers’ attraction from the perspective of romantic context. 120 college sport dancers were randomly assigned to color priming of the 6 (red, black, blue, green, yellow, and white) and × 2 (female picture and male picture) between-group design.
The study took place in a lab room at Wuhan Sports University. The experimental martial are 2 picture which one male sport dancer and one female sport dancer wore competition uniform. After giving informed consent, participants seat in front of computer to complete the study.
Color priming used experimental instruction, which presented on 19cm×15cm different color rectangle(red, black, blue, green, yellow, and white). Participants’ reaction time is 1500ms was intended to impede rational and conscious judgment. An ANOVA was used to examine the effect of color priming and gender on the judgment of sport dancers’ attractiveness.
The analysis revealed significant effect of color priming.participants in the red priming condition given higher score on sport dancer than other color priming condition. There are no significant effect of gender and interaction effect of color priming and gender. The psychological effect of red color is cross- culture.
In the romantic, red induce approach motivation. Moreover, red uniform in aesthetic events also carries specific meanings that affect others’judgment on the attraction of athletes. Keywords: romantic context, red effect, sport dancers The modulating effect of cardiorespiratory function on executive function induced by acute aerobic exercise: an evidence from fMRI study Lin Li, Qi Xiang, Jie Cui, Xiao-Yan Wang, Liu Ji (East China Normal University), Gao-Xia Wei (Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School) More recently, large amounts of evidences demonstrated that physical exercise is beneficial for the improvement of cognitive performance.
However, the findings are inconsistent for varied individual differences such as cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF). This study aimed to investigate if CRF modulate the cognitive benefits induced by acute aerobic exercise. Twenty-four female college students were assigned into high fitness group or low fitness group based on their performance of fitness test.
During their first visit, all participants were asked to complete N-back test during scanning after a short break. After one-week interval, they were scanned for the same N-back task following a 30-mintue aerobic exercise session with moderate exercise intensity. The 495Posters Thursday July 13th results showed that there were significant interactive effect of group * time in accuracy rate during 0-back (F(1,22) = 4.95，p = 0.04)， and 1-back task (F(1,22)=5.06，p = 0.04) while no significant interactive effect of group * time in accuracy rate during 2-back task (F(1,22) = 0.79，p = 0.39).
It was observed from neuroimaging results that both 0-back and 1-back task activated cerebellum when investigating group * time effect while 2- back task activated anterior cingulate cortex and pallidum in group * time effect. Moreover, we also observed that left parietal lobule was significantly activated during 0-back and 1-back task while right superior frontal gyrus was activated during 2-back after acute exercise compared with before exercise. These findings suggested that CRF is an important variable to modulate the effect of acute exercise on cognitive function, which provided great implication for investigating the association between cognition and exercise.
Keywords: cardiorespiratory fitness, cognition, physical exercise, superior frontal gyrus The relationship between perfectionistic strivings and perfectionistic concerns and mental health among athletes Lilla Török (University of Physical Education) Several studies suggest that, perfectionism may be a risk factor for mental health problems in athletes. The study examines the relationship between perfectionistic strivings and perfectionistic concerns and mental health among Hungarian athletes (M age = 23.45 years; SD = 6.61). Athletes (N = 98; Nmale = 62) completed questionnaires to assess the level of positive and negative perfectionism and mental health in terms of obsessive-compulsive, depression, anxiety, hostility and somatization.
We administered some relevant subscales from the Symptom Checklist-90-R (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1977), and perfectionism is conceptualized as a multidimensional construct and is measured with the Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (MPS; Frost, Marten, Lahart, & Rosenblate, 1990). Bivariate correlation analysis revealed that positive and negative perfectionism are related positively (r = .35; p = 0.01), but they have different relationships with mental health dimensions. Negative perfectionism positively associated with hostility (r = .42; p < 0.001), anxiety (r = .49; p < 0.001), obsessive-compulsive (r = .45; p < 0.001), somatization (r = .31; p < 0.01) and General Severity Index (GSI; r = .52; p < 0.001).
Moreover, positive perfectionism is unrelated to the measured mental health factors, except for somatization (r = -.21; p < 0.05), which correlated negatively. The finding suggest that perfectionistic concerns may be a risk factor for poorer mental health in athletes. Keywords: perfectionism, mental health The prediction of proactive personality and coaches’ autonomy-support behavior on college student-athletes’ career exploration behavior Li-Kang Chi (National Taiwan Normal University) This study was based on proactive motivation process model (Parker, Bindl, & Strauss, 2010) to examine the predictive utility of proactive personality and coaches’ autonomy-support behavior on college student athletes’ career exploration behavior.
Furthermore, to examine the mediating effects of career self-efficacy, career self-determined motivation, and positive affect. After received the informed consent, 259 Division-I college student-athletes in Northern Taiwan were asked to complete questionnaires assessing their proactive personality, perceived coaches’ autonomy-support behavior, career self-efficacy, career self-determined motivation, positive affect, and career exploration behavior. The results indicated that career self-efficacy, career self-determined motivation, and positive affect had partially mediating effects between proactive personality and career exploration behavior.
In terms of the prediction of coaches’ autonomy-support on career exploration behavior, career self-efficacy and positive affect had completely mediating effects and career self-determined motivation had a partially mediating effect. The results also found the moderating 496Posters Thursday July 13th effect of coaches’ autonomy-support behavior between proactive personality and career exploration behavior. Specifically, regardless of high or low coaches’ autonomy-support behavior, high proactive personality student- athletes reported more career exploration behavior than low proactive personality student-athletes.
However, when perceived low coaches’ autonomy-support, student-athletes who had low proactive personality reported less career exploration behavior. Based on the results, high proactive personality and coaches’ autonomy- support behavior lead high career self-efficacy, high career motivation, and high positive affect and then have more career exploration behavior. Coaches are also encouraged to create more autonomy-support behavior especially helpful for student-athletes who have low proactive personality.
Keywords: proactivity, proactive behavior, career self-efficacy, self-determined motivation, positive affect Suppress or express? Ironic effect of self-control in sport Liancheng Zhang (Tianjin University of Sport,China.) Two studies were conducted to test the ironic effect of self-control that refers to paradoxical or counter- intentional mental state effects arising during efforts at self control under high pressure in sport. Study 1, two experiments were used to test the effect of emotion suppression on athletes’ self-control.
Participants were divided into three different group to finished emotion control task for 8 minutes and 30 seconds at first, one of the three group finished emotion expression, another group suppress their emotion, the last one is a control group, and then the participants in Experiment 1 went on Stroop task, the participants in Experiment 2 finished Visual-CCPT task that can provide the missed number, the number of false, and reaction. Results showed that emotion suppression group has more error numbers of unmatched Stroop task and more the number of false of Visual-CCPT than control group and expression group. Study 2, two experiments were conducted to test the effect of thought suppression on athletes’ self-control.
The participants in Experiment 3 included 3 group to finish thought control task for 5 minutes firstly, one of them finish thought expression, another one carried on thought suppression, the last one is a control group. And then they went on finishing Stroop task, the participants in Experiments 4 finished Visual-CCPT task. Results were consistent with study 1.
It may be inferred that suppressing emotion or thought was a worse strategy than expression, which will result in ironic effect of self-control. Keywords: self-control, ego-depletion, athletes, thought suppression, emotion suppression Exploring flow in sport and exercise therapy with war and torture survivors Ley Clemens (University of Vienna) Refugees from conflict regions are facing various challenges, often influenced by extreme pre-, peri- and post-migration stressors. Among them, war and torture survivors have a high prevalence of mental health challenges, including posttraumatic stress and intrusive memories from past experiences.
Thus, they can hardly focus on the ‘here and now’. However, there are some indications that people may fade out illness-related thoughts while exercising, e.g. through flow experiences.
The "Movi Kune" programme has been offering sport and exercise therapy to two groups of five to ten war and torture survivors each year. The present study focused on exploring whether and how flow occurred during the programme. Data from the participant observation of non-verbal and verbal expressions were coded and analysed for the intervention groups (2013- 2016) with a category system using the software Atlas.ti.
Event-focused analysis was complemented with person-focused analysis identifying the occurrence of flow and potential influencing factors. The results suggest that various participants achieved flow several times, particularly during team sports, games, movement improvisations and dance tasks. Hindering factors included task and setting-related aspects that triggered flashbacks and intrusive memories from the past, quick changes in affective experiencing and momentary well- being.
Sense of safety was identified as a condition for the occurrence of flow in this study. The experience of 497Posters Thursday July 13th pleasure, the distraction and respite from illness-related thoughts and worries, the being in the present ‘here and now’, the experience of mastery and achievements, as well as activation and motivation for physical activity seemed therapeutically meaningful effects relating to flow. Therefore, the minimization of potential hindering factors is recommended, together with the provision of adequate tasks and a setting that facilitates flow in sport and exercise therapy.
Keywords: mental health, refugee, trauma Physical and sports activity in adolescents spa consumers Leonardo Eliecer Tarqui Silva (Universidad Estatal de Milagro - UNEMI) The present study shows the therapeutic approach based on physical and sports activities applied as reinforcer, channeler and behavioral modifier in conjunction with cognitive, socio-humanistic, spiritual, occupational, experiential and family therapies performed in adolescents using psychoactive substances (SPA) between Ages 14 to 17 years in the Therapeutic Community for Adolescent Males Hogar Crecer (CTHC), of the city of Cuenca - Ecuador; resulting in a reduction and channeling of aggressiveness levels, improvements in the area of socialization, self-esteem, academic performance and an adequate process of detoxification and direct incidence in the initial critical stage of abstinence. The results of the research are obtained through the application of clinical and sports psychological reagents; together provide the reports and diagnoses of weekly evolution of clinical staff during the 6 months of treatment in hospitalization modality administered in initial and subsequent periods of the psych educational process. Keywords: therapeutic, physical-sports, socio-humanistic, detoxification, evolution Physical fitness and self-perceptions in teenagers José Guilherme (Universidade do Algarve), Conde Monserrat (GCU), Carla Martins (ISMAT), Luís Faísca, Cristina Nunes, Saúl Jesus (Universidade do Algarve) Self-perceptions seem to be influenced by physical fitness and gender in teenaged athletes.
However, less is known about how this constructs interact in non-athletes teenagers, from both rural and urban backgrounds. The aim of this cross-sectional study was to investigate the associations between physical fitness and self- perceptions (self-concept, global self-esteem and body self-image) in teenagers. The European Portuguese versions of Fitnessgram, figures rating scale (Tiggeman&Barret,1998), Rosenberg self-esteem scale, and physical self-description questionnaire (Marsh,1994) were administered to a sample of 119 teenagers, aged between 13 and 16 years old, selected from the population of students of the public schools of Albufeira (Portugal).
Results: There were significant statistical differences (p<0.05) between the mean scores of physical fitness and physical self-concept. Additionally, greater scores of global self-esteem tended to correspond to greater scores of physical fitness (positive, strong correlation). No statistical significant associations were detected between physical fitness and body image.
Physical fitness was associated to both physical self- concept and global self-esteem in this sample of Portuguese teenagers. Keywords: physical fitness and self-perceptions in teenagers Degree of impact of psychological assessment during altitude training with elite athletes Leonardo Eliecer Tarqui Silva (Universidad Estatal De Milagro - UNEMI) The main purpose of this work in Sport Psychology, alms to identify psychologycal effects caused by training 21 day in height with elite athletes who practice the disciplines of swiming, mountain biking, judo, boxing and triathlon, alongside the degree of impact of psychologycal intervention whith a program of mental 498Posters Thursday July 13th preparation during this period was subjetively evaluated. The research was done during sports training camps in height conditions in the city of Cuenca, whith a total mixed simple of 45 subjects (20 men and 25 women) from different countries; during the years 2007-2012, who were applying the Perceived Stress Scale Borg, POMS (test of mood states) and Ways of Coping Check List (adapted sports) to obtain the results in terms of stress and burnout projected between the twenty-eighth day of acclimatization.
The results indicate a positive psychological development in ecalas stress and adaptation on day 20 assessment (retest), concluding that the mental training program directly afects athletes, improving mental processes of acclimaization. During the course of training in height, two identifiable phenomena could be observed; the first during the evaluation performed at 8 days of acclimatization where the stress and exhaustion scores indicated a high index; In the second evaluation lower values are registered in the items of exhaustion and perceived stress that is correlated between the applied tests, also detecting an increased management of psychological sports strategies such as self-application of relaxation techniques, goal setting, visualization techniques, Self-talk management, energy regulation, activation control, concentration management and positive feedback by the intervened subjects, all these processes are part of the planning of the mental training program for elite athletes adapted to the micro cycle of 21 days in height, the same that received all the athletes. Keywords: altitude training, stress, exhaustion, acclimatization The effect of a mental skills programme on the anxiety of track-and field athletes in secondary schools Leon Van Niekerk (University of Fort Hare), Maryna Van Niekerk (University of Johannesburg) Youth athletes in South Africa are often under much pressure to perform well, but not always prepared mentally to deal with the pressure.
Hence, many youth track-and field athletes experience too high competition anxiety. The premise of the study is that an increase in the mental skills of athletes will decrease their experience of anxiety. The purpose of this study was to explore the influence of a mental skills training programme on the anxiety of secondary school athletes during sport performance.
A purposive sample of 83 athletes ranging from 13 – 19 years of age (mean age = 16.00 years; sd = 1.90) were included in the study. A quasi-experimental design was followed, with 55 athletes assigned to the experimental group and participated in a mental skills training programme over a period of six months. The control group consisted of 28 athletes, who did not receive any intervention, but were asked to continue with their regular training programme.
All the participants were asked to complete the Sport Competition Anxiety Test (SCAT), as well as the Mental Skills Inventory (MSI). Statistical significance was set at .005. Descriptive analysis indicated that youth athletes have a high level of anxiety when competing in track- and field events.
It was also found that they have a moderate level of mental skills, leaving much room for improvement of their mental skills. To determine the relationship between anxiety and mental skills, a Pearson product-moment correlation was done. A strong negative correlation between mental skills and anxiety was reported.
A mixed (within-between) repeated measures ANOVA was done to determine the effect of the intervention. A significant main- and interaction effect was found for both the increase in mental skills and decrease of anxiety, with a large effect size (Eta squared > .14) for both the main- and interaction effect of the variables. The results indicated that the mental skills training programme decrease anxiety significantly.
Keywords: mental skills training, anxiety, track- and field athletes 499Posters Thursday July 13th Motivation and sport satisfaction: analysis of the mediator impact of coach-athlete relationship from the Brazilian coach perspective Lenamar Fiorese Vieira, Andressa Ribeiro Contreira, Patrícia Aparecida Gaion Rigoni, Gislaine Contessoto Rizzo, Nayara Malheiros Caruzzo (State University of Maringá), José Roberto Andrade do Nascimento Junior (Federal University of Vale do São Francisco) Interpersonal relationships have been constantly pointed out in literature as a key factor for developing and maintenance of motivation and satisfaction in competitive sport. The coach-athlete relationship (CART), specifically, is considered a driving force for the performance, personal growth, and wellbeing of coaches and athletes, embracing the behaviors, feelings, and thoughts of both. This study aimed to analyze the mediating effect of CART in the association between basic psychological needs (BPN) and satisfaction of Brazilian coaches.
Participated a total of 182 coaches (40,47 ± 9,7 years old), both men and women, of collective and individual sports, participants in the Brazilian School Youth Games 2015. As instruments, the Coach-Athlete Relationship Questionnaire (CART-Q), the Athletic Satisfaction Scale (ASQ) and the Basic Needs Satisfaction in Sport Scale (BNSSS) were used. The structural equations modeling showed that the direct effect of BPNs on coaches' satisfaction was significantly strong (β = 0,56, p<0,05), explaining 48% of the shared variance of satisfaction.
Under CART mediation, the relationship between BPN and coach satisfaction showed a significant increase (p<0,05) in the total effect (0,56 to 0,71), with an indirect effect of β = 0,15, explaining 54% of the variability of the satisfaction of Brazilian coaches. It was concluded that, in the Brazilian sporting context, coaches who are satisfied with BPN and who establish ties of affection, commitment and respect with their athletes are more likely to increase their levels of sports satisfaction. Keywords: motivation, satisfaction, sport, coach-athlete relationship Stress and injuries in the rhythmic gymnastics’ Brazilian team for the Rio 2016 Olympic games Lenamar Fiorese Vieira, Renan Codonhato, Caio Rosas Moreira, Paulo Vitor Suto Aizava (State University of Maringá), Constanza Pujals (Ingá University Center), Paulo Marcio Oliveira (Federal University of Sergipe), Camila Ferezin Resende (Brazilian Confederation of Rhythmic Gymnastics), Patrícia Aparecida Gaion Rigoni (State University of Maringá) Sport injuries are one of the main causes of athletic careers ending, keeping athletes away from training and competition, while damaging their health.
Stress is believed to be the most relevant psychological variable related to injury occurrence, also having a role in the rehabilitation process. The present study investigated the stress/recovery and injury profiles of the Rhythmic Gymnastics’ Brazilian Team during its preparatory cycle for the 2016 Olympic games. Participants were the eight (08) female athletes (20.4±2.5 years old), which composed the team during the 2015-2016 Olympic Cycle.
Instruments used were the RESTQ-76 Sport and the team’s injury records. Descriptive statistics were presented as frequency and percentage; the Shapiro-Wilk normality test, Paired T test, Pearson Correlation and Cohen’s D were adopted for data analysis. Data collection happened between the 2nd semester of 2015 and the 2nd semester of 2016, in four time points that preceded the Olympic Games.
Injury records had shown a total of 14 injuries, being seven (50%) minor injuries, two (14%) mild injuries, and five (36%) severe injuries; all athletes were injured at least once, and the time away from training/competition activities accounted for a total of 509 days; stress levels were low/under control at all assessments; the recovery levels were significantly greater than stress: 2015 Pan-American Games (p<0.01; d=2.59), XXXIV Rhythmic Gymnastic World Championship (p<0.01; d=3.47), Berlin and Kazan World Cups (p=0.03; d=2.47) and 2016 Olympic Games (p=0.04; d=1.56); no significant correlations were found. It was concluded that the athletes presented adequate levels of recovery, aiding in the control of stress and injuries throughout the season. Keywords: stress, recovery, injuries, rhythmic gymnastics 500Posters Thursday July 13th Understanding positive youth development in sport through the voices of indigenous youth Leisha Strachan (University of Manitoba), Tara-Leigh McHugh (University of Alberta), Courtney Mason (Thompson Rivers University) Research in the area of positive youth development (PYD) claim that structured physical activities, such as sport, are critical for development (Petitpas et al., 2005; Strachan et al., 2016).
The 5 C’s (i.e., confidence, competence, character, connection, caring/compassion; Lerner, 2003) are a gold standard when discussing positive outcomes for youth and these have been applied to youth sport contexts (Vierimaa et al, 2012). While these outcomes are clearly important, they are hypothesized and researched in a western context. Indigenous leaders, both at the national (Truth and Reconciliation Commission, 2015) and community levels (Maskwachees Declaration, 2005) recognize the value of sport for Indigenous children and youth.
Research in sport psychology has called for more research to understand youth participation in sport and physical activity from diverse cultural perspectives (Blodgett et al., 2008; Schinke & Hanrahan, 2009). If sport is a key context for development for youth, more understanding as to what constitutes positive development for Indigenous youth needs to be explored (McHugh et al., 2013). The current study used a community-based participatory (CBPR) framework (Fletcher, 2003) to engage 43 youth aged 12-19 from central and western Canada.
Talking circles were used to generate the data and Elo and Kyngas’ (2008) process of content analysis was used to identify themes. The results point to unique understandings of the C’s for Indigenous youth. For example, moving beyond typical western understandings of ‘confidence’, participants described how confidence includes concepts such as bravery and freedom.
Further, participants described the interconnectedness of competence and confidence, and how they are used and understood within a sport context. Suggestions on how these C’s can be used to facilitate a more equitable sport system will be discussed. Keywords: sport, Indigenous, youth, positive development Self-efficacy as an antecedent of mental toughness, prosocial and antisocial behaviors of youth athletes in Botswana Mpaphi Ramolale (University of Botswana), Leapetswe Malete (Michigan state university) The mechanisms that underlie the development of efficacy beliefs and mental toughness in sport, such as role modeling and reinforcements of certain behaviors offer a compelling case for how behaviors develop and persist over time.
This has important implications for the role sport plays in the socialization of youth into various desirable and undesirable behaviors. The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship among self-efficacy, mental toughness, prosocial and antisocial behaviors in youth athletes in Botswana. A total of 158 male (N = 81) and female (N= 77) junior and senior secondary school athletes aged 14-20 years old enrolled in Centers for Sport Excellence (CSE) in Botswana participated in the study.
Participants completed a background information questionnaire, a General Self-Efficacy scale (Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1995), a Sport Mental Toughness Questionnaire (Sheard, Golby, & van Wersch, 2009) and the Prosocial and Antisocial Behavior in Sport Scale (Kavussanu & Boardley, 2009). A significant positive relationship was established between higher efficacy beliefs and responsibility and composure items from the mental toughness scale. Higher self-efficacy was positively associated with prosocial behaviors and negatively correlated with antisocial behaviors.
The differences found varied by sport type and playing experience. The findings suggest a possibility that higher efficacy beliefs play a role in regulating mental toughness and prosocial behavior with lower efficacy beliefs predicting the likelihood to display antisocial behaviors. The study also offers insight into prosocial and antisocial behaviors towards teammates, a less studied dimension in the research.
Limitations and implications for future research are discussed within the context of the descriptive nature of the study. Keywords: self-efficacy, prosocial and antisocial behaviors, mental toughness, youth sport 501Posters Thursday July 13th IIncidence of environment and the personality in the development of resilience through sports in adults. Recommendations to promote it in childhood Leandro Javier Lorusso (Universidad Atlántida Argentina) Resilience is considered a positive feature of the human personality that favors individual adaptation to adverse situations.
Recently, resilience has been studied in populations of elite athletes, as it would allow them to face negative experiences of their professional and personal life that affect their performance (University Press of Murcia, 2014). However, since it is considered a useful trait in any human being, further research to determine the means of animating and reinforcing resilience in all class populations is of great value. This study assumes the existence of a relationship between regular sports practice and development at the level of resilience.
Based on this, the objective is to identify a relationship between the level of resilience and environmental resources as well as the personality traits in a population of adults practicing structured physical activities in the city of Mar del Plata. First, the administration of the Argentine Resilience Scale (1993) will be carried out to the study group. Then, only those people who have achieved measures that correlate with a high level of resilience will apply an ad hoc questionnaire of socio-demographic data and a validated instrument to evaluate personality traits.
Subsequently, data analysis will be performed with statistical programs and correlation coefficients. As this study is not limited to a population of high performance athletes, the results are expected to allow the development of recommended practice guidelines to promote the resilience trait in children starting sports activities. These practices will promote social integration in children, especially those exposed to socially vulnerable.
Keywords: resilience, structured phisical activities, personality, environment, integration The efficacy of affective behavioral strategies for increasing physical activity: Implications for harnessing the dual-mode model Lauren Billing (University of Minnesota) The relationship between physical activity (PA) and decreased risk for noncommunicable diseases such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and cancer is well established. However, despite these benefits, only 32% of U.S. adults participate in any PA (HHS, 2011).
Researchers have begun to examine the importance of affect for adopting and maintaining PA. For example, research shows that those who report feeling greater positive affect during a bout of PA report more minutes of overall PA six-months later (Williams et al., 2010). Yet few studies have examined how strategies aimed at facilitating positive affect could influence PA participation and adherence.
Thus, the current study sought to teach participants how to focus on and enhance affect experienced during PA as a means to increase participation and adherence. It was hypothesized that participants randomized to the affective behavioral strategies intervention would have more minutes of PA at both post-intervention and one-month follow-up than the be havioral strategies comparison control. Healthy, sedentary adults (n=40) were randomized to either an affective or behavioral comparison condition each delivered over the telephone and lasting 12 weeks.
The affective condition included topics such as visual or auditory stimuli, and rewards which were tailored to specifically emphasize the positive affect felt during PA. The behavioral comparison condition included information on the general benefits of PA, types of PA, and PA recommendations. The primary measures included the 7 - day PAR and 4 - day ActiGraph wear.
Assessments were conducted at baseline, 12 weeks, and 16 weeks. Preliminary results show no significant differences between groups on weekly PA minutes at 12 weeks as measured by the ActiGraph (m=288.22; SD=328.76) and 7-day PAR(m=232.50; SD=205.47). Future research should seek large sample sizes with adequate power to detect significant differences.
Keywords: physical activity, exercise, affect, dual-mode model, behavioral strategies, intervention 502Posters Thursday July 13th A depth study on the factors of slump bounce-back of professional golfers Seong-Hun An, JungHun Heo, Kyung Hoon Ko, YoungSik Won, Woong Tae Na (Chung-ang University) This study aimed to investigate in-depth causes of slump, symptoms and factors leading professional golfer's bounce-back and present phenomena and psychology in the course of time, provided that it accords to the phenomenon that professional golfers’skill sets are improved after a period of slump is defined as “slump bounce back.” Subjects of study were 4 male golfers and 5 female golfers. Results were extracted from in- depth interviews. In causes of professional golfer’s slump were from faulty swing, inefficient practice, lack of practice, plateau condition, injury, problems of physical strength, health issues, boredom, criticism from surrounding people, stress from comparing with fellow golfers, pride, uncertain goals, etc., and environmental causes were from financial problem, personal relations, conflict with instructors, change of environment, etc.
In symptoms included continuously worsening skills; physical symptoms included insomnia, worsening health, physical exhaustion, hair loss, subjects experiencing negative emotions, psychological isolation, a drop in psychological functions, financial problem, relationship with parents, attitude from surrounding people, etc. As for the factors for depressed golfers to bounce back, it was due to continuous practice, change of methods, improved scores and techniques, physical maintenance, positive change in emotions, training in psychological techniques, financial comfort, parental support and instructor’s help, fellow golfer’s roles, special opportunities, etc. The results were based on case studies in which Korea’s top professional golfers experienced slump, and so they are expected to be used as one of guidelines for golfers experiencing difficulties.
Keywords: professional golfers, slump causes, slump symptoms, slump bounce-back The association between physical activity wearables and athletic identity in student- athletes Kwok Ng, Harri Selänne, Tatiana Ryba (University of Jyvaskyla) Self-quantification is easier with the assistance of wearable technology. Hardware devices that athletes wear, such as heart rate monitors or sports watches (HRM/SW), and integration into the user’s smart phones as applications (apps) are readily available as commercial products. Despite the surge in the emergence and use of these technologies, there is a lack of knowledge of how student-athletes use these devices and if it plays a part in the identity of athletes.
Therefore, the purpose of this study is to investigate the rate at which student-athletes at elite sport schools own and use HRM/SW and apps, as well as the associations between these devices and academic/athletic identity. Adolescents (n=400) in their second year of elite sport school (average age range is 16-17 years old) took part in a survey collected from 7 schools around Finland in a longitudinal mixed methods study on adolescent athletes’ careers (Ryba et al, 2016) in the spring of 2017. The athletic identity measurement scale (AIMS), (Brewer et al, 1993), modified AIMS for academic context (SIMS), and items taken from the Finnish School-age Physical Activity (SPA) study (Kokko et al, 2016) regarding physical activity wearables (PAW) were included in the analysis.
Analyses with descriptive statistics and MANOVA for overall sport identity and academic identity were analysed in relation to the use of apps and HRM/SW. The results from this study were able to report the proportion of student-athletes who own and use apps or HRM/SW. Differences in using apps or HRM/SW, to just owning apps or HRM/SW, were observed in relation to athletic and academic identity of the student-athletes attending elite sport schools.
Sport psychology consultants may need to consider how student-athletes use wearables to shape their academic and athletic identity. Keywords: dual careers, technology, self-quantification, student identity 503Posters Thursday July 13th Passion, sport motivation and aggression among combat sport athletes Kuldeep Singh (Panjab University, Chandigarh, India) In line with Self-Determination Theory the Dualistic Model of Passion (DMP) posits that individuals are motivated to explore their environment in order to grow as individuals. In so doing, they engage in a variety of activities.
Of these, only a few will be perceived as particularly enjoyable, important, and to have some resonance with how people see themselves. From these few activities one or two will eventually be preferred and engaged in on a regular basis and turn out to be passionate and it is an important source of motivational energy underlying such persistent involvement. Indeed, passionate athletes may be so involved in their sport that they are likely to be aggressive if victory is on the line.
The present endeavour was planned with the aim to find out differences among different combat sport athletes on passion, sport motivation and aggression. The study was also planned to study the relationship between passion, sport motivation and aggression. For this purpose 300 male respondents (100 boxers, 100 wrestlers and 100 judo players), within the age range of 18-23 years, were selected from different colleges from Punjab state of India.
Passion was measured by using the passion scale by Vallerand et al. (2003). To measure aggression, the aggression questionnaire by Buss and Perry (1992) was used.
The sports motivation scale (SMS-28) by Pelletier, Fortier, Vallerand, Tuson, Briere, and Blais (1995) was used to measure seven types of sports motivation. The results revealed that F-ratios for groups on obsessive passion, harmonious passion, types of sport motivation and total aggression emerged significant. Both types of passion were found to be significantly related with types of sport motivation and aggression among the groups.
These results suggest that on the whole, sports provide beneficial effects to ones passion and motivation and to the reduction of anger and “real world” aggression in youth and adolescents. Keywords: passion, sport motivation, aggression, boxers, wrestlers, judo A systematic review and meta-analysis of relative age effects in female sport Kristy Smith, Dr. Patricia Weir, Dr.
Stephen Cobley (University of Sydney) Relative age effects (RAE; Barnsley et al., 1985; Cobley et al., 2009) refer to immediate participation and long-term attainment influences in sport, which occur as a result of an interaction between one's chronological age and the dates used to logistically organize participant cohorts in a sport system. The prevalence of the RAE remains relatively undetermined for female sport contexts. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine female participation trends with respect to relative age in the published literature by evaluating the birth quartile distribution of athlete samples.
Using systematic search procedures, 54 studies spanning 1984– 2016 were identified and contained 308 independent samples across 25 sports. The overall prevalence and strength of the RAE across and within female sport contexts was determined, and moderator variables were assessed using odds ratio (OR; events versus non-events) meta-analyses, applying an invariance random-effects model. Preliminary findings suggest the RAE is generally more prevalent at pre-adolescent (< 11 years) and adolescent (12-14 years) ages (OR range = 1.14-5.40, relatively oldest in ‘Quartile 1’ versus the relatively youngest in ‘Quartile 4’).
Likewise, a RAE was more likely to be observed - and of greater magnitude - in some sport contexts requiring certain physical attributes (e.g., height in volleyball) and at higher levels of sport competition when other factors were held constant. With some sport context exceptions, RAE effect sizes seemingly reduced following maturation. These findings suggest that interactions between participant developmental stages, level of competition, sport context performance demands and sociocultural factors likely determine RAE prevalence and effect magnitudes in female sport participation.
To reduce and eliminate RAE-related inequalities in female athletic development, direct policy, organizational and practitioner intervention are required. Keywords: birth date, annual age-grouping, maturation, selection bias, women, athletes 504Posters Thursday July 13th The longitudinal impact of relative age on organized sport and unorganized physical activity participation in pre-adolescents Kristy Smith, Laura Chittle, Dr. Jess C.
Dixon, Dr. Sean Horton (University of Windsor), Dr. Mathieu Bélanger (Université de Sherbrooke), Dr.
Patricia Weir (University of Windsor) The Relative Age Effect (RAE), whereby individuals born further from an arbitrary cut-off date are disadvantaged in comparison to their earlier born peers, has been documented in various sport and educational contexts (Cobley et al., 2009). If youth are routinely disadvantaged in daily activities, the detrimental impact of this effect could extend to other areas of their lives (e.g., proclivity to engage in a physically active lifestyle). The aim of this study was to explore the longitudinal pattern of sport and physical activity participation among a prospective cohort of pre-adolescents with respect to relative age.
Self-reported data from the first twelve cycles of the Monitoring Activities of Teenagers to Comprehend their Habits (MATCH) project was included in the analysis. A detailed description of the study is available in Belanger et al. (2013).
Generalized linear mixed models with binary logistic regression were conducted to assess the contextual effects of the RAE in this sample. There was a significant RAE for both male and female organized sport participants (p < .05), with an over-representation in the second quartile of birth. This RAE pattern was consistent over the four-year span of data collection.
There was no interaction between birth quartile and chronological age for organized sport or unorganized physical activity participation. However, there was a significant main effect (p < .01) of chronological age for unorganized physical activity participation, indicating decreased involvement with increasing age (e.g., 11 year old 3.6 times more likely to participate vs. 15 year old).
This study affirms that context is an important consideration when examining various forms of physical activity participation and targeting interventions for youth, as this decline was not noted among organized sport participants. Continued investigation of the factors contributing to the RAE and participation trends, and their stability over time is warranted. Keywords: relative age effect, sport, physical activity, participation, pre-adolescent, longitudinal Students’ psychological growth in high school athletic clubs: Role of students’ perceptions of teacher Kota Matsui We aimed to examine students’ psychological growth in athletic clubs in combination with students’ perceptions of their teacher in high school.
Study 1 examined the effects of students’ perceptions of their teacher and teacher’s feedback on students’ intrinsic motivation in athletic clubs. We administered questionnaires to 1,071 students from high school athletic clubs. Items concerning their teacher were used to score trust, based on which the students were divided into groups of high and low levels of trust with their teacher.
Analysis of factors in items regarding teacher’s feedback confirmed the following three factors: praise, reproach, and absence of feedback. Results of multiple regression analyses suggested praise and reproach were positively correlated with intrinsic motivation in the high trust group, while a positive correlation occurred only with praise in the low trust group. Results of path analysis suggested that the effects of teacher’s feedback on students’ intrinsic motivation were mediated by students’ perceptions of their teacher.
Study 2 examined students’ perceptions of their teacher and dependency on their teacher, and motivation and overcommitment in athletic clubs. We administered questionnaires to 978 students from high school athletic clubs. Items concerning their teacher had two subscales (acceptance and control); based on these scores, students were divided into four groups (acceptance, control, acceptance-control, and nonacceptance- noncontrol).
Items concerning dependency on their teacher had two subscales (integrated dependency and dependence need), and motivation for their activity had two subscales (autonomy and heteronomy). On the basis of ANOVA, in the acceptance-control group, all scores were high, while it was the opposite in nonacceptance-noncontrol group. In the control group, only dependence need scores were high.
In the 505Posters Thursday July 13th acceptance group, integrated dependency and autonomous motivation scores were high, while others were low. Keywords: student-teacher relationship, dependency, motivation, overcommitment Investigation of variables aimed at reducing depressive symptoms in collegiate athletes prior to competitions: Use of logical thinking errors and behavioral activation as variables Kosuke Hirayama, Hideaki Takai (Nippon Sport Science University) It has been reported in recent years that collegiate athletes suffer from depressive symptoms (e.g., Wiegand et al., 2013). Such symptoms hinder optimal performance by increasing memory disorder, behavioral procrastination, and avoidance behavior, and are therefore believed to decrease overall performance (Fujita & Iwanaga, 2005).
The purpose of this study is therefore to investigate variables aimed at reducing depressive symptoms by focusing on logical thinking errors, which potentially cause such symptoms, and behavioral activation carried out in order to improve such symptoms. The subjects were 133 male student athletes enrolled at A University in Japan. They were requested to respond to questions on the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), which measures depressive symptoms, the Thinking Errors Scale (TES), which measures logical thinking errors, and the Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS), which measures behavioral activation, while recalling competitions in which they had felt anxiety or tension.
A CES-D score of 16 points was set as the cut-off point to identify athletes with depressive symptoms; 50 athletes had a score of 16 or above while 83 athletes had a score below 16. Our analysis revealed that collegiate athletes with depressive symptoms obtained significantly higher scores in all subscales of TES, and significantly lower scores in all subscales of BADS except “Activation,” than collegiate athletes without depressive symptoms. The absence of a significant difference with “Activation” alone may probably be attributed to the fact that collegiate athletes acquire active behavioral patterns through daily training.
In conclusion, interventions targeting logical thinking errors and relevant BADS subscales, including “Avoidance and Repetition,” “Competitive and School Impairment,” and “Social Impairment,” are likely to be effective in reducing depressive symptoms in collegiate athletes. Keywords: depressive symptoms, collegiate athletes, logical thinking errors, behavioral activation Relationship between the effective use of language during the feedback process and its impact on youth soccer athlete’s exercise commitment, athletic performance, and persistence of an exercise Kooin Jung, Chnaghyun Kim, Jeongjoo Kim, Deokgyu Won, Juyoung Kim (Korea National University of Education) This study tried to examine the relationship between the effective use of language during the feedback process and its impact on youth soccer athlete’s exercise commitment, athletic performance, and persistence of an exercise. We used convenience sampling method on a sample of a middle school and high school students who were registered as an athlete in the Korea Football Association at 2016.
Questionnaires were used as a research method, total of 676 questionnaires were collected, 26 of them excluded because those were trustless. Total of 650 sample data went through the statistical programs like SPSS 21 and AMOS 21ver. The results are following; first, The effective use of language during the feedback process has significant effect on youth soccer athlete’s exercise commitment.
second, The effective use of language during the feedback process has significant effect on youth soccer athlete’s athletic performance. third, Youth soccer athlete’s exercise commitment has significant effect on athletic performance. fourth, Youth soccer athlete’s exercise commitment has significant effect on persistence of an exercise.
fifth, Youth soccer athlete’s athletics performance has significant effect on persistence of an exercise. 506Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: language during the feedback, commitment, performance, persistence of an exercise Analysing visual behavior and its effects on decision making. An experimental study in volleyball Konstantinos Velentzas (Bielefeld University), Thomas Heinen (Leipzig University), Angeli Gawlik (University of Erlangen) Perception and anticipatory skills in high velocity sports as volleyball affect significantly performance (Velentzas & Schaper, 2016; Vickers, 2007).
The present study aims to provide evidences about the relationship between perceptual strategies and decision making in volleyball and to scrutinize differences in gaze control between athletes of different levels during defending in the position “six”. Reaction time is measured by keyboard entries (Presentation®) and visual behavior was evaluated by a SMI® eye-tracker. Three groups of participants (novices, intermediated and high performers; 12 participants per group) were asked to “read” a reenacted scene (58 sequences) and enter setting direction (two possible choices were given) on the keyboard as fast as possible.
The video stimulus was subdivided into obvious-, covered-, and setting after bad reception presented in a random order. Reaction-time was calculated in relation to the first touch of the ball by the setter. The data analysis shows that there are no significant differences between the three groups regarding the fixations’ number [(MNovices = 5.24; MInterm = 5.70; MHigh = 5,64; F(2, 41) = 0.709, p > .05)]as well as regarding the fixations’ duration [(MNovices = 341.8ms; MInterm = 264.5ms; MHigh = 257.6ms; F(2, 41) = 2.109, p > .05)].
However, reaction time decreases significantly on increasing expertise F(2, 41) = 8.46; p < .01, Post-Hoc showed that high performers reacted significantly faster as both the other groups (MHigh= 2857ms : MNovices = 3142ms; MHigh= 2857ms : MInterm = 3009ms). The results of the present study match previous studies partly only. Differences in visual strategies can’t be ascertained.
The results indicate that experts are able collect and actualize information more efficiently by using almost the same visual-peceptual strategies as the novices, indicating at the same time that phenomena as the „looking without seeing“ could taking place during the information acquisition. Keywords: eye tracking, reaction time, volleyball defense, video stimuli A narrative study on the psychological development of athletes through the experience of yips Kojiro Matsuda (Kyusyu University) The yips is a multi-etiological phenomenon consisting of involuntary movements during the execution of a skill. Previous research has primarily focused on the negative aspects of yips as yips have been considered a crisis as an athlete owing to their intractability and the risk of withdrawal they cause.
However, from the perspective of positive psychology, research has focused on the relationship between crises faced by athletes and their psychological development (e.g., change to adaptive motivation, reduction of anxiety of competition, improvement of concentration). That is, a crisis as an athlete is considered as a turning point in his/her development, caused by a set of transitional problems (e.g., psychological conflicts, slump) that have to be resolved. Thus, the purpose of this study was to examine the psychological development of athletes who experienced yips to understand what kind of psychological development occurs on confronting a painful situation.
We interviewed six university baseball players (mean age=21.14 years, SD=0.87 years) who experienced yips, using a narrative approach. The narrative data were categorized based on similarities. As a result, six characteristic narratives, “clarifying the meaning of sports activity,” “understanding oneself,” “independent achievement orientation,” “mental stability,” “understanding, accepting, and appreciating others,” and “having a deep understanding of the competition” were identified.
These characteristic narratives were considered to have expressed or to be related to psychological development as an athlete. These 507Posters Thursday July 13th findings clarified that the experience of yips acted as a turning point for athletes and that this experience brought about their psychological development as an athlete. Future empirical studies need to confirm these findings.
Keywords: crisis as an athlete, turning point, narrative data, withdrawing from a competition Development of a tag game to improve children’s helping behavior-related self-efficacy Kohei Ueno (Kagawa University) Helping behavior is influenced by many factors, including past experiences of and feelings while helping others (Nagai, 2011; Senoo, 2001), both of which may be promoted through physical activity. For instance, team sports and physical education (PE) can promote not only athletic ability but also personal growth. Accordingly, this study investigates the effect of participation in a game of tag, which was focused on helping others, on children’s self-efficacy related to helping behavior; i.e., belief about one’s ability to help others (Ueno, 2014).
Sixty-two elementary school students (ten to eleven years old) played one round of two types of tag in a PE class. In the first class (i.e., regular tag), students had to run around and avoid being caught. In the other, which was developed by the author and named “Nakama-oni,” the catcher could touch only those students who were running alone and not those who held hands with each other (a student could hold hands with only one other student at a time).
This feature of the game was intended to trigger helping behavior. Students were told before the game that there is significant value in helping others avoid the catcher without regard for personal safety. Self-efficacy related to helping behavior was assessed before and after the game with a scale developed by Ueno (2014).
Two-way repeated measures ANOVA and simple main effect tests were conducted on the scale’s scores. A significant interaction effect was found between timing and type of the tag. The results of the simple main effect tests showed that the scale score after Nakama-oni was significantly higher than it was either before Nakama-oni or after regular tag.
These findings suggest that experiences of helping others, even in a game of tag, may enhance helping behavior in daily living by increasing self-efficacy. Keywords: helping behavior, pro-social behavior, physical education, tag game The psychological factors of sports injury prevention Kento Hibi, Haruo Sakuma (Ritsumeikan University) The relationship between sports injury and psychological issues has been a concern in the recent times. Particularly, the psychological condition during the recovery process and the psychosocial influence on sports injury has been examined.
However, there are only a few studies on young Japanese athletes regarding the psychological factors of prevention. The purpose of this study was to examine the psychological factors related to the occurrence of sports injury. One hundred and thirty-nine university students (89 males and 50 females) participated in this study.
Participants were asked to complete the Stress-Response-Scale 18 (e.g., lethargy and depression-anxiety), Diagnostic Inventory of Psychological-Competitive Ability for Athletes (e.g., concentration, self-control, volition of winning and aggressiveness), and report their past experiences of sports injury. According to their past injury experiences, participants were classified into the injured group (n=98) and the non-injured group (n=41). The results showed a negative correlation between concentration and lethargy, r =.33, p = ≦ .001.
Furthermore, there was a negative correlation between self-control and depression-anxiety, r = .35, p = ≦ .001. An independent t-test was conducted to compare the scores of the volition for winning between the injured and non-injured groups. There was a significant difference between the injured group (M=14.43, SD=3.026) and the non-injured group (M=13.00, SD=3.690); t (139) =2.41, p =.017.
In addition, the aggressiveness score showed a significant difference between the injured group (M=14.95, SD=3.244) and the non-injured group (M=13.00, SD=4.071); t (66.4) =2.78, p =.007. These results suggested that concentration, 508Posters Thursday July 13th self-control, lethargy, and depression-anxiety were related to the occurrence of sports injury. In addition, there was a relationship between the volition for winning, aggressiveness, and the occurrence of sports injury.
Keywords: sport injury, prevention, psychology The influence of self-consciousness and other-consciousness on “choking under pressure” in sports Kenta Karakida (Osaka University of Health and Sport Sciences) According to Baumeister (1984), “Choking under pressure is defined as performance decrements under increased importance of good performance”, which is a significant problem in athletes. Previous studies (Wang et al. 2004) have reported that self-consciousness (SC) is related to “choking”.
Furthermore, Tsuji (1993) has investigated other-consciousness (OC), or the tendency to attend to others. Attention from others, such as coaches, teammates and the audience cannot be avoided by athletes, and it is possible that “choking” could occur because of the conscious about these people. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of self-consciousness and other-consciousness on “choking under pressure” in sports.
The Questionnaire on Factor in “Choking” in Sports with of 7 factors and 41 items developed by Murayama and Sekiya (2012), the Self-Consciousness Scale with 3 factors and 21 items developed by Tsuji (1993) and the Other-Consciousness Scale with 3 factors and 15 items developed by Tsuji (1993) were used in this study. The sample was 136 college student athlete. First, t-tests were conducted after classifying SC and OC scores into high and low groups based on mean values by using the 7 factors of “choking” as dependent variables.
Results indicated that scores of high SC and OC groups were significantly higher for all factors of “choking”. This result supported previous studies suggesting that high SC results in “choking”. Moreover, high OC also suggested the possibility of leading to “choking”.
Subsequently, multiple regression analysis was conducted to investigate the influence of subordinate factors of SC and OC on “choking” factors. Results indicated significant paths from SC and OC suggesting that they are important factors in many types of “choking”. These results indicate that SC and OC influence different “choking” factors.
Keywords: choking under pressure, self-consciousness, other-consciousness Examining the contextual factors that influence life skills transfer from sport to life Kelsey Kendellen, Martin Camiré (University of Ottawa) The practice of sport inherently encompasses skill building (Bergeron et al., 2015). In the past decade, empirical work (Chinkov & Holt, 2016) has demonstrated how the skills developed in sport are applicable beyond sport. To appreciate the extent to which the skills learned in sport are applied in different contexts, researchers have highlighted the need to examine the particular factors influencing the transfer of life skills within these contexts (Pierce, Gould, & Camiré, 2017).
The study’s purpose was to examine athletes’ experiences of transfer by focusing on the contextual factors that have influenced their ability to transfer the life skills they attribute to having developed in sport during childhood/adolescence. Interviews with 13 athletes (7 males; Mage = 21.77; SD =2.2) were conducted at two time points and online journal entries were written by the athletes over three months. Findings illustrated how the nature of athletes’ interactions with social agents within transfer contexts influenced the type of life skills they applied.
Athletes discussed how, for example, they applied at work the communication skills they developed in sport (e.g., voicing their opinion with coaches) because their managers regularly consulted them on work matters (e.g., hiring new employees). Other athletes mentioned how they rarely communicated with their managers and, consequently, had to apply in the workplace some of the problem-solving skills they had learned in sport (e.g., asking experienced colleagues for advice). The perceived reward for transfer was also identified as an important contextual factor, with many athletes discussing how they applied at work leadership skills they had developed in sport because they 509Posters Thursday July 13th perceived potential rewards for this transfer (e.g., upward career mobility).
The findings elucidate how contextual factors within transfer contexts influence athletes’ opportunities and motivations to apply in everyday life the skills they developed in sport. Keywords: emerging adults, youth, positive development, social agents, workplace Development of guidance tools for cooperative skill acquisition Keiko Yokoyama, Yuji Yamamoto (Nagoya University) In collective sports, players are required to demonstrate behavioral social skills such as cooperative interaction among teammates and competitive interaction against opponent players. These behavioral social skills in sports are considered the self-organized process from the dynamical system perspective (Schmidt et al., Int.
J. Sport Psychol, 1999). In this study, we revealed that the skill differences in cooperative interaction among teammates could be explained by the differences in synchronized behavioral pattern on a playing field, by using a three-on-one ball-possession task (Yokoyama & Yamamoto, PLoS Comp.
Biol., 2011). We developed two types of guidance tools (“three-band” and “one-band”) for acquiring cooperative skills and verified the effectiveness of these tools for novice players. Each tool comprised elastic bands that connect players and belts that are worn by players for connecting the bands and the players.
The “three-band” guidance tool comprised three bands wherein each band connects two players. The “one-band” tool comprised only one long band that connects three players. We hypothesized that these tools would demonstrate effectiveness through facilitation of perception of the movements of other players by using the physical tension of elastic bands, according to interpersonal distance, and would lead to cooperative interaction.
Sixteen novice elementary-school student players performed three-on-one ball-possession tasks under no-band (control), one-band, and three-band conditions for 60 seconds in each condition. The movements of all the players on a playing field were recorded by using motion capture cameras (OptiTrack Prime 17W) at 120 Hz. The players' movement velocity, interpersonal distances, and inner angles in a triangle formed by the positions of three players were analyzed.
Results show that the three-band tool was significantly more effective for maintaining stable cooperative interaction than the one-band tool. Keywords: motor learning, collective dynamics, social skill Highly skilled player's gaze behavior in basketball shootings Kazutoshi Kudo, Masakazu Nemoto, Ryoji Onagawa, Hiroto Tsuji (The University of Tokyo), Yuki Inaba (Japan Institute of Sports Science) Steady goal-gaze just before movement execution has been reported to provide extra information about motor execution parameters. It is controversial, however, whether the gaze behavior is also effective in highly skilled athletes.
Therefore, we investigated gaze behavior of highly skilled basketball player in basketball shooting. One highly skilled professional male basketball player, who succeeded 99 of 100 free throw and 47 of 50 three-point shot in pre-test, performed basketball shooting under four conditions: free throw, three-point shot, turnaround jumper, free throw with eyes closed. Gaze behavior during shooting was recorded by eye mark recorder (EMR-9, NAC, Japan), and goal-gaze duration was measured.
The results showed that success rates of shooting were 80% (8 of 10) for free throw, 80% (8 of 10) for three-point shot, 50% (3 of 6) for turnaround jumper, and 80% (8 of 10) for free throw with eyes closed. Steady goal-gaze duration just before execution of shooting movement was nearly one second with small variance across trials under free throw condition, and no significant duration difference was found between successful trials and failed trials (p > .05, t test). Under three-point shot condition, the duration showed large variance among trials, and tended to be longer in latter half of trials than that of former half of trials.
Under turnaround jumper condition, the duration was significantly shorter than that of free throw condition and three-point shot condition (ps < .05, t test). 510Posters Thursday July 13th Overall, there was no significant correlation between steady goal-gaze duration just before execution of shooting movement and successful shooting. The results suggest that steady goal-gaze duration just before execution of shooting movement has a limited role in successful shooting, in case of highly skilled basketball player.
Keywords: eye movement, motor control, expertise, free throw The characteristic of the movement task judged from the internal trouble in college students: analysis by the Landscape Montage Technique Katsuhiko Kotani (Hokkaido University of Education) In psychological consultations with athletes, it is important to grasp their troubles as not only their performance problems but also internal problems even if they only mention the former. The purpose of this study is to examine the characteristic of the movement task from the internal trouble in students that taking lessons in the gymnastics at university. The participants were 11 college students of physical education department (male=6, female=5, mean age=19.09).
About the movement task, an expert teacher judged their tasks from a state of activity in lessons of gymnastics. Their internal troubles were identified by the characteristics of pictures that they drew in Landscape Montage Technique (LMT). LMT is used as a technique to assess the client’s psychological problems in psychotherapy.
This study focuses on 3 students who drew impressive picture in LMT. In picture of case A (female), items were scattered, and the mountain was floating in the air. In picture of case B (male), it was a picture without the impression.
In picture of case C (female), the house and the rice field were drawn narrowly between the river and the road. In particular, Case A was not able to image the order of movement in motor learning. The feature of A's picture symbolized that she had not been able to connect past experience to current activities.
That is, her identity was becoming unstable. Therefore, it was considered that she can’t demonstrate his ability because she can’t understand how to achieve hers goal The result of this study indicated that there were similarities between the tasks in physical movements and the internal troubles in daily life. Therefore, The unnatural characteristics of LMT were considered as symbol of unstable identity of athletes.
Such unstable identity made their physical movement unnatural. Keywords: movement task, internal trouble, college students Educational program "Sácale partido al cole" Sevilla FC SAD J.M. Gamito Manzano, J.
Viñas Rodríguez (Sevilla FC SAD) Sevilla FC presents to society its most humane and social side, approaching the youth and trying to transmit values inherent to the sport such as tolerance, respect for differences, perseverance, the pursuit of personal improvement, enjoyment of the game, compliance with the rules, etc. It is a reality the impact which Football Clubs have in the world of young people and also what their team means to them and the players who represent it, becoming true referents for their lives. This is the reason why, sports organizations should contribute with what is within their reach and so it results in an improvement in training enhancing all those quelities which must be developed in a good citizen, whether young or adult.
Therefore, their involvement in this integral education of future citizens is necessary. The Sevilla FC. SAD, after more than a hundred years of history, is more alive than ever, and looks to the educational field to these young people, fans or not to the sport, offering them a series of activities that contribute to a correct formation in values.
The objectives of the educational program “Sácale Partido al Cole”, which meets its XIII Edition, are the contribution to the education of young people since it is everyone's task (Sevilla FC intends to contribute to that society by training young people in sports values in what is called collaborative meddling), the extrapolation to the classrooms of the socializing and educational power of football and the benefits it can bring to our young people, the 511Posters Thursday July 13th contribution of a more human and close vision of sport, where what has value is the person, their interests And their needs, and the transmission to students of values such as tolerance, respect, a healthy lifestyle or racial and cultural integration as part of our "CORDIALITY" campaign. Keywords: training in values, integral education, youth, Seville Football Club, socialization, modeling The mental strategies of elite climbing sherpas Kate O'Keeffe, Ismael Pedraza , Taru Lintunen (University of Jyväskylä, Finland) In the research conducted on extreme sports, the focus has been on single psychological skills rather than the combination of skills. Extending this limitation, there has been no previous study examining the psychological skills of elite high altitude climbing Sherpas from the Himalayas.
This research aims to describe and understand the psychological skills of these Sherpas as they tackle Mt. Everest whilst leading and supporting an expedition team. The study consisted of five male Sherpas (35-40years) whom all have attempted to climb Mt.
Everest at least once, with four of them summiting between one and ten times. The study was conducted through semi-structured thematic interviews which included two interviews and a focus group. Questions were developed based on the themes of the ‘Wheel of Excellence’ (Orlick, 2008) which is used to measure peak performance in the pursuit of excellence.
These themes included; focus, ongoing learning, commitment, mental readiness, positive images, confidence and distraction control. Interviews were conducted through English and Nepalese. Data analysis was conducted using both an inductive and deductive approach through content analysis utilizing the qualitative analysis software Atlas.ti.
From the results, a model illustrating the psychological profile of a high altitude climbing Sherpa was constructed based on the main themes found. Belief is centered as the core component as it helps the Sherpas maintain confidence and trust in their God in keeping them safe and regulating their arousal through the adverse conditions. The remaining six components radiating and founded from this belief include; mental readiness, evaluation, leadership, teamwork, focus and commitment.
All of these components are facilitated by positive thinking and safety which encompass the model. This study offers a valuable contribution towards understanding the psychological skills necessary for performance under pressure and in extreme environments. Keywords: sherpa, extreme, excellence, everest, performance, belief Psychological and motor determinants of effectiveness of an individual play in football game Karolina Chlebosz, Lukasz Bojkowski, Maciej Tomczak (University School of Physical Education in Poland) The main objective of the study was to examine determinants of successful play of an individual manifested or displayed in one-on-one game .
Our choice of psychological and motor determinants was based on actual literature (Seabra et al. 2014; Silva et al. 2015; Moura et al.
2016; Syander, Van Zyl 2016). Determinants significant for a player’s offensive, defensive and comprehensive effectiveness are temperamental traits, types of task and ego orientation, selected motivation process and co-ordination motor abilities (Cramer, Jackschath 1998; Kraft, O’Sullivan, Zuckerman 1998; Weigand, Broadhurst 1998) 91 male football players (M=22,9, sd= 2,298) filled in a set of questionnaires, the Formal Characteristics of Behaviour - Questionnaire of Temperament (Zawadzki, Strelau 1997), the Task and Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnaire (Duda et al. 1995), and the Sport Motivation Scale (Pelletier et al.
1995). Followed by two co-ordination motor abilities tests (level of adaptability and conversion of physical activities, and a test assessing differential complex reaction time) and a test, simulation game, verifying effectiveness of individual play in one-on-one game (Ljach, Witkowski 2004). Research pointed out on the strongest mental properties that differentiated the group of players in terms of their playing effectiveness.
In terms of analysis of an individual’s play they were high level of briskness and low level of emotional reactivity as well as high intensity of task and ego orientation 512Posters Thursday July 13th focused on the task. On the other hand, motor abilities that determine player’s level of effectiveness in one-on- one game and the level of competence in a group and team play included high level of adaptability and presentation of physical activities (in offensive play and in comprehensive assessment) and fast differential reaction time. Keywords: temperament, goal orientation, motivation, co-ordination, effectiveness Visual exploratory behavior in elite youth football players: A study on visual search activity and performance of players in all otutfield positions at the ajax-academy Karl Marius Aksum (Norwegian School of Sport Sciences) The general purpose of this study was to examine visual perception in young elite football players by investigating their visual exploratory behavior in real match situations.
The specific aim of this study was to examine in what degree elite youth football players from of one of the most acclaimed youth academies in the world, used visual exploratory activity as a tool to attain information during offensive match situations. The theoretical framework used for this study was Gibson's ecological approach to visual perception (Gibson, 1986). 45 players ranging from 14-20 years of age from the Ajax academy were observed in real match situations using 4k-cameras.
Results indicate significant differences in visual exploratory behavior across various domains including; passing performance, direction of the pass, field area, pressure distance, playing position, last action taken, and age. In situations where players conducted a visual exploratory behavior before receiving the ball they made more successful passes and more forward passes than in situations where they did not explore before receiving the ball. Results also suggest clear differences in visual search activity related to playing position; in particular centre backs and midfielders explore their surroundings much more frequently than wingers, full backs and centre forwards.
Further results show a clear relationship between visual exploratory behavior and playing area. In particular, there were more visual exploratory behavior instigated centrally on the pitch than on the sides. The combined results support previous research by finding evidence that suggest a positive relationship between visual exploratory behavior before receiving the ball and performance with the ball (Eldridge, Pulling, & Robins, 2013; Jordet, Bloomfield, & Heijmerikx, 2013).
Keywords: visual perception, exploratory activity, ecological approach, football, ajax, attack Cognitive and neural mechanisms for perception of biological motion eliminated most kinematic information of gymnastics skills Kana Goto, Yoshifumi Tanaka (Mukogawa Women's University) This study was aimed to examine the differences between expert gymnasts and novices on perception of biological motion eliminated kinematic information of body parts.Central nervous activity for perception of such biological motion was also investigated. Ten expert gymnasts and 10 novices were participated in this study.Point-light biological motion eliminated most kinematic information except for two joints were made up based on videotaped two skills (“jumping” and “cart wheel”) of an expert gymnast.Each skill’s biological motion was consisted of four types differing from the position of two reflective markers attached the joints of the body (A: shoulder and knee, B: wrist and ankle; C: wrist and greater trochanter, D: ankle and greater trochanter).Participants observed 80 point-light movies (two skills by four types of markers’ position of 10 trials each).To measure central nervous activity, corticospinal excitability controlling the left first dorsal interosseous muscle was recorded at a time point during observation of each movie.Moreover, immediately after observation each movie, participants were requested to answer correct skill of the presented movie in form of choosing from ten alternatives on a sheet.They also answered the degree of confidence of the judgement for each movie on a scale of 0 to 5. Results indicated that judgement accuracy of experts was significantly higher than the novices in only the cart wheel biological motion.
For confidence of the judgement, there was no 513Posters Thursday July 13th significant difference between experts and novices.In terms of central nervous activity, experts’ corticospinal excitability was significantly larger than the novices in both skills.These results suggest that expert gymnasts percept the presented skills correctly facilitating mirror system in the brain to compensate limited information on biological motion.It could be proposed that movies eliminated most kinematic information is more useful for observation learning in expert athlete. Keywords: biological motion, mirror system, gymnastics Combining student and athlete roles – sleep quality and psychological functioning of academic athletes Kamila Litwic-Kaminska (Kazimierz Wielki University in Bydgoszcz, Poland), Martyna Kotyko (University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn) Sleep is regarded by competitors as an important element of preparing for sports competitions (Samuels, 2008). Despite this, the interest in this subject is inadequate (Lastella, Lovell & Sargent, 2014).
People who have a higher level of stress may be particularly vulnerable to inappropriate sleep behavior patterns. Such a group can be academic athletes, who must combine student and athlete roles (Wilson & Pritchard, 2005). The aim of the research was to find out if there are differences in temperamental traits, chronotype, level of perceived stress, type of stress appraisal and quality of life between academic athletes who declare problems with sleep (n=72) and those who have no such concerns (n=105).
Following tools were used: FCB-TI (Zawadzki & Strelau, 1997), MEQ (Horne & Östberg, 1976), PSS (Cohen et al., 1983), Stress Appraisal Questionnaire (Wrześniewski et al., 2010), SWLS (Diener et al.,1985), PSQI (Buysse et al., 1989). On the basis of the U Mann-Whitney test it may be stated that athletes who reveal problems with sleep quality have a preference for eveningness than morningness (Z=3.47; p<.001). They most often appraise stressful situations as a threat (Z=-2.49; p=.012), perceive more stress in everyday life (Z=-4.02; p<.001 and declare lower quality of life (Z=2.34; p=.02).
In terms of temperament traits, they are less brisk (Z=2.71; p=.007) and endure (Z=3.73; p<.001), more emotionally reactive (Z=-4,53; p<.001) and present higher level of perseverance (Z=-3; p=.002). Findings from the presented research suggest that more attention should be paid to individuals with greater emotional reactivity and perseverance and those with evening preference because they might be vulnerable to lower sleep quality. Monitoring of sleeping problems is also needed because they might potentially cause stress and reduce the quality of life.
On the other hand, disturbed sleep may also result from stress experienced by an individual. Keywords: sleep quality, academic athletes, stress, temperament, chronotype, quality of life Identification of factors predicting athletes’ sport commitment: Capabilities of team unity and collective efficacy Kai Yamada (Hosei University) The sport commitment of athletes is defined as “the desire and resolve to continue participation in a sport over time” (Scanlan et al., 1993). In recent years, commitment has emerged to be associated with athletes’ participation and competitive level and success (e.g., Chu and Wang, 2012), referred to as a supported factor in understanding their behavioral motivation and perseverance in competitive sports (e.g., Scanlan et al., 2013).
Hence, promoting sport commitment is an optimal strategy for increasing athletes’ serious attitude toward daily training and competitive performance. However, few studies have investigated methods promoting the athletes’ sport commitment from the perspective of their team belonging. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine the predictive capability of team unity and collective efficacy such as effective factors supporting sport teams’ interaction against competitive sport commitment.
A total of 206 university athletes (average age 19.62 years, SD = .82) from 32 different sport types completed a survey questionnaire. The questionnaire sheet comprised the Unity Scale for Sports Teams (Yamada et al., 2013), the Psychological Performance CE Score 514Posters Thursday July 13th (Arai, 2011), and the Sport Commitment Scale (Hagiwara and Isogai, 2014). Correlation analysis indicated that relationships between team unity, collective efficacy, and sport commitment were positive (r = .37―.51, all p < .001).
Additionally, covariance structure analysis showed sufficient goodness of fit indices (χ2 (2) = 3.39, n.s.; GFI = .99, AGFI = .96, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .06), and team unity (β = .27) and collective efficacy (β = .28) also predicted sport commitment (both p < .001). These results support the benefits of developing and enhancing team unity and collective efficacy. Further, increasing these factors may be associated with encouraging athletes’ sport commitment.
Thus, interventions using team building will be an effective approach in promoting athletes’ sport commitment. Keywords: sport commitment, unity, collective efficacy, team Subjective assessment of exercise and physical activity (IPAQ-LF) in Japanese elementary school teachers and their relation to mental health: Testing a hypothetical model to management with stress experiences Junichi Nishida (Kindai University), Hiroshi Matsumoto (Mukogawa Woman's Univirsity) The main purpose of the present study was to verify the relationship in a hypothetical model proposing that the amount of exercise and physical activities had would influence changes in that teacher’s mental health through the mediating concept of the teacher’s stress experiences. In this study, we refer to psychological stress model by Lazarus & Folkman (1984).
A questionnaire survey was conducted with full-time teachers (n=300) working in public schools by using the GHQ28 and the International Physical Activity Questionnaire Japanese version (IPAQ-LF). Participants included 93 men (40.3%) and 138 women (59.7%), the age range 22-63 years, and mean age was 39.8 years. The level of mental health assessed by using the GHQ was examined.
Results indicated that 42% of the participants had some problems. Especially, scores of “somatic symptoms” and “anxiety and insomnia” were significantly higher in female teachers, compared to male teachers. Subsequently, the amount of exercise and physical activities was examined using IPAQ-LF.
The mean amount of total physical activities was 2451.4 MET-minutes per week. Physical activities at workplaces accounted for approximately 65% of the total amount. In physical activity for “transportation” and “leisure” settings, the amount of exercise in male teachers was significantly larger than in female teachers.
Moreover, effects of exercise and physical activities were examined using multiple regression analysis, which confirmed a model for female teachers in which a significant path was indicated from exercise and physical activities to “anxiety and insomnia”, as well as “social dysfunction”. Furthermore, a significant path was indicated from exercise and physical activities during housework and yard work to “anxiety and insomnia”, “social dysfunction”, and “depression”, mediated by the sense of being busy. This study reconfirmed the deterioration of mental health in elementary school teachers.
Keywords: exercise, mental health, GHQ, IPAQ-LF, teacher Development of a positive psychological capital scale for athletes Eunji Kim, JungHun Heo, Jeong Dog Sul (Chungang University, Korea), Jooyoung Park (Soongsil University, Korea), SangKook Park, Young Ho Lee (Chungang University, Korea) This study was designed to develop a positive psychological capital scale (PPCS) for athletes. Through literature review and focus group interviews, six theoretical sub-factors that are self-efficiency, optimism, hope, resilience, mental toughness, and psychological skills, were developed for application in the real sports environments. Based on the six sub-factors, 138 preliminary items were created and reduced into 60 items via the content validity and face validity.
All of items were composed of 5 points Likert scale. Item analysis were conducted with 288 athletes. At the result of exploratory factor analysis with 55 items, 43 items in the six sub- factors at first were extracted.
The factor loadings ranged from .416 to .770, the overall explanatory variable 515Posters Thursday July 13th was 55.62%, and the Cronbach′⍺ was .953. Additionally, a confirmatory factor analysis for validation was conducted and as a result, the suitability was confirmed as follows : Q(χ²/df)=1.641, RMSEA=.047, CFI=.945, IFI=.946, GFI=.907, RMR=.030. Finally, there are 23 questions including 4 items of self-efficiency, 4 items of optimism, 3 items of hope, 4 items of resilience, 4 items of mental strength, and 4 items of psychological skills.
In the validation process, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and predictive validity were analyzed. First, for the convergent validity test, a correlation analysis using Korean positive psychological resource scale was conducted. As a result, the correlation coefficients showed good value from .305 to .551, therefore convergent validity was verified.
Next, for discriminant validity test, the correlation coefficient and the dispersion extraction index were checked. In all the 6 factors, the average variance extracted index value was higher than the coefficient of determination. Finally, for the predictive validity test, the confirmatory factor analysis and regression analysis were conducted using perceived performance / performance ability / athlete satisfaction scale.
Keywords: resilience, positive psychological capital, self-efficiency Preliminary analysis of the psychometric properties of the perceived social support scale in mexican young athletes Julio Román Martínez-Alvarado, Luis Horacio Aguiar Palacios, Ana Gabriela Magallanes Rodríguez, Agustín Negrete Cortés, Alfonso Sámano Sánchez, Angel Alejandro Herrada Garibo (Universidad Autónoma de Baja California, Escuela de Ciencias de La Salud) Perceived social support consists in an exchange of affective resources between at least two people where there is a provider and a receiver in order to improve the well-being of the person who receives the support (Shumaker & Brownell, 1984). It allows to face and overcome in a easier way the different circumstances that the athlete can experience in a competition. The support network perceived by the athlete is composed of both people directly related to the sport (e.g.
coach, teammates) and people off the sport but who have close relations with the athlete (e.g. parents, siblings or friends). Perceived social support focused on sport is related to other psychological aspects such as the management of stressful situations, the process involved in sports injuries, Burnout syndrome, motivation or self-confidence.
Recent findings show that support provided by the coach, parents and peers plays an important role in forming a positive or negative sports experience in young people (Sheridan, Coffee & Lavallee, 2014). The objective of this study was to translate and validate the scale of social support perceived in young Mexican athletes. The sample consisted of 889 young Mexican athletes of both sexes and aged between 12 and 18 years (M = 14.9, SD = 1.67).
The factorial structure of the scale was studied by the Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA); while internal consistency was assessed through Cronbach's alpha. The CFA results showed an adequate adjustment of the unifactorial model (TLI = .95, IFI = .99, CFI = .99 and RMSEA = .08). As for the internal consistency a Cronbach alpha of .85 is shown which is acceptable.
The results provided preliminary support for the use of the perceived social support scale to measure this construct with young Mexican athletes. Keywords: social support, team sports, psychometric properties The consequences of positive outward emotional reactions in table tennis Julian Fritsch (University of Thessaly), Diana Zerdila (Democritus University of Thrace), Yannis Tzioumakis, Alexander T. Latinjak (University of Girona), Anne-Marie Elbe (University of Copenhagen), Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis (University of Thessaly) Research on the relationship between emotions and sport performance has almost exclusively focused on its subjective experience, neglecting its behavioral component (e.g., gestures, verbalizations, or facial expressions).
Qualitative findings suggest that positive outward emotional reactions enhance one’s own and 516Posters Thursday July 13th diminish the opponent’s performance (e.g., Sève, Ria, Poizat, Saury, & Durand, 2007). However, initial studies looking at specific manifestations of outward emotional reactions such as gestures (Moesch, Kenttä, Bäckström, & Mattsson, 2016) or verbalizations (Zourbanos et al., 2015) have shown inconsistent findings. Based on these inconsistencies, the main purpose of this study is to shed more light onto the impact of outward emotional reactions.
Given the need to study sport performance in naturalistic settings, 15 table tennis matches during the final tournament of the Greek youth championship were recorded, whereby two cameras were positioned diagonally behind the table each catching the movement of one player. The analysis of videos consisted of coding the reaction after every point into positive, negative, or neutral by two independent raters. Furthermore, each played point was classified as a winner or error of player A or player B, allowing to draw on temporally closely related performance indicators.
Based on these ratings, a sequential analysis will be employed to assess the transitional probability for positive outward emotional reactions. This type of analysis can indicate whether a certain kind of point is more or less likely to follow a positive outward emotional reaction than only by chance. The findings are expected to add to the growing research looking at outward emotional reactions in the sport context.
Keywords: emotion, sequential analysis, naturalistic setting The effects of acute exercise on executive function in children of preterm birth Jui-Ti Nien, Tai-Fen Song, Chien-Heng Chu, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Recent studies have shown that acute exercise improves executive function, a higher level of cognitive function. The positive impacts are not only observed in healthy populations, but also extend to special populations, including children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. However, whether acute exercise affects executive function in children of preterm birth remains unknown.
The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of acute exercise on executive function among children of preterm birth. Twenty children (mean age = 10.05, SD = 2.33 years) were recruited and experienced both control and exercise treatments using a counterbalanced order. Children in the exercise treatment performed a single bout of 30 minutes of cycling done at moderate intensity, while the participants in the control group sat in chairs and watched cartoons for 30 minutes.
The numerical Stroop test, which involves measuring the inhibitory process of executive function, was performed immediately after each treatment. A two-way ANOVA analysis revealed that the children in the exercise treatment had shorter reaction times in relation to neural and incongruent conditions, compared to those that underwent the control treatment. The findings suggest that acute exercise done at moderate intensity for 30 minutes could facilitate the inhibition aspect of executive function in children of preterm birth.
Accordingly, it is recommended that children should engage in physical activities during periods of school recess. Further studies are suggested in order to account for the possibility of obtaining different results with an increased sample size, as well as to examine the types of executive functions, and/or the modularity of the exercise. Keywords: exercise, executive function, children with preterm birth, stroop test The relationship between body and fitness related self-conscious emotions and goal orientations Judit Boda-Ujlaky (University of Physical Education), Linda Bucsánszki (Gáspár Károli University of the Reformed Church) Our pilot study aims to investigate the relationship between goal orientations and body and fitness- related self-conscious emotions, i.e.
shame, guilt, pride and hubris. Shame is an extremely painful emotion, that attacks the self through cognitive appraisal, while guilt is a negative emotion after a certain behavior – or an unfulfilled behavior. Pride is the basis of healthy self-esteem, while hubris is the accompanying emotion of 517Posters Thursday July 13th narcissism, i.e.
shame and hubris is about the worth of the whole self, whereas guilt and pride is about the worth a certain behavior. Pride and hubris has a positive, while shame and guilt has a negative valence. Goal orientation can be task- or ego-orientation, depending on what attributions and sources of success and failure the individual applies.
In the study we administered BSE-FIT and TEOSQ questionnaires. There were 160 participants (104 females, 58 males, age mean=28 years, sports experience mean=14 years), with different levels of sporting activities form regular exercising (3 times a week) to Olympic Games winner athletes. In this sample task orientation correlated negatively with body and fitness-related shame (r = - 0,237**), guilt (r=- 0,260**) and positively with pride (r=0,397**) and hubris (r = 0,279**), while ego orientation correlated positively with hubris (r= 0,171**).
Level of athletic experience did not show any differences in our results. No gender differences were found. The results show that it is the valence and not the direction of the emotions is important, moreover, as other research show, the lack of task orientation is important factor in performance, not the presence of ego orientation.
Further investigation is needed to be able to clarify the role of the sport types (aestethic or weight group sports). Keywords: self-conscious emotions, goal orientation The effects of long-term soccer or futsal training on the development of perceptual skills during passing Luca Oppici (Victoria University, Australia), Derek Panchuk (Movement Science, Australian Institute of Sport (AIS); Victoria University, Australia), Fabio Serpiello (Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL), Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia), Damian Farrow (Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL), Victoria University, Australia; Movement Science, Australian Institute of Sport (AIS), Canberra, Australia) It is known that task constraints influence an individual’s coordination and the perceptual behaviour underpinning the execution of a movement. However, the long-term effect of task constraints on the development of perceptual skill is unclear.
In soccer and futsal, the passing skill requires players to divide their attention between the approaching ball and the behaviour of players around them. In this experiment, we examined the influence of extensive practice with domain-specific task constraints (i.e., equipment, rules) on the development of perceptual skill associated with the passing action in soccer and futsal by assessing players’ orientation of attention during passing. Soccer players (n=24, 13.6 ± 1.2 years old, 6.8 ± 1.2 years of experience) and futsal players (n=24, 13.6 ± 1.2 years old, 7.0 ± 1.6 years of experience) performed in modified games (5 v 5) while wearing an eye tracking device.
Orientation of attention was then classified into ball or player areas to compare the scanning behaviour of each group. The two groups developed different strategies to gather information about the ball and other players at different moments during the games. Futsal players had a higher scanning behaviour during ball reception and control (40% more ball-player attention alternations) while soccer players mainly scanned the environment when they were not in possession of the ball (25% more attention alternations).
Specifically, futsal players developed a strategy to control the ball while orienting their attention towards other players, which then resulted in more time to focus on other players. It was likely that the behaviour differences were promoted by extensive practice with a higher number of players in soccer and a higher game intensity with an easy-to-handle ball in futsal. This study provides new insights on the long term effects of practicing with specific task constraints.
Keywords: attention orientation, performance, passing skill, soccer, futsal 518Posters Thursday July 13th Professor learning climate vs. student learning orientation as moderators of the impact of sport motivation on the importance and utility of physical education perception Paloma Escamilla Fajardo, Juan Manuel Núñez Pomar, Ferran Calabuig Moreno, Vicente Prado Gascó (Universitat de València) We live in an eminently sedentary society, which causes a lot of physical and mental problems while increasing health costs. In addition, adolescence is consider to be the stage were more people decline the physical activity levels, most of this abandon is related with the Importance and Utility of Physical Education Perception (IUPEP) on school.
Literature suggest that IUPEP could be explained through Sport Motivation (SM). Although many studies had analyze this relation, no research considers the moderating effect that Professor Learning Climate (PLC) and Student Learning Orientation (SLO) could have simultaneously on this relation on adolescents. Therefore, the aims of the present research are both to analyze the impact of Sport Motivation on the Importance and Utility of Physical Education Perception, and to analyze the moderator effect of Professor Learning Climate and Student Learning Orientation on that relation.
This analyses was performed using the PROCESS macro (Hayes, 2013), designed for testing the moderation by directly assessing the significance of the indirect effect of the independent variable (X; SM) on the dependent variable (Y; IUPEP) through two moderators: PLC (M) and SLO (W). Participants were 267 adolescents from 8 classes of a public school on Valencia, aged between 11 to 18 years old (Mean=14.04 ± 1.64), 52.8 % boys. Results suggest that Sport Motivation explains 20% of the Importance and Utility of Physical Education Perception.
In addition, a moderating effect of Professor Learning Climate but not of Student Learning Orientation is observed. Keywords: sport motivation, utility of physical education perception Cardiovascular capacity, weight status and peer relations in students of 5th and 6th grade Juan Gregorio Fernandez-Bustos, Ricardo Cuevas Campos, Irene González-Martí, David Zamorano García (Universdidad de Castilla La Mancha) It is known as the relationship between equals influences participation on physical activity. Additionally, both poor motor skills and obesity have sometimes been associated with social difficulties.
However, the role of physical fitness in these relationships has hardly been studied. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to establish the relationship between cardiovascular fitness, weight status and peer relations of fifth and sixth grade Spanish students. A total of one hundred and thirty Spanish aged 10 to 12 completed the Course Navette test and the Questionnaire of Conduct and Social Experiences in Class, CESC.
Datas of weight and height were collected. The results showed a positive relationship between cardiovascular capacity and positive status and prosociality, while negative with victimization. On the other hand, a higher BMI was related to victimization behaviors and lower cardiovascular capacity.
These results show that children with better physical fitness are more valued and better accepted in the class-group, whereas the obese are more rejected, showing the importance of everything related to the physical in the social relations in children of Primary Education. Keywords: peer relation, weight status, cardiovascular fitness, primary education Study + training. Dual career at the University of Seville Juan Gavala González, Patricia Jaenes-Amarillo, , Iván Guirola Gomez (Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona) The aim of this study is to analyze the facilitator s and barriers in the arrangement of academic and athletic aspects in high performance athletes, following the lines of research and the models of Stambulova and cols (2014) and collaborators on the conciliation of academic and sports aspects (dual career).
The sample is made up of six teen high level athletes (considered by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports of Spain) of different sports specialties participated that in turn develop their academic careers at the University of 519Posters Thursday July 13th Seville A qualitative study is proposed framed holistic car eer development model, by means of semi- structured interviews. A content analysis of the in terviews was conducted in five levels from the theoretical model used: athletic level, psychologic al level, psychological level, academic/vocational level and financial level. Thes e categories were analyzed in terms of two others: facilitators and barriers.
Support to High Performance Athletes at the Univers ity of Seville, in particular, and in Spanish universities, in general, they are well below the m inimums that are accredited in other European universities. Athletes show facilitators and barrie rs in sports, psychological, psychosocial, academic and financial levels. Keywords: dual career, facilitators, barriers, sport, education José María Cagigal’s impact on the 3rd Psychology Of Sport World Congress in 1973 Juan Carlos Fernandez-Truan (Universidad Pablo de Olavide), Virginia Cagigal de Gregorio, Sofia Cagigal de Gregorio Sport Psychology in Spain starts up with José María Cagigal (1928-1983), undeniable leading figure of Physical Education and Sport, both nationally and internationally; he also invented what is nowadays known as Sport Humanism.
His premature and tragic death left all the educative and social sport change in our country unfinished. Cagigal, who was a pioneer of Sport Philosophy and Sport Psychology, dignified Physical Education and Sport, as an intellectual phenomenon to which he contributed by foundamenting and consolidating it institutionally, against technological tendency leading that historical period. However, all his production was more valued and understood outside our borders than inside, what can be observed throughout his great international prestige, while inside he had to deal with great misunderstanding and several obstacles.
Most sport technicians from that historical period never understood his contribution to Philosophy, Pedagogy and Psychology, as they were more occupied on stereotyped teaching. But outside the limits, he got great professional recognition, due to the high quality and profundity of his thinking, what is expressed on the great number of international organizations of Physical Education and Sport to which he not only belonged to but he also was a founder and a very active member. Among all of them, we would like to single out the International Society of Sport Psychology, to which he belonged to from 1965 as a founder under Italian Dr.
Ferruccio Antonelli Presidence, participating in the first World Congress that took place at Rome that year. In 1969, at the General Assembly of the ISSP in Washington (USA), he was elected member of the ISSP Managing Council, a post he held until 1977. At Madrid’s National Institute for Physical Education and Sport (INEF), that he had founded and was Director of until 1977, he organized the IIIrd International Sport Psychology Congress.
Keywords: history, Cagigal, world congresses, sports psychology The prediction of empowering motivational climate on coach-athlete relationship: The mediating effect of psychological needs in high school basketball Jo-Yun Chen, Li-Kang Chi (National Taiwan Normal University) The purpose of this study was to examine the relationships among empowering motivational climate, coach-athlete relational and basic psychology needs among high school basketball players. Moreover, the mediating effect of basic psychological needs between empowering motivational climate and coach-athlete relationship was also examined. The participants were 122 high school basketball players (M=16.94 age, SD= 0.81) recruited from 12 high schools in Taiwan.
After received the informed consent, participants were requested to complete Chinese-version of Empowering and Disempowering Motivational Climate Questionnaire, Psychological Need Satisfaction Questionnaire and Coach-Athlete Relationship Questionnaire. The results of Pearson correlation indicated that empowering motivational climate was positively correlated to coach-athlete relationship (r=.65), competence (r=.35) and relatedness (r=.44); coach-athlete relationship is positively associated with competence and relatedness. Their correlations were .18 and .50 respectively.
520Posters Thursday July 13th Furthermore, the relationship between empowering motivational climate and coach-athlete relationship was partially mediated by relatedness. Overall, according to the findings of current study, coaches are suggested to create empowering motivational climate and fulfill the basic psychological needs of athletes, so that elevate the quality of coach-athlete relationship. The implication and application of the findings were discussed.
Keywords: bootstrapping, competence, relatedness A qualitative study on the psychological process of excellent performance of Japanese athletes in international competitions held in Japan Joyo Sasaki (Japan Institute of Sports Sciences), Mayu Okuno (Kurume University), Kenta Yonemaru, Atsushi Suzuki, Kunimune Fukui, Yasuhisa Tachiya (Japan Institute of Sports Sciences) The purpose of the present study was to qualitatively investigate the psychological processes that occur before and during the excellent performances of Japanese athletes in international competitions held in Japan. Five retired Japanese athletes (1 male and 4 females) participated in a semi-structured interview. The participants had experiences of participating in international competitions held in Japan, and performing well in the competitions.
Additionally, they had experiences of participating in international competitions held in other countries, which enabled them to talk about the characteristics of international competitions held in Japan by direct comparison with those held in other countries. In the interview, questions concerning the differences they perceived between Japanese and international competitions. The taped and transcribed interviews were analyzed using the modified grounded theory approach (M-GTA: Kinoshita, 2007).
The analysis yielded an integrated process model consisting of the following 16 categories: (1) a larger audience than usual, (2) more media persons than usual, (3) experiencing a sense of responsibility, (4) a tense atmosphere created by the team staff, (5) futile efforts, (6) support from credible coaches, (7) flexible responses to problems, (8) controlling the media for their own convenience, (9) assertive explorations for ways to feel refreshed, (10) feeling motivated by seeing Japanese people, (13) regulating oneself by using autosuggestions in one’s own way, (14) recovering from perceived urgency, (15) entering a “challenger’s” state of mind, and (16) being inspired by the cheers from the audience. Based on those results, it was considered that the process leading to high performance included not only positive events but also negative events, and the flexibility and adaptability of strategies for coping with the difficulties, which determine success of failure in the games. Keywords: coping skill, home advantage, home disadvantage Athlete’s skills with oneself.
Definition and classification José-Carlos Caracuel Tubío (University of Seville), Joan Riera Riera (INEFC) The aim is to better define some concepts from the field of Sports Psychology. We present the concept an athlete’s skills with oneself as an alternative to the inaccurately called psychological or mental skills, suggesting a succinct definition of mind as a process and proposing a functional classification for these skills: skills with oneself from interoceptive information, proprioceptive information, linking of affects, assessment of the environment and personal reflection. Lastly, we provide a representation for the interaction between the different sources of self-knowledge.
Keywords: keywords: skills with oneself, mind, self-knowledge 521Posters Thursday July 13th Outcomes of the positive coach-athlete relationship: A qualitative study in youth basketball teams José Manuel Sánchez Galán (Universidad Francisco de Vitoria), Alberto Lorenzo Calvo (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid), Sergio Lorenzo Jiménez Sáiz (Universidad Europea de Madrid), Jorge Lorenzo Calvo (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid) The coach-athlete relationship has been identified as the core of the learning process in sports (Isoard- Gauther, Trouilloud, Gustafsson, & Guillet-Descas, 2016). There are enough evidences for the impact this unique relationship has in the development of both members of the dyad (Erickson & Côté, 2015). The specific literature showed two kind of results of the relationship: a) personal consequences, b) and performance consequences (Jowett & Poczwardowski, 2007).
Jowett and Poczwardowski (2007) stablished the effective relationship (positive personal consequences) as the desirables ones, as far as the coach and the athletes involved in those relationships report higher psychological well-being and task commitment. Grounded in the holistic approach of the coach-athlete relationship, this work aims to understand the outcomes of effective coach-athletes relationships in coaches and youth basketball players. The study was conducted through the qualitative methodology.
The sample (N=24) were selected deliberately (discriminating variables such as the team’s sportive level, coach characteristics, duration and quality of the relationship). In-depth semi-structured interview was used for data collection. The results provide initial evidence of the bond between the positive components of the dyad and results such as players’ personal growth or sport performance.
The first one arises because the coach assumes the role of mentor of young athletes. This finding is relevant because it underlines the potential of the coach in the positive youth development. With regard to sport performance, the results show that it is mainly produced due to the satisfaction and psychological well being of both the coach and the player.
Overall, the results highlighted the relation between the positive components (i.e., closeness, confidence, respect) of the dyad and the positive outcomes for both members of the dyad. Keywords: coach-athlete relationship, youth basketball, positive youth development Are careers assistances programs effective in Spain? Athletes' perceptions about difficulties to carry out a dual career Rubén Moreno, José L.
Chamorro (European University of Madrid) A relatively recent concept that has captured the attention of researchers and sports organisations (USOC, 2012; Wylleman, De Brandt & Defruyt, 2017), and political institutions (EU Guidelines on Dual Careers of Athletes, 2012) is the concept of dual careers (DC). In Spain, the Spanish Olympic Committee (COE) established a career assistance program (Athletes’ Advice and Information Bureau) in 2007, and two years later, a similar service was created by the National Sports Council (CSD; Torregrosa & González,2013). The aim of this study was to explore if athletes enrolled in Spanish Career Assistance Programs (SCAP) have lower perceptions of the difficulty to carry out a DC than those who are not enrolled in these programs.
Participants were classified in: a) 8 Olympic level athletes which were professionals before the implementation of SCAP (codified as PRE); b) 8 Olympic level athletes enrolled in SCAP (codified as POST); and c) 8 professional football players not enrolled in SCAP. Interviews guides were created according to the Lifespan Model of Athletes' Careers (Wylleman et al.,2013), focusing in academic/laboral level. An interpretive thematic analysis using inductive and deductive reasoning was employed to analyse the interviews (Guest, MacQueen, & Namey, 2012).
Results suggest that athletes POST were not perceived more resourceful regarding to combine sport and academic careers from those athletes of the other groups. First, all of participants identified that universities and educational institutions do not offer flexible curricula. Second, athletes POST as well as football players were not feel more resourceful in relation to time management.
Third, athletes PRE showed a higher intrinsic motivation than the other athletes, probably because they received less rewards for their sporting achievements than the other 522Posters Thursday July 13th two groups. Forth, athletes POST perceived that they did not receive the enough information about the possibilities that SCAP could offer they. Keywords: dual careers, career assistance programs, career development Physical fitness and self-perceptions in teenagers José Guilherme (Universidade do Algarve), Conde Monserrat (GCU), Carla Martins (ISMAT), Luís Faísca, Cristina Nunes, Saúl Jesus (Universidade do Algarve) Self-perceptions seem to be influenced by physical fitness and gender in teenaged athletes.
However, less is known about how this constructs interact in non-athletes teenagers, from both rural and urban backgrounds. The aim of this cross-sectional study was to investigate the associations between physical fitness and self- perceptions (self-concept, global self-esteem and body self-image) in teenagers. The European Portuguese versions of Fitnessgram, figures rating scale (Tiggeman&Barret,1998), Rosenberg self-esteem scale, and physical self-description questionnaire (Marsh,1994) were administered to a sample of 119 teenagers, aged between 13 and 16 years old, selected from the population of students of the public schools of Albufeira (Portugal).
There were significant statistical differences (p <0.05) between the mean scores of physical fitness and physical self-concept. Additionally, greater scores of global self-esteem tended to correspond to greater scores of physical fitness (positive, strong correlation). No statistical significant associations were detected between physical fitness and body image.
Physical fitness was associated to both physical self-concept and global self-esteem in this sample of Portuguese teenagers. Keywords: physical fitness and self-perceptions in teenagers Burnout: An intervention performed in a handball coach Jose Flores Rodríguez (Universidad de Sevilla), José Manuel Martín Migez (C.M.D. San Juan), Francisco José Vela Rubio (Ayuntamiento Los Molares), José Manuel Martínez Rodríguez (Masvitae) Burnout is considered a three-dimensional syndrome.
With respect to sports the most relevant dimensions are: physical / emotional exhaustion (PEE), reduced sense of accomplishment (RSA), and sport devaluation (SD). Due to its influence on sports performance, there has been a descriptive investigation of burnout, but few investigations are focused on intervention or prevention of the syndrome in athletes and / or coaches. So considering the dynamic systems paradigm (which performance is a consequence of the relationship of interdependence established between the different intervener elements), we present an intervention performed in a handball coach who presented burnout symptoms.
The objetive was to reduce burnout syndrome in this coach. For this research a male handball coach that trains players between 14 and 16 years old was asked to answer the Spanih versión of the Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ), measuring the burnout syndrome before and after the intervention. The intervention was performed during the season and during 9 weeks.
He dealt with the following aspects of the training process: objectives reformulation, training load reduction (volume and intensity), coach-player interaction changes (reduction of direct command), team´s tactics changes (involving players), and the training session structure(more dynamic and funny). The mean scores obtained for each of the three dimensions were: -Pretest: 3.4 in PEE, 4.0 in RSA and 4.0 in SP. -Postest: 1.8 in PEE, 2.8 in RSA and 2.4 in SP.
Keywords: burnout, intervention, coach, team sport, handball, dynamic systems 523Posters Thursday July 13th Choking under pressure in sport competition: An exploratory study based on coping “profiles” in a sample of Portuguese athletes José Fernando Cruz, Rui Manuel Sofia, Joana Maria Osório (School of Psychology, University of Minho, Portugal) The pressure of sport competition can often lead to performance failure, even among the most experienced and successful athletes. Choking under pressure can be defined as “the occurrence of inferior performance despite striving and incentives for superior performance” (Baumeister, 1986, p. 361).
In sport competition, choking is often associated with high levels of perceived threat and competitive anxiety (e.g., Maxwell et al., 2006; Nieuwenhuys et al., 2016; Nieuwenhuys &, Oudejans, 2010). Consequently, studies on this phenomenon should focus on how athletes cope with threat and anxiety. Indeed, coping processes are essential to understand how athletes deal with anxiety and pressure during competition (Dias et al., 2011, 2012).
Therefore, the main goal of this study was to explore the role of coping processes on the tendency to choke under pressure, as well as on anxiety and threat perception. For this purpose, a sample of 121 basketball players (43.1% females), ranging between the ages of 14 and 25 years (M = 16.59), completed self-report measures of the tendency to choke, threat appraisals, competitive anxiety and dispositional coping. A cluster analysis showed four different coping “profiles” consistent with previous studies (Doron et al.
2014; Gaudreau et al., 2004), namely: high copers, low copers, adaptive copers, and avoidant copers. Overall, results generally showed that high and avoidant copers were more likely to choke under pressure and showed higher levels of competitive anxiety and threat appraisals. These findings highlight the importance of analysing coping profiles instead of strategies in isolation (Doron et al., 2014) to further understand choking under pressure, as well as anxiety, in sport contexts.
From a practical standpoint, these results suggest the relevance of promoting more adaptive and effective coping strategies to deal with the pressure of competition as an important pathway to prevent episodes of choking. Keywords: choking under pressure, competitive anxiety, threat appraisals, coping strategies, sport competition SNK Learning System: a model of integral education through sport Jose Cela-Ranilla, Luis Marqués-Molías, Enric Barri-Vilardell (Rovira & Virgili University) Sport activity is a very good setting and a great opportunity to develop life skills, especially in first stages of life. In Spanish context, sport programs are out-of-school activities commonly chosen by parents for their children.
This fact is especially relevant considering the problems currently experienced by our children in terms of health, drop-out, disruptive behaviors, etc. Our society is giving response with sport programs whose use and management are at least questionable in several terms: philosophy, objectives' definition, early specialization, wrong management of competitiveness, coaches’ formation, parents’ perspectives, etc. In our context, many of these sport programs are not oriented towards the integral education of our youth.
The current poster presents the SNK Learning System as a general framework/model to design and implement sport programs whose main concern is educational quality understood in terms of integral development, rather than the strictly sport skills. The presented model consists of 5 basic elements: Philosophy, Individual assets, Learning contents, R+D+I and Transfer process. The model arises from a theoretical perspective and a practical implementation.
The theoretical part takes the positive youth development programs as a general umbrella, from Bronfenbrenner (1979) to Gould & Carson (2008), Petitpas et al. (2005) and the late works by Holt (2016); the practical one is based on the implementation of a specific program (in soccer) developed in the Spanish context in which all agents are becoming active participants in the model construction. This framework could also be used as a guide to develop assessment and certification processes in terms of educational quality.
In sum, SNK Learning System aims to influence in the improvement of the educational quality of sport programs by promoting, strengthening and consolidating the idea of integral educational as a core requirement of these wherever its context of application. 524Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: sport programs, integral education, positive youth development, out-of-school activities, life skills Psychological evaluation and perception of violence in football referees of lower categories Jose Manuel Bustamante Castaño (Bustamante Psicología), Jorge Martínez Ojeda (COPAO Almería), Nuria Santana Rubio (Clinirehab), Francisco José Trillo Padilla (Universidad de Almería) This project is focused on violent acts on referees that usually happen on sport fields every weekend. Too many cases are known in which referees, coaches, players of the opposing team or even team-mates are insulted or booed from the stands by parents acting like coaches who discuss, comment and demand all people around them have to do.
It has been applied “Perceptual Questionnaire of Violence on Football Referees” to 150 members of Andalusian Technical Committee of Football Referees in the province of Almería. The study participants selected age between 14 and 26 years and belong to different categories: Third Division, Senior Honorary Division and Andalusian, Official and Auxiliary First Division. This study aims to investigate the perception of violence on football referees through four subscales: verbal violence, physical violence, belief in violence and perceived fear.
On one hand, the results suggest an excessive verbal violence and, on the other hand, levels of fear, few violent physical situations and a moderate perception of violence. Keywords: violence, referee, football, fear and perception Quantifying external focus of attention in sailing by means of action sport cameras Joost Pluijms (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, MOVE Research Institute Amsterdam) The aim of the current study was twofold: (1) to validate the use of action sport cameras for quantifying focus of visual attention in sailing and (2) to apply this method to examine whether an external focus of attention is associated with better performance in upwind sailing. To test the validity of this novel quantification method, we first calculated the agreement between gaze location measures and head orientation measures in 13 sailors sailing upwind during training regattas using a head mounted eye tracker.
The results confirmed that for measuring visual focus of attention in upwind sailing, the agreement for the two measures was high (intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) = 0.97) and the 95% limits of agreement were acceptable (between −8.0% and 14.6%). In a next step, we quantified the focus of visual attention in sailing upwind as fast as possible by means of an action sport camera. We captured sailing performance, operationalised as boat speed in the direction of the wind, and environmental conditions using a GPS, compass and wind meter.
Four trials, each lasting 1 min, were analysed for 15 sailors each, resulting in a total of 30 upwind speed trials on port tack and 30 upwind speed trials on starboard tack. The results revealed that in sailing – within constantly changing environments – the focus of attention is not a significant predictor for better upwind sailing performances. This implicates that neither external nor internal foci of attention was per se correlated with better performances.
Rather, relatively large interindividual differences seem to indicate that different visual attention strategies can lead to similar performance outcomes. Keywords: sailing, visual attention, eye-head orientation, motor control, environmental conditions Roles of competence and sport anxiety on well-being among table tennis players JoonYoung Lee, Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu, Tao Zhang (University of North Texas) Previous studies have emphasized that sport athletes’ well-being should be given important consideration as their athletic performance (Davis & Jowett, 2014; Lundqvist & Sandin, 2014). Given that well-being has played an important role in engaging athletes in sports, Seligman (2014) proposed a new well-being PERMA 525Posters Thursday July 13th model (i.e., Positive Emotion, Engagement, Relationships, Meaning, and Accomplishments).
However, this new well-being framework has not been widely studied in sport settings. Purpose: To examine the contributions of perceived competence (competence satisfaction and competence frustration) and sport anxiety on table tennis players’ well-being based on the PERMA model. Methods: Participants were 254 table tennis players (Mage = 40.23, SD =18.24 years) from the United States (n = 185), China (n = 43), and other countries (n = 26) through a validated online survey.
Pearson product-moment correlations and multiple regressions were used to examine the relations among the study variables. Results: Correlation analyses indicated that competence satisfaction was positively related to well-being (r = .20 to .29, ps < .01), competence frustration was not significantly related to well-being (ps > .05). Sport Anxiety was negatively related to well-being (r = -.13 to -.15, ps < .05) except for engagement (p > .05).
Further, the regression analyses showed competence satisfaction was a positive predictor of each well-being component in positive emotion (β = .24, 8.4%), engagement (β = .32, 10.6%), relationships (β = .31, 10.6%), meaning (β = .29, 9.0%), accomplishments (β = .33, 12.8%), but competence frustration was a non-significant predictor of each well-being component. Lastly, sport anxiety was a negative predictor of accomplishments (β = -.15, 12.8%). Conclusions: Competence satisfaction was a significant predictor in all five domains in well-being.
This suggests that considering competence satisfaction is important when we try to improve athletes’ well-being. Keywords: competence, sport anxiety, well-being, table tennis The last straw: Doping behavior as maladaptive coping strategy Jolan Kegelaers, Paul Wylleman, Nicky Van Rossem (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) The last decade has seen a rise in social science studies trying to understand why athletes dope. Few studies however considered the impact of negative life events and considered doping as a maladaptive coping strategy.
Our study used the metatheory of resilience (Richardson, 2002) to understand how life events influenced the doping-decision of athletes. Narrative techniques were used to analyse the life stories of three world-class Belgian athletes who admitted to doping use during their career. Results show that at least two of the athletes recalled specific events that led to a disruption in their psychosocial wellbeing.
The athletes perceived their decision to use doping as a direct response to these events. This study highlights the function doping can have as a coping mechanism. These findings provide important considerations for current anti- doping strategies.
Keywords: performance-enhancing drugs, resilience, negative life events, transitions Motivation factors for the practice of pole sport: applications for management Carmen-Gloria Ortiz-Saldaña, Jesús Fernández-Gavira, Jerónimo García-Fernández, Antonio-Jesús Sánchez- Oliver, Moisés Grimaldi-Puyana (Universidad de Sevilla) The practice of Pole Sport, although relying on a minority as a recreational activity, has increased exponentially in recent years (Whitehead & Kurzel, 2009). The present work aims to expose the main reasons that lead athletes to practice Pole Sport in order to a better manage of the centers where the sport is taught. For this purpose, the Spanish adaptation of Celis-Merchán questionnaire (2006) of the Scale of Measurement of Reasons for Physical Activity-Revised (Ryan's, Frederick, Rubio and Sheldon, 1997) was used.
This instrument measures the reasons of sports practice in five dimensions (appearance, competition, enjoyment, fitness and social function) through 30 items (Likert 1 to 7). Taking into account that the universe of practitioners in Andalusia is approximately 600 people, through the Survio online software, the questionnaire was distributed to all athletes of the "Esther & Clara Academy", the school with the most athletes in Andalusia (322). A response was obtained from 85 athletes, of whom 80 were women and five men.
The sample studied had an error of ± 10% for a 95% confidence level (Z = 1.96). The SPSS 22.0 statistical program was used to perform 526Posters Thursday July 13th descriptive analyzes, exploratory factorial, and reliability. The results obtained show that the factor "enjoyment" was the main motivational factor for the practice of this sport, refuting the study of Escarti and Cervello (2008) and Martínez (2003), as well as the data of the Survey of sports habits in Spain of the year 2015 which studied the sport factors motivations in a general way.
Despite this discordance, we find authors who agree with the results obtained in this work (Frederick and Schuster, 2003). Keywords: pole sport, motivational factors, management Constraining your actions with internal focus of attention? Evidence from event-related brain potentials Lin Yu, Zhijian Huang, Thomas Schack Previous studies have shown external focus (focusing on the effect of movement) was more useful than internal focus (focusing on movement)in motor skill performance and learning.
The Constrained Action Hypothesis(CAH) was proposed to explain such phenomena, which claimed focusing on movement consciously would impair motor planning and control. Several behavioral studies corresponded with the hypothesis, but few studies tested it with neurophysiological methods. In this study, movement-related potentials were used to examine the hypothesis in dart throwing task.
18 right-handed novices (mean age=20. 31; SD=1. 52; 10 females) were assigned randomly to either internal or external group.
Volunteers in different groups received different verbal instructions before each block. The experiment contained 11 blocks (10 practice blocks and 1 retention block) and each block included 10 shots. The shot followed the “S1-S2” paradigm and the inter- stimulus interval was 4000 ms.
Motor performance (scores) and EEG signals were recorded while they were playing. The EEG signals were analyzed off-line by using EEGLab toolbox in Matlab. After artifacts removing, filtering and average, the Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) was obtained.
The criteria for EEG analysis followed the previous study (Froemer, R., et al., 2012). Behavioral results showed the external group performed better than the internal group. The accuracy of the external group was higher than the internal group.
However, the neurophysiological results showed that the average amplitude of the late CNV component (time-locked to S2), which indicated motor planning and preparing, was no significant difference between internal and external groups. The results revealed that external focus was beneficial to novices during motor learning and the motor planning was not impaired by focusing internally. We suggest future research could use other movement-related potentials or other brain imaging techniques to verify the CAH.
Keywords: Focus of Attention (FOA), motor planning; motor learning, constrained action hypothesis, Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) "Put the ball in the basket" – The paradox of shooting three-point shots in basketball Ronnie Lidor (Wingate Institute) The purpose of the current two-phase study was to examine whether shooting success was higher in three-point shots taken free from defense compared to three-point shots taken under defensive pressure. In Phase 1, 97 elite basketball players and 12 coaches were interviewed on various aspects related to three-point shots in basketball. In Phase 2, the shooting accuracy of 378 three-point shots (145 shots made under defensive pressure and 233 free shots) was analyzed.
The shots were taken by guards who played for the best four teams in the professional basketball league in Israel. The shots were collected from the 2013-2014 season. Accuracy of shots was analyzed according to a number of factors, among them the phase of the season when the game was played.
Chi-square analyses were used to analyze the overall shooting accuracy of shots taken free from defense and those taken under defensive pressure. In addition, binomial tests and a logistic regression were performed. Data that emerged from the interviews with the players revealed that the players preferred to take the three-point shots when they were free from defense.
Surprisingly, data analyses revealed 527Posters Thursday July 13th that accuracy of shooting was higher under defensive-pressure conditions (53.6%) than under free-of-defense conditions (29.6%). This paradoxical finding, namely that the rate of shooting success was higher when the shooter performed under pressure, was indicated in most of the analyzed situations. The findings are discussed by the Distraction Theory.
This asserts that when players shoot the ball under free-from-defense situations, they start paying attention to irrelevant environmental cues, and therefore perform poorly. Practical implications for players and coaches in basketball are proposed, among them the need to practice pre-shot psychological routines to be used when they have the time to prepare themselves for the shot.
Keywords: basketball, accuracy of shooting, distraction theory Links between sport preferences and personality dimensions: an approach to pertinent individualized sports therapy programs Leif Lay-Sipf Conducting personality assessments can provide relevant information for designing individualized sports therapy programs aimed at improving psychological well- being of participants.This study provides an overview of the psychologically therapeutic uses of sports,explores links between sport preferences and personality dimensions and proposes interesting directions for further research.In order to explore personality dimensions relevant to sport selection and program design,a version of the Myers -Briggs test was administered to 206 participants along with an experimental questionnaire aimed at gathering information about sport preferences and behavioral and introspective aspects.Personality tests measure preferences in thinking,feeling and behaving.Assessing sports preference addresses aspects such as interaction with the outer world(contact vs.no contact,audience vs.solitary, individual vs.team) and inner world(competition with self vs.with others, internal and external locus of control,degree of emotional response).Determining factors seem to be the combination of different dimensions rather than the result of a single trait.For example, 40% of T(Thinking) respondents saw defeating the opponent(as opposed to competing with oneself) as the priority, and 70% of these were TJs(Thinkers/Judgers).Within the group that saw external guidance as an irrelevant factor,63% were Ns(intuitive) and 78% of them were NFs(Intuitive/Feelers).Some single traits stood out in association with outer and inner world aspects(Js were less likely to feel strong emotions while playing sports;Ts were more likely than Fs to prefer sports with crowds).Conducting a personality assessment is essential for devising a more pertinent individualized sports therapy program.Further research could help determine the best approach in different situations, i.e. by tailoring a sports protocol to the participant’s personality or by exposing him/her to one that stimulates less developed dimensions.
Keywords: personality, sports therapy, Myers-Briggs, assessment, preferences, sports In-depth understanding on elite athletes' subjective-wellbeing: What’s the difference between subjective-wellbeing of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean elite swimming athletes Jin Hwang, Ju-Hee Moon, Han-Seung Yang, Kook Cho, Do-Young Lee (Chonbuk National University) Subjective well-being is a feeling about one self that is normally positive and chronically stable. While the Subjective well-being of elite athletes is somewhat below that of the general population, very little is known about the Subjective well-being of athletes and how the context of subjective well-being influences their competitive performance. As such, this studies have been conducted to explore this issue.
The purpose of this study were to investigated the following questions: First, what is the awareness of the subjective-wellbeing to elite swimming athletes in Korea, China and Japan, respectively? Second, is there any difference in the subjective-wellbeing between them? The semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted with 4 Korean, 4 Chinese and 4 Japanese 20-to-24-year-old elite swimming athletes.
The interviews contents were recorded and transcribed. Transcripts of the interviews were analyzed inductively using qualitative content analysis based on 528Posters Thursday July 13th the Patton(2000) by validity committee. Study 1 results revealed that 3 nations’ elite swimmers regarded subjective well-being as a satisfaction with life, lower stress, the balance of positive to negative affect, motivation, confidence over a period of time.
Study 2 results revealed that Chinese swimmers showed a more tendency to be satisfied with the competition results and the Korean swimmers conceived the predictor of subjective well-being was self-trust and self-confidence. Finally we suggested the assessment tool because the well-being studies within sport psychology have been hampered by conceptual ambiguity, which makes it difficult to compare results across studies. Keywords: Korea, China, elite swimming athletes, counterfactual thinking A new profile display format for the monitoring of psychobiosocial states of athletes Ana Beatriz Gomes Leite, Micael S.
Couceiro, Duarte Araújo (CIPER, Faculdade de Motricidade Humana, Spertlab, Universidade de Lisboa) Psychobiosocial states are situational, multimodal and dynamic manifestations of the total human functioning. They have been conceived by Hanin et al. encompassing five interrelated dimensions: form, content, intensity, context, and time.
The form dimension comprises multiple non-emotional state components, such as cognitive, motivational, volitional, bodily-somatic, motor-behavioral, operational, and communicative components. These components together, the form dimension, characterize a performance- related psychobiosocial state of an athlete (Ruiz, Hanin, & Robazza, 2016). It is measured by using an individualized profiling procedure that assesses, through verbalization, a large array of athletes' performance- related experiences.
Considering suggestions identified in previous studies, it is relevant to employ a situational (state-like) version of the scale, and examine psychobiosocial states prior to, during, after performance, or after interventions (Robazza, Bertollo, Ruiz, & Bortoli, 2016). However, one needs to have the clearest and immediate view of the results in order to improve future interventions. Therefore, this work aims to present the development of a visual diagram, named PBS-SD, inspired in the radar chart and developed in MatLab.
The proposed PBS-SD allows to represent 20 quantitative factors, wherein the functional (+) and dysfunctional (-) properties of each factor are symmetrically illustrated; on the upper half of the diagram is represented the functional area while on the bottom the dysfunctional. Each factor is represented as a filled region, according to its numerical values ranging from 0 (center) to 11 (edge). Although it might be seen as a simple extension of radar charts, the PBS-SD reduces the complex interpretation of a considerably large amount of factors, which is needed to compare the successful and unsuccessful profiles with other profiles generated in different moments.
Keywords: psychobiosocial states, emotions, sports intervention, sport performance, display, visual analytics To be or not to be physically active after completing Secondary: lineal models vs. QCA María Huertas González-Serrano, Ferran Calabuig Moreno, Josep Crespo-Hervás (Departamento de Educación Física y Deportiva. Facultad de Ciencias de la Actividad Física y el Deporte.
University of Valencia), Vicente Prado Gascó (Departamento de Psicología Social. Facultad de Psicología. University of Valencia) Physical inactivity is one of the most important problems of our society.
Several studies have pointed out both that adolescence is the stage were more decline the physical activity levels, and that is one of the most influential period in the acquisition of active lifestyles habits that endure to throughout life. Therefore, the present study has the aim of understand the variables that predict and influence the intention to be physically active (IPA) in high school students after they finish their schooling while comparing two different methodologies, lineal models (LM) and comparative qualitative analysis (QCA). No research has compare these methodologies on the when trying to explain the intention to be physically active in high school.
307 adolescents from 14 to 19 years old (Mean=15.64 ± 1.12), 55.5 % boys, participated on the research. To achieve 529Posters Thursday July 13th the objective of the research a hierarchical regression model with two steps (1: attitude toward the behavior (ATB), perceived behavioral control (PBC) and subjective norm (SN); 2: athletic identity (AI) and physical self- concept (PSC) and a fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA) were performed. The first step explain 26% of IPA while the a Considering the fsQCA results, none of the conditions is a necessary condition of IPA, although low levels of PBC seems to be the most important condition to not having IPA.
Regarding sufficient, the intermediate solution indicates five combinations that explain 70% of IPA. The three most important combinations where having high levels of PSC and PBC; high levels of AI and ATB; PBC and ATB (explaing 45%; 60% and 43% respectively of the intention to be physically active). In general QCA is more explanatory than LM.
Keywords: intention to be physically active, adolescence, secondary school, theory of planned behavior, athletic identity, physical self-concept Sport specific sports psychology: a conceptual framework for Danish elite triathletes Ronja Højbjerg The development within the field of applied sports psychology is moving towards a greater contextualization. The ability to successfully develop to the highest levels in sport is dependent on a range of variables, especially an individual’s ability to cope with the various challenges related to their sport. The limited triathlon specific literature available reveals only little of the psychological demands, skills and techniques needed to enhance elite performance.
This study examines the national Danish Olympic triathlon team by developing a sport specific conceptual framework to reveal specific psychological skills relevant to face the challenges elite triathletes encounter. The research design takes the form of a qualitative semi-structured focus group interview study. Four group interviews were carried out investigating which sports psychological challenges influence their everyday life in training and competition.
The interviews included three groups of 10 athletes in total at national and international level (21-26 years old), and one group encompassing the athletes’ two national coaches and the sport director. Follow-up interviews were made with the athletes for condensation and further elaboration of specific challenges, together with an ongoing member reflections process. A deductive and inductive content thematic analysis shows that the elite athletes perceived a multitude of sports psychological challenges both in the sporting and non-sporting domain.
These findings indicate that stress factors in everyday life, training and competition, for example dealing with planning, traveling, arousal regulation, self-efficacy, confidence in the process and confidence in own skills, are reduced or eliminated by training with an established team and in a known environment on a daily basis. Final results will contribute to the sports psychologist’s and coaches’ work with the athletes and their ability to cope with specific challenges. Posters Session 5.
(16:00-17:00) A diary study of relationships between regular distance running and goal orientations in exercise John Nezlek (SWPS Poznan, College of William & Mary), Marzena Cypryanska (SWPS Poznan), Joanna Sztachanska (SWPS Warsaw) The present study examined relationships between regular distance running and individual differences in people’s goal orientations to exercise. Participants in the study maintained a weekly diary with which they described their daily “runs” each week. Participants were residents of Poland who were recruited via the internet and running magazines.
The present analyses were limited to the 180 individuals (50% women Mage = 530Posters Thursday July 13th 34.0, SD = 8.3) who provided 5 or more weekly reports (Mreports = 11.7, SD = 3.9). Each week participants logged onto a website and described how far they had run each day during the week. At the beginning of the study, participants completed the GOEM (Petherick & Markland, 2008).
Other data were collected that are not described in this abstract. Results: The data were analyzed using multilevel modeling in which weekly reports were nested within persons. Participants reported running an average of 2.59 days per week, and the average run was 10.7km.
The analyses found that the number of days per week a person ran was significantly positively related to both task and ego orientations when analyzed separately, but only task orientation was significant when the two were analyzed together (p < .01). In contrast, for number of km run each week, both measures were related positively when analyzed separately, but only ego orientation was significant when they were analyzed together (p < .001). The present results suggest that ego orientation may become more important as recreational runners “put on distance” which may entail having competitive, not just health maintenance of health improvement goals.
Supported by Grant NSC 2013/11/B/HS6/01135, National Science Centre, Poland Keywords: Training, goal orientation, diary methods, multilevel modeling Returning home after playing abroad: re-adaptation challenges of elite Swedish handball players Johan Ekengren, Natalia Stambulova (Halmstad University) In cultural sport psychology and athlete migration literature (Ryba, Schinke, Stambulova, & Elbe, 2017) there is a call for studying athletes’ transnational mobility and cultural transitions out of, and back to the country of origin. This call is also echoed in the cultural praxis of athletes’ careers paradigm (Stambulova & Ryba, 2013) attracting attention of career researchers. This study is aimed at exploring “back home” re- adaptation challenges of elite Swedish handball players after several years of playing professionally abroad.
Eleven players (six females) were interviewed about their careers from the beginning to the end, and their narratives about the transition back to Sweden were extracted from the larger data set and thematically analysed (Braun & Clarke, 2013). Participants spent abroad for M=7.2±2.8 years, and many of them came back having families and kids. Several informants narrated that the transition was more challenging than they expected, and they (especially at the beginning) felt themselves as strangers in their own land.
Five major themes describing the transition challenges were: “to rethink self-identity”, “to renew family life”, “to re- establish links with relatives and family”, “to understand local laws and regulations”, “to keep in pace with the society”. The identity issue was addressed through a sense of being “in between” the identities of the home and the foreign cultures that elevated emotional discomfort, especially at the early phase of re-adjustment. Three themes describing coping strategies used in the re-adaptation were: “don’t give up” (i.e., attempt to change own attitude and the situation to the better), “use social skills” (e.g., be alert and communicate) and “search for social support” (e.g., from a spouse and close family).
Based on the findings, recommendations will be provided for pre-retirement planning of elite athletes and psychological support in their cultural transition and re-adaptation back home. Keywords: career experiences, cultural transition, handball, identity, re-adaptation, transnational mobility Examining the “big three” coping processes in adolescent athletes Joan Pons, Yago Ramis, Carme Viladrich (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) Adolescence is a critical period for sport participation. Coping helps adolescent athletes to face these stressors (Nicholls, Perry, Jones, Morley, & Carson, 2013).
According to cognitive-motivational-relational theory (CMRT), coping is a dynamic and recursive process composed by cognitive appraisals, emotions and coping (i.e., The “big three” coping processes). These relationships has been tested in adult athlete samples (e.g., Doron & 531Posters Thursday July 13th Martinent, 2016; Nicholls, Perry, & Calmeiro, 2014). The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship between competitive appraisals, emotions and coping strategies in adolescent athletes.
We assessed these relations in a sample of 211 adolescent athletes (practicing synchronized swimming and judo) of ages between 12 and 21. We used the Precompetitive Appraisal Measure, the Sport Emotion Questionnaire, and the Coping Inventory for Competitive Sports. Data was analyzed using network modeling analysis (Epskamp, Rhemtulla, & Borsboom, 2017) with R package.
This is an exploratory analysis that allow a visual display of interrelation between variables. First, results show that cognitive appraisals positively relate with pleasant emotions and negatively related with unpleasant emotions. This indicates that both importance and perception of coping potential are relevant in determining emotional states.
Second, relations between emotions and coping strategies show that pleasant emotions positively relate with task-oriented coping strategies, meanwhile unpleasant emotions negatively relate with task-oriented coping strategies. Conversely, pleasant emotions show negative associations with distraction-oriented and disengagement-oriented coping strategies, meanwhile unpleasant emotions show positive relations with them. This is congruent with and extend results found by Nicholls, Polman, and Levy (2012).
As a whole, results are in the same line as CMRT and suggest that adolescent athletes’ coping interacts in a similar way than in adults. Keywords: coping, emotions, appraisals, CMRT, network modeling Fatigue perception indicators on Dakar Rally-Raid motorcycling riders Joan Palmi, Gonzalo Gil (INEFC-University of Lleida) The literature on the perception of fatigue shows the complexity of the concept, the difficulty of the evaluation (Loge,2003), especially in relation to the subject of motorcycle driving (Marina, Rios, Torrado, Busquets & Angulo,2015) and the deficiency of specific studies. Therefore, the objectives of this study were: 1) To analyze indicators perceived by riders as fatigue; 2) to assess the suitability of the selected recording instruments (scales and questionnaires) for the analysis of the fatigue perception and effort.
The research design was a case study with two motorcyclists maximum level riders (TOP 5 worldwide). The research had three phases: pre-test with a test assessing physiological and psychological base (PLAB) and two field tests, with their corresponding assessments, on a circuit designed to simulate the conditions of a regular stage Dakar Rally-Raid (PC1, PC2). The instruments used were: List of indicators (ad hoc); Visual Analogue Scale-fatigue (VAS-fatigue, ad hoc); Subjective Exercise Experiences Scale (SEES, McAuley & Courneya, 1994) and Rating of Perceived Effort (RPE, Borg, 1982).
The results show: 1) Indicators perceived by riders as most relevant are the loss of muscle strength, the reduction of technical mastery and control of the motorcycle, agree with other studies (Allen, 2009; Marina et al, 2015); 2) VAS-fatigue, RPE, and SEES-fatigue were suitable and sensitive to assess the state of fatigue perceived, with high correlation between them (VAS-fatigue vs. RPE, r=.855,p≤.0005; VAS-fatigue vs. SEES-fatigue, r=.878, p≤.0005; SEES-fatigue vs.
RPE, r=.734;p≤.003). These results will use these questionnaires more tightly depending on the needs (Mateo, Rodriguez, Costa, Sanchez-Muñoz, Casimiro & Zabala, 2013). Keywords: fatigue perception, motorcycling, Dakar Rally-Raid Psychometric properties of the subjective vitality scale (SVS): Evidence from Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong Jingdong Liu (Hong Kong Baptist University) Background: The subjective vitality scale (SVS) has been widely used in previous studies and has proven to be a reliable and valid instrument for measuring subjective vitality in diverse populations.
However, no previous study has investigated the validity and reliability of the Chinese version of the SVS among Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong. The purpose of the present study was to examine the psychometric properties of 532Posters Thursday July 13th the Chinese version of the SVS in a representative sample of Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong. Methods: A sample of Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong was invited to participate in the study.
Three measurement models of the SVS (7-item model, 6-item model, and 5-item model) were examined and compared via confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). Cronbach’s alpha was calculated to evaluate the internal consistency reliability and bivariate correlations between subjective vitality with the positive and negative affect were computed to evaluate the concurrent validity. Finally, measurement invariance across gender and time-point was examined to evaluate the invariance of the measurement model of the SVS.
Results: The results of CFA analyses suggested that the five-item measurement model fitted the data best compared with the other two measurement models. Results revealed an excellent internal consistency reliability with the Cronbach’s alpha value above 0.70 (0.92). SVS was significantly associated with positive affect and negative related to negative affect, which provided support for the concurrent validity of the SVS.
Finally, measurement invariance analysis suggested the five-item measurement model of the SVS displayed strict invariance across gender and time- point. Conclusions: Results support the five-item measurement model of the Chinese version of the SVS and show excellent internal consistency reliability. Meanwhile, the results support the concurrent validity of the instrument and demonstrate strict invariance across gender and time-point.
Keywords: subjective vitality, psychometric properties, adolescents, Chinese, Hong Kong Effects of individual and competitive goal structures on dart throwing performance and heart rate Jingcheng Li (Capital University of Physical Education and Sports) Purpose This study tried to compare effects of two goal structures on students dart throwing and HR. Because dart throwing is a static, accurate, and low arousal event, we hypothesis that (a) the individual goal structure had more positive effect on performance than the competitive goal structure had, and (b) participants’ HR in the individual goal structure would be lower than that in the competitive goal structure. Methods Forty university students (20 male and 20 female, mean age: 21.2) participated in the study.
Each participant was asked to throw the darts under tow goal structure. Under the condition of individual goal structure, instruction was that “your goal is to perform better than your pre-test. The person whose performance is better than pre-test will be rewarded”.
Under the condition of competitive goal structure, participants were grouped into two persons according to their pre-test performance, so their level of throwing darts was closed each other. The instruction was that“ your goal is to perform better than your opponent. The person whose performance is better than the opponent will be rewarded”.
Results The structures of individual and competitive goal were independent variables, and dart throwing accuracy and HR were dependent variables. To determine the different effects of two goal structures on performance and HR, a covariance analysis was adopted in order to control the baseline differences.Results showed that dart throwing performance under the individual goal structure were better than that under the competitive goal structure, F(1,77)=5.35,p﹤0.05. HR in test under the competitive goal structure was faster than that under the individual goal structure, but no significant difference existed.
Conclusion The results of this study provided evidence to show that setting the self-improving goal was better for the closed skill performance like dart throwing. Keywords: goal structure, dart throwing, heart rate An exploration of the field’s demand on development of educational contents for basketball coaches of female youth clubs Jihye Chung, Misun Kim (Sookmyung Women's University) 533Posters Thursday July 13th Since youth sports participation plays an important role in physical and psychological development of youth in school, the Ministry of Education in South Korea encourages youth sport participation in school. In youth sport, coaches are considered as a critical factor to make the program successful.
Therefore, the purpose of the study was to identify characteristics of qualified coaches. The educational content needed for educating coaches was also explored. In addition, motivational factors of youths participating female basketball program were investigated.
Nine qualified coaches were selected for in-depth interviews. Semi-structured questions were asked such as ‘what educational contents are necessary for coaches in female youth basketball?’ Also, open-ended questions on motivation, interest, and teaching method were administered to ninety-six youths in basketball program. Qualitative analysis was used.
In results, teamwork training, passion for basketball, and team regulation were found as important for educating program. Second, coaching philosophy, physical/psychological development and characteristics of female youths, communication skills and practical basketball drills were suggested as necessary educational contents for coaches in female youth basketball. Third, the motivational factors contributing to female youths’ participation in basketball club were as follows: 1) the fun and interest domain were games, basic training, and practical training, 2) the preferred education methods were stable curriculum, and low training intensity, 3) the reasons for choosing basketball club were growing their own height and interest in basketball, and 4) the factors leading to loss of interest and fun were hard physical training and repetition of movements that they do not feel confident about.
These results suggested how educational program should be consisted for basketball coaches in female youth clubs. Keywords: female youths, basketball club, sports activation, basketball coach Explore resilience of principal dancer Jihye Chung, Eun Choi, Misun Kim (Sookmyung Women's University) An ability to overcome adversity is critical to become a dancer at advanced level, which can be described as the term resilience in sport psychology. Resilience is related to higher mental toughness, lower dropout rate, less stress, as well as positive outcomes (i.e., success) in sport.
However, resilience of dancers has been relatively less studied. Due to less understanding on dancer’s resilience, the present study aimed to qualitatively explore the psychological construct of resilience in the dance situation, and find out psychological characteristics in terms of resilience in dancers at advanced level. We used a semi-structured in-depth interview with twelve principal dancers at advanced level, conducted inductive content, and generated 433 raw data themes.
The raw data was categorized into forty categories; and then nine sub-categories as well as three general themes, such as self-regulation, positive attitude, and interpersonal relationship. Specifically, self- regulation skills were the most discussed contributors to resilience in dance, followed by positive thinking; interpersonal relation ability; emotion regulation; impulse control; gratitude; causal analysis; self-optimism; communication skills; empathy; life satisfaction; and the ability to extend the self. Overall, this study generated meaningful information regarding the understanding of resilience in principal dancers.
These findings contribute to theoretical understanding of resilience in dancing, and providing practical resources in counseling dancers who cope with adversity to develop their career. Keywords: principal dancer, resilience, self-regulation skills, positive thoughts, interpersonal relation ability Effects of mental training on reservists’ fatigue in physical training Jifu Wang (Wuhan Sports University) With the increasing of information war, higher requirements of the military’s training level and psychological quality were put forward, and training fatigue could seriously affect the overall training level of the troops. So this study was to investigate the effect of mental training in reducing the physical fatigue of military reservists.
Fifty-four military reservists were selected and randomly divided into mental training 534Posters Thursday July 13th intervention group (27 people) and the control group (27 people), and mental training continued for four weeks. Mental training methods included progressive relaxation training, breathing training and relaxation music relaxation training, and we used MFI-20 questionnaire and the choosing reaction to evaluate reservists’ degree of fatigue during the intervention process. (1) The results of MFI-20 measurement showed that the difference between before and after of fatigue scores of the intervention group was significantly higher than the control group during the mental training (t=5.85, p0.05).
With increased mental training, the fatigue of experienced in reservists through physical training had been slowing; and choice reaction time was gradually shortened. In short, mental training played a role in reducing the fatigue of reservists during military and physical training, in particular reducing the experience on mental fatigue. Keywords: mental training, military and physical training, reaction, mental fatigue, reservists Sport psychology in the training process of the referee and the football assistant referee Jesús Chalela (SUPDE- Asociación Uruguaya de Fútbol) Sport Psychology in the training process of the Referee and the Football Assistant Referee.
Psychological Department of the Referees Association of the Uruguayan Football Association, AUF, Montevideo, Uruguay Jesús Chalela (Invitado)-Gustavo Bello Abstract: The Referee is today exposed to the demands of performance, the public, the press, athletes, leaders, managers, and of specific training. For that reason, he must devote weekly hours to physical, technical and regulatory training, in addition to holding other work or study tasks, with the wear and tear that this brings. In order that the Football Referee is able to rise to the challenge, so that he can carry out all his projects and obtain a good quality of life, it is imperative that he resorts to the benefits that PSYCHOLOGY of SPORT brings him.
The objectives of the Psychological Department are: to Provide Psychological Counseling to Referees and Football Referees in activity, that the Referees have enough tools management and psychological instruments in order to achieve a better performance in the task. These instruments would provide them with the knowledge and proper use of their psychological sports abilities, such as: Attention, Concentration, Self-confidence, Self-esteem, Interpersonal Relations, Motivation, Communication Style and proper body management. The tasks of the Psychological Department are: Psychological Assistance, match preparation, Psychological Training, Advice for FIFA Tournaments, Evaluation and follow-up (RAP), Teaching (thematic workshops and classes for active and aspiring referees), Match observation, Preparation of the referee's career, Advice to the Referees’ Association and School, Participation in Update meetings and in FIFA Courses, and Study and Research.
Keywords: psychological department, referees and assistant referees, football Sports educational workshops Jesús Chalela (SUPDE- Club Malvín de Basketball Montevideo,Uruguay) I consider of utmost importance for the training stage of child and adolescent athletes, the creation of sports educational workshops. These are a fundamental tool to address different issues, from a comprehensive perspective that helps the sports population to understand the process of comprehensive sports training in the long run. In order to carry out these considerations properly, it is very important that the rules are worked with all sports actors and generate spaces for them to be fulfilled.
For all the above mentioned, it is very important to point to different strategies while working with children, adolescents, coaches, physical education teachers, parents, referees and leaders, to help them think about the role they should play in the whole training process. The objectives of the sports educational workshops are: Improve the quality of the sports experience, improve the level of socialization, greater participation and less absenteeism, personal training (sexuality, drugs, body care, nutrition), promote and facilitate communication and interpersonal relationships among all actors, motivate the continuity of sports practice, promote group integration and cooperation as factors that benefit 535Posters Thursday July 13th group cohesion, preparation of sports tours, training and respect for sports, institutional and community rules, respect for referees and regulation formation. The contribution of all members of a club for the benefit of children and adolescents may achieve a beneficial future as athletes and as individuals.
Keywords: sports educational workshops, comprehensive education, sports population Sports as a risk environment: homophobia and bullying in a sample of gay and heterosexual men Jessica Pistella, Marco Salvati, Salvatore Ioverno, Roberto Baiocco (Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome) Research on bullying and homophobic bullying has mainly focused on school contexts, with little research on bullying in sports-related contexts. Consequently, the differences between people who identify as sexual minorities and people who identify as heterosexual in terms of sports-related bullying and sports-related homophobic bullying remain even less explored. This study used a sample of 88 gay men and 120 heterosexual men to examine the frequency of bullying experiences in Italian sports-related contexts.
The results showed that gay men reported more frequent bullying, χ²(1, 208) = 22.140, p < 0.001, and homophobic bullying, χ²(1, 208) = 6.870, p < 0.01, in sports-related contexts than heterosexual men. Gay men also reported dropping out of sports more frequently, namely due to a fear of being bullied, χ²(1, 208) = 13.914, p < 0.001, and greater familial pressure to conform to masculine-type sports, χ²(1, 208) = 12.323, p < 0.001. Overall, victims of bullying displayed higher levels of self-hatred than those who were not bullied in sports-related contexts, F(1,207) = 9.10; p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.05.
In addition, gay men who were victims of bullying or homophobic bullying displayed higher levels of internalized sexual stigma than gay men who were not bullied in sports-related contexts, F(1,84) = 9.61; p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.19. Results suggest that gay men are more at risk of bullying and may be particularly vulnerable in sports-related contexts because these environments still represent a belief system that privileges heterosexuality, stigmatizing other, nonconforming sexual behaviors or gender preferences. This is especially true in a context such as the Italian one, where traditional gender norms and homophobic attitudes are still rife.
It is necessary to promote safer sports-related contexts for people who identify as a sexual minority or who self-identify as heterosexual yet are perceived as lesbian, gay or bisexual people. Keywords: risk, sports, bullying, homophobic bullying, gay men, internalized sexual stigma Developing a body expression program to improve empathic competence Jeonghee Kim (Gyeongin National University of Education) This research implemented the body expression program in elementary school field and tried to find out how the body expression program which was set up in elementary school influences the children's empathic ability according to the level of emotional response. Therefore, two research questions 'Compared to control group, does the experimental group that participates in the empathy education program show significant difference between empathic ability?' and 'Compared to control group, does the experimental group that participates in the body expression education program according to emotional response show significant difference between empathic ability?' were established.
To verify these research questions, 6 classes off ourth grade in G elementary school were pre-tested. Two classes confirmed their similarities were selected, one of which was designated as the experimental group while the other class was designated as the control group, with the experimental group and the control group each being composed of 24 students sessions of the body expression program was implemented over 6 weeks, twice in a week, with the experimental group while no interventions were made in the control group. After the end of the experiment, a post-tested was implemented.
To verify the effects of the program, SPSS program was used and Matched pair sample T-test and Analys is of Covariance was implemented. The results of response of test paper were as follows : First, 536Posters Thursday July 13th experimental group that participated in the body expression program showed significant improvement in empathic ability and low variables those are cognitive empathic ability and emotional empathic ability. Second, the high level group of emotional response about body expression program showed significant improvement in empathic ability compared to low level group.
Third, the low level group of empathic ability showed significant improvement in school lifes atisfaction compared to high level group. Keywords: empathic competence, expression program, children Self-organized exercise to prevent back pain: The role of behavior regu-lation and self- efficacy in an athlete sample Jens Kleinert, Johanna Belz (German Sport University Cologne), Heidari Jahan (Ruhr University Bochum), Levenig Claudia, Hasenbring Monika, Kellmann Michael (German Sport University Cologne) Back pain (BP) is a common problem in athletes (prevalences of 18-65%; Trompeter et al., 2016). Exercise to prevent BP is, therefore, an important component of both training routines and self-organized training (e.g., home-based).
Whilst BP prevention exercises are frequently incorporated into the training routines (Goertzen & Zinser, 1998), less is known about the frequency and regulation of self-organized exercise (SOE) to prevent BP. Thus, the aim of this study was to assess the occurrence and the frequency of SOE to prevent BP and its relationship with both autonomous behavior regulation and self-efficacy. A total of 346 German elite athletes (42.6% female; Mage=18.3 years, SDage=5.39 years) participated in this cross-sectional study.
Athletes were asked about the weekly frequency and mean duration of their SOE; also autonomous behavior regulation (12 items based on organismic integration theory) and self-efficacy (MSES; Rodgers, et al., 2008) were assessed. Self-organized exercise was reported by 50.7% of the participants. This finding can be partly explained by autonomous regulation (r2=.174).
The likelihood of exercise increased with intrinsic regulation (OR=1.35), identified regulation (OR=1.43) and introjected regulation (OR=1.39), while external regulation showed a negative relationship (OR=0.79). Neither sex, nor age, nor occurrence of BP within the last three months (46.8%) explained SOE. Athletes exercised on average 1.9 times per week (SD=1.02) for a mean duration of 20.9 minutes (SD=15.75).
Frequency per week could be explained by schedule efficacy (β=.26), while mean exercise duration could be explained by intrinsic regulation (β=.23) and age (β=.18). These results show that autonomous behavior regulation and self-efficacy explain different aspects of the overall regulation of BP- preventive exercise, with the former seemingly more important for general decisions and enjoyment and the latter more important for implementation into daily routines. Keywords: back pain, prevention, motivation, self-efficacy, prevention Mechanisms of Exercise Dependence – A person centred approach to study the predictive ability of anxiety, obsessive passion and appearance orientation on exercise dependence Jenny Back (Halmstad University) Exercise dependence is a maladaptive pattern of exercise with a craving for physical activity that results in extreme exercise that may generate mental health problems such as anxiety and depression.
Previous research suggests that individuals with certain personality traits are more prone to develop exercise dependence. However, research on personality traits and exercise dependence is still limited. In the current study, predictive abilities of anxiety, obsessive passion and appearance orientation on exercise dependence were investigated.
A longitudinal design was adopted to investigate if personality related factors could predict exercise dependence. The sample consisted of 206 regular exercisers (100 males and 106 females) from various exercise groups, sport clubs and sport science classes in Sweden (Mage = 28,5 years; SD = 9,97). The LPA (Latent Profile Analysis) showed that a model with two profiles provided best fit to the data, and that profile belonging at T1 could predict measures of exercise dependence at T2.
Profile 1: “high risk exercisers” reported significantly higher 537Posters Thursday July 13th levels of exercise dependence, anxiety, obsessive passion and appearance orientation compared to Profile 2: “low risk exercisers”. This study highlights factors that may characterize people who develop exercise dependence. High-risk exercisers are obsessively passionate about their training and exercise may function as a tool to cope with anxiety.
If the individual for some reason is prevented from training, feelings of anxiety and guilt are often experienced. Furthermore, these individuals tend to be self-conscious about how they look and appear to other people. To them, exercise may also work as a way to achieve body ideals.
The results of the current study suggest plausible mechanisms of why exercise behaviours become unhealthy and uncontrollable for some exercisers whereas others manage to remain healthy. Keywords: anxiety, appearance orientation, exercise dependence, passion, physical activity Attention, heart rate and skilled motor performance: Effects of task difficulty Jennifer Henderson, Christopher Ring (University of Birmingham) Attention is one of the most crucial yet elusive skills in sport, particularly when athletes are under pressure to perform. However, performance psychologists remain unsure of the means to achieve optimal focus.
Recent research has shown that a performers heart rate (HR) decelerates in the seconds prior to the execution of a skilled motor task. For instance, elite golfers’ HR’s drop about 20bpm in the 5 seconds before they putt. Although this HR slowing phenomenon is well documented, the specific features of this deceleration profile remain unclear.
Under the premise that increased task difficulty requires greater concentration, the current study was designed to improve our understanding of this bradycardia, and furthermore determine its association with performance and attentional processes. 40 golfers of varying ability (20 expert, 20 novice), completed baseline and 7 counterbalanced 9-ball putting conditions on an artificial surface. Conditions were designed to manipulate difficulty, and thus attentional demands, by altering putt distance, hole size, and surface gradient.
HR (electrocardiogram) and muscle tension (electromyography) were measured throughout, with performance outcome determined by the number of holed putts in each condition. Performance was significantly affected by condition difficulty (P<.05). Similarly, condition difficulty affected several aspects of the cardiac pattern, including peak-to-trough amplitude, peak-to-trough timing, and the rate of the HR deceleration.
The latter was also found to correlate with performance. To conclude, HR deceleration in the seconds preceding a skilled motor task was affected by variations in task difficulty, thus, improving our understanding of the attention-performance relationship. Practically, these findings help validate pre-movement cardiac deceleration as a discreet measure of attention, and lay the foundations for future biofeedback training protocols aimed at improving performance under pressure.
Keywords: psychophysiology, attention, heart rate, skilled motor performance The psychophysiological effects of pressure on skilled motor performance Jennifer Henderson, Matthew Bridge, Christopher Ring (University of Birmingham) The pressure to perform can stem from a multitude of factors. During competition, these factors can have either a facilitative or debilitative effect on performance. Although the mechanisms that cause athletes to ‘choke’ under pressure have yet to be fully established, attentional focus has emerged as a key aspect of optimal performance.
Specific cardiac patterns prior to movement onset have been associated with attention. In golf putting for example, elite golfers’ heart rates decelerate about 20-beats-per-minute in the 5-seconds before they putt. However, this phenomenon has never been studied for a full golf swing, or analysed in response to pressure.
The current study therefore aimed to fill these gaps in our understanding of the psychophysiology of skilled motor performance. 20 expert golfers, completed 9 shots in a baseline and 5 pressure conditions (e.g. social, financial) in an indoor simulator.
Heart rate (electrocardiogram) and muscle 538Posters Thursday July 13th tension (electromyography) were measured throughout, with performance determined by shot outcome. Questionnaires also measured self-reported pressure and attentional focus. Data collection is ongoing, but preliminary analyses (N=14) indicated that expert golfers exhibit a heart rate deceleration profile in the seconds before performing a full golf shot, and that pressure had a significant effect on this cardiac pattern (p =< .05).
For instance, condition was found to affect the peak-to-trough amplitude, the peak-to-trough timing and the rate of deceleration. To conclude, heart rate deceleration in the seconds preceding skilled motor performance was affected by pressure. If current results are confirmed, then this research helps validate the link between attention and heart rate deceleration prior to skilled motor performance.
Practically, these findings could form the basis of future biofeedback training interventions, which in turn could help athletes become more robust when faced with the pressure to perform well. Keywords: psychophysiology, pressure, attention, skilled motor performance Developing a theoretically grounded mentorship programme for women in coaching Jenessa Banwell, Ashley Stirling, Gretchen Kerr (University of Toronto) The role of mentorship in improving career development and enhancing work satisfaction has been well documented in the non-sport literature. Mentorship has been recommended within the sport context, specifically to address the lack of women in coaching and yet previously implemented mentorship programmes for female coaches have produced mixed results (Belding & Dodge, 2016; CAC, 2017; Kerr & Banwell, 2016; Robertson, 2017).
One of the current gaps identified in existing programmes for enhancing the mentorship of women in coaching is that the development and delivery of these programmes have not been theoretically- informed. The purpose of this study therefore, was to develop a mentorship programme aimed at advancing women in coaching using Zachary’s (2012) four-stage mentoring cycle as its grounding theoretical framework, and to evaluate the development and implementation of the programme using Stufflebeam’s (1983) CIPP model for programme evaluation. This poster specifically focuses on the context and input evaluation phases.
An overview of the context of women in coaching will be provided including a summary of women in coaching literature and identification of previous mentorship programmes. Addressing the input phase of programme evaluation, findings reveal stakeholder contributions and identified needs in developing the mentorship programme, theoretical considerations built into its design, and examples of how Zachary’s theory of mentorship was applied to the development and delivery of a mentorship programme for women in coaching. This study adds to the current sports coaching literature by illustrating the application of Zachary’s model to the design and delivery of mentorship programming, and highlights how theory can inform each stage of the mentoring process in hopes to create enhanced learning experiences and outcomes for participating mentor and mentee.
Keywords: women, coaching, mentorship, programme evaluation Goal attainment effects on cognitions, emotions, and subsequent performance in a golf putting task Jean-Charles Lebeau, Heather Gatten, Inbal Perry, Ye Wang, Sibak Sung, Gershon Tenenbaum, Heather Kiefer (Florida State University) Attaining or failing to achieve a goal affects our thinking, feeling, and behavior. Grounded in Carver and Scheier’s (2003) conceptual model, the present study aimed to uncover the effects of goal success and goal failure on cognition, emotion, and subsequent performance using a golf putting task. Novice golfers (17 males, 24 females, Mage = 27.17, SDage = 8.91) were randomly allocated to a goal success or goal failure condition and received a deceptive feedback of their putting scores using a 4 point system to induce goal success or goal failure.
Participants had five practice putts from a distance of 1,83m to a target, and then performed six putts 539Posters Thursday July 13th without visual feedback. The score for the six practice trials was multiply by 4 to set the goal for 24 putts and participants were instructed to reach this goal. During the main task, participants completed 24 putts and received a deceptive feedback of their putting score every 6 putts, after which self-efficacy was measured.
Emotions and executive functions were assessed after the 24th putt. Participants’ emotions were measured using an adapted version of the Physical Activity Affect Scale. Executive functions were assessed with the Stroop task and the Pace Auditory Serial Addition Test.
After completing the cognitive tasks, participants performed an additional set of 24 putts without specific goal. For this second set, participants received their real score as a feedback. Individuals in the goal success condition reported significantly higher self-efficacy and more positive emotions than individuals in the goal failure condition.
Non-significant differences were revealed on either of the cognitive tasks or golf putting performances in the second set between the goal success and goal failure conditions. The results are examined in regards to previous research and the complexity in linking emotions, cognitions, and performance. Implications, limitations, and future research directions are discussed.
Keywords: goal achievement, executive functioning, emotion, self-efficacy An evaluation of time movement anticipation among female athletes of various sports Shubhda Bhosle, Jayashree Acharya, Sanchita Baruah (Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior) Anticipation in sport is the ability of the athlete to make decisions and to act ahead of time (Surkov, 1982). (Taylor 2016) noted that expert advantage in utilising informative cues for anticipation remains stable across sports, the cues that are most important or relevant for effective anticipation varies depending on the type of sport. Zhu ( 2012) mentioned that there is great potential in using technology-based assessment to overcome the limitations of traditional measurement methods.
The Vienna Test System (VTS) developed by Schuh-fried GmbH (Moedling, Austria) is one such computerized system that is able to analyse many different sport psychology-related constructs. ZBA (Time/ Movement Anticipation Test) that measures time and movement anticipation ability, in which a green ball moves at a certain trajectory and suddenly disappears after a while. Participants are required to indicate where the ball hits the target line and the point on the target line where the ball will pass.
The present study focused of highlighting possible differences in time and movement anticipation of visual stimuli movement. For this 45 university female athletes aged between 19 to 24 years with a mean and SD of 22.73± 2.14 of various sports (i.e. cricket, football and hockey; N=15 from each), ZBA was measured for mean deviation time (MDT)-slow and mean deviation time (MDT)-fast.
ANOVA results revealed no significant difference among female athletes of different sports when considered on the score of MDT-slow (F(2,42)= 2.99, p= .061). But in MDT-fast significant differences was found (F(2,42)= 6.98, p= .002). Post-hoc test of Tukey HSD reveals significant difference in time movement anticipation between football and hockey group, also in football and cricket group.
Keywords: movement anticipation, time anticipation, vienna test system, movement perception The influence of performing arts practice on physical education students’ motivation Javier Coterón, Javier Gil (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid), Evelia Franco Álvarez (Centro Universitario Cardenal Cisneros - Universidad de Alcalá) Performing arts (PA) are a vast set of artistic expression media and techniques, as dance or theatre (Torrents, Balagué, & Hristovski, 2016). Self-Determination Theory is an attractive framework to promote understanding of motivational processes in this kind of activities (Quested & Duda, 2011). The aim of this study was to analyze the effect of a PA-based intervention on Physical Education (PE) students’ motivational variables.
The sample was composed by 148 students aging from 13 to 16 (M=14.76; SD= .86). Subjects were randomly assigned to experimental (n = 52) and control group (n = 96). Spanish versions of BPNES and PLOC 540Posters Thursday July 13th were used and two items were created ad-hoc to measure the liking for PA activities and the intentions to take part in future activities.
The intervention consisted of 10 extracurricular sessions in which experimental group prepared a PA composition to be presented at a regional event apart from the didactic unit, while control group only took part in the PE lessons. Mann-Whitney and Wilcoxon test were performed to analyze inter and intra-groups differences between pre-test and post-test. A significant increase in autonomy (Z = 2.26; p < .05) and relatedness satisfaction (Z = 2.77; p < .05), as well as in intentions to take part in PA activities were only found in the experimental group (Z = 2.60; p < .05); while both groups reported a significant increase in liking for PA activities (ZControl = 2.28; p < .05; ZExperimental = 2.91; p < .01).
In line with other works (Sevil, Abarca- Sos, Julián Clemente, Murillo, & García-González, 2016) findings suggest that the use of extracurricular activities related to PA could enhance students’ motivation and engagement in these contents. Further investigation would be needed to better understand the effect of this kind of interventions on different outcomes according to the contents. Keywords: performing arts, intervention, basic psychological needs The relationship between the ability of motor imagery and the clumsiness in exercise in university students Yuko Hayashi, Haruo Sakuma (Ritsumeikan University) In making a motor imagery, it is known that there are two imagery perspectives which influence on the motor skills; one is internal imagery perspective in which the imager looks through by his or her eyes on their imaging experience, and the other is external imagery perspective in which the imager is looking at oneself from outside like a picture.
Generally, motor imagery plays an important role in the promotion of motor learning and sports performances. In physical education, there are some students whose motor skills hardly improve due to their clumsiness despite having no problem with motor development. One of the reasons for poor motor skill is considered that they cannot make motor imagery well from their own perspectives, even before they actually do motor execution.
In other words, it is supposed that controlling the perspectives of the imagery leads to improve motor skills and gain good performances. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between motor imagery perspectives and clumsiness on motor learning by assessing the electroencephalograms(EEG) and questionnaires. Participants were 14 female college students (19-21 years).
The clumsiness of motor skills were measured by the questionnaire of motor clumsy scale for university student, and the imagery types were classified into internal imager or external imager by Movement Imagery Questionnaire -Revised Japanese Version; JMIQ-R. The EEG (F3,F4,C3,C4,P3,P4,O1,O2) and mental time were measured during the imagery tasks which making image of sports scenes and their movements (e.g., throwing, jumping, stepping) by internal and eternal perspectives. The arpha2 band power of EEG more activated at parietal and occipital area during internal perspective imagery tasks.
Results suggested that the difference of brain activity in internal perspectives of the motor imagery was related to the performance and clumsiness. Keywords: motor imagery, imagery perspective, clumsiness, motor learning Who suffers more from sport pain - men or women? Jan Blecharz (The University of Physical Education) Existing studies on gender differences in sport pain do not provide comprehensive interpretation of this phenomenon and are limited to some selective aspects of pain (Muller et al.
2016). There is a growing evidence that men and women not only tend to administer different strategies to deal with pain, but their moderation role also seems to work differently (Jones, Parker, 2015), which probably moderates analgesic effect of physical activity (Pokhrel, et al., 2013), and thus results in significant differences in performance under pain (Smeets, et 541Posters Thursday July 13th al., 2007). However, the functional difference does not explain all the variations of the result (Haddas, et al., 2015).
The main aim of the study was to asses gender differences in a complex, four-stage model of pain processing, consisting of pain sensation intensity, pain unpleasantness (stage 1 affect), suffering (stage 2 affect), and pain behavior (Wade, et al., 1996) under different situational circumstances. In the study VAS, Pain Catastrophizing Scale, McGill Pain Questionnaire, Pain Coping Strategies Questionnaire were administered. The data has been collected for high level female and male athletes in training and competition situations.
As agreed with previous studies women scored higher in pain intensity and unpleasantness, than men. Surprisingly, no differences in behavioral aspect has been found. The differences might be explained by administering slightly different cognitive coping mechanisms.
Additionally, a moderating role of situational factor has been found. Understanding of multidimensional dynamics of sport pain sensation and its determinants is the first step to compile efficient and safe pain coping program for athletes (Birrer, Morgan, 2010) tailored to the needs of both sexes. Sport pain sensation dynamics can be highly moderated by administering effective coping strategies.
It is a subject of great importance for performance improvement, quality of life and health promotion. Keywords: pain, gender, athletes, performance under pain Is perceived autonomy support provided by a coach related to the frequency of injury preventative behavior among elite golfers? James Parker, Urban Johnson, Andreas Ivarsson (Halmstad University) Research has shown that perceived autonomy support can have an indirect effect on behaviors via autonomous motivation (Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2015).
This indirect effect has, for example, been found in relation to injury preventive behaviors within sport (Chan & Hagger, 2012). Overuse and acute injuries are a common problem among golfers (McHardy & Pollard, 2005) and exploring factors that might increase the frequency of preventive behaviors is warranted. The aim of the study was to investigate if perceived autonomy support from the coach has an indirect effect on the self-reported frequency of injury preventive behaviors via the level of autonomous motivation.
A total of 59 elite golfers, (handicap M=-1.2, SD=4.9, age M=21, SD=5.5), completed a questionnaire with questions related to autonomy support from the coach, autonomous motivation for injury prevention, and the frequency of five injury preventive behaviors (e.g., how often do you ask for advice about injury preventive exercises, how often to you train to improve your physiological status). A mediation analysis, using Hayes (2012) process macro in SPSS 20.0, was performed. The results showed that perceived autonomy support and autonomous motivation could explain 45% of the variance in the frequency of preventive behaviors, F (1,56) = 22.71, p < .001.
The result showed that perceived autonomy support had a statistically significant positive indirect effect on the frequency of preventive behaviors via autonomous motivation (ab = .16, 95% CI = 0.05-0.34, p<.05). Based on the results, coaches should consider giving feedback that supports autonomous motivation among golfers when aiming to encourage injury preventative behavior. Injury prevention programs should include strategies to improve the athlete’s autonomous motivation to carry out preventive activities.Future research should investigate the relationship between estimated and the objective frequency of injury prevention behaviour.
Keywords: perceived autonomy support, golf, self determination theory, coaching Can emotional disclosure promote sport injury-related growth? Jade Salim, Ross Wadey (St Mary's University, Twickenham) Previous research has shown injured athletes low in resilience are less likely to experience Sport Injury- Related Growth (SIRG) than their more resilient counterparts (e.g., Salim, Wadey, & Diss, 2015; Wadey, Evans, Hanton, & Neil, 2012). This study aimed to examine the efficacy of a four-week emotional disclosure 542Posters Thursday July 13th intervention to promote SIRG with injured athletes low in resilience following their return to competitive sport.
The intervention was a quantitative design and consisted of three groups: Written Disclosure Group (WD) (N = 15), Verbal Disclosure Group (VD) (N = 15), and a Control Group (C) (N = 15). For the purposes of social validation, 10 athletes from each group (N=30) were interviewed three months after the intervention. Growth was measured using the Stress-Related Growth Scale (SRGS; Park et al., 1996), pre-and post-intervention and at the 4-week follow-up.
Data were analyzed using a mixed-design (Group x Time) MANOVA, whereas the qualitative data were analyzed using thematic analysis. Findings revealed a significant difference between the VD Group and C Group for SIRG. There was no significant difference between the WD Group and C Group.
Both the VD and the WD Groups reported that they found writing or talking to be cathartic. However, while those in the VD Group were able to positively accommodate their thoughts and emotions that led to SIRG, those in the WD Group reported that they were unable to fully understand their emotions. The organismic valuing theory (Joseph & Linley, 2005) and the broaden and build theory (Fredrickson, 2001) are used to interpret these findings.
These findings have important implications for those working with injured athletes low in resilience, by encouraging them to self-disclose in private, and in turn help them to work through the restructuring process, and enable them to identify how the outcomes obtained will be of value to their sporting performance, well-being and/or risk of injury. Keywords: sport injury-related growth, emotional disclosure, positive psychology Passion for teaching and burnout in Physical Education teachers: The mediating role of being a transformational leader Isabel Castillo, Octavio Alvarez, Isaac Estevan, Javier Molina-García (University of Valencia) Grounded in the dualistic model of passion (Vallerand et al., 2003) and the transformational leadership theory (Bass, 1985) extended by Beauchamp et al. (2010) to the context of education, the main purpose of the present research was to examine the associations between physical education (PE) teachers’ passion and their perception of burnout, testing in this relation the mediating role of teachers’ transformational behaviours.
Participants (163 PE teachers; 108 males and 53 females, Mean age = 40.59 years; SD = 8.36) were requested to complete a multi-section questionnaire consisting of the Passion Scale, the Transformational Teaching Questionnaire, and the Maslach Burnout Inventory. Teachers had been involved in their profession for 13.95 years (SD = 8.39) and had been working a median of 6.36 years (SD = 5.57) in their current school. Results of MANOVA revealed that there were no significant gender differences (Wilks’ Lambda = .94, F (156, 4) = 2.01, p > .05), and hierarchical multiple regression analysis was conducted considering the whole sample.
In order to determine the extent to which leadership contributes to changes in burnout over and beyond types of passion, the two types of passion (harmonious and obsessive) were entered first, followed by the transformational leadership variable. Results showed that harmonious passion (B = -.31, p < .01) and transformational leadership (B = -.20, p < .01) were negative predictors of burnout; whereas obsessive passion was a positive predictor of burnout (B = .14, p < .05). Results also indicated that transformational behaviours partially mediated the relationship between harmonious passion and burnout and totally mediated the relationship between obsessive passion and burnout.
In conclusion, lower levels of burnout in PE teachers appears to be related to whether more transformational behaviours underlies their job as well as whether they feel as if they are in control of their passion for teaching. Keywords: physical education, teacher, passion, burnout, self-efficacy, transformational behaviours How well can children and parents’ report on children’s motor skill competence? Isaac Estevan, Ana Queralt, Isabel Castillo (University of Valencia), Lisa Barnett (Deakin University Australia) 543Posters Thursday July 13th Motor competence (MC) is defined as a person’s ability to execute different motor acts.
It is not clear whether young children can report on their own MC, Thus parents may be an alternative source of information for their children’s MC. The degree to which parents and children can report on children’s MC is still questionable. This study aims to analyse how well children and parents’ perception of children’s MC can predict children’s motor skill competence.
A sample of 179 children (aged 7.5 ± 1.8 years) and one of their parents participated in the study. The Spanish version of the pictorial Perceived Movement Skill Competence scale was used for assessing perception of children’s MC by children and parents. The Spanish version of the Test of Gross Motor Development was used for children’s actual MC assessment.
Two independent linear hierarchical blockwise regression analyses for children (model 1) and parents (model 2) were conducted with actual child MC as the outcome variable. In every model, the first step included children’s perceived MC (model 1) and parent proxy report of child MC (model 2) as predictor. In the second step both models were adjusted for children’s age and sex.
Model 1 showed, in step 1, children’s perception (β=0.31; p>0.05) did not predict their actual MC. In step 2, children’s perception (β=0.38; p<0.001) with an effect of age (increasing) and sex (boys) predicted the 76.7% of the variance. In conclusion, children presented limited capability in explaining their MC.
The study confirms previous literature in that age and sex factors accounting for most of the children’s actual MC explained. Keywords: motor competence, perceived motor competence, parents, children Influence of applying a modified Stroop Test during postural control task in children of 4- years-old Isaac Estevan, Israel Villarrasa-Sapiña, Xavier García-Massó (University of Valencia) This study is focused on the influence of a modified Stroop Test on postural stability task in children with 4-years-old. A sample of eighteen healthy children of 4-years-old [17.88 (2.56) kg, 1.04 (0.05) m and 16.39 (1.2) kg/m2)] participated.
The postural sway data were measured by a Wii Balance Board, from which single (ST) and dual tasks (DT) were performed in the bipedal standing position with eyes open. A reference point or a cognitive task was projected onto a screen at 2 m in front of the children at eye level, in ST and DT, respectively. A modified Stroop Test was used as cognitive task during DT.
Four selected figures traditionally matched with a specific colour [i.e. i) star (yellow), ii) heart (red), iii) frog (green) and iv) smurf (blue)] were shown individually in random order with random colours (yellow, red, green or blue) on the screen. The children were asked to name the colour of the figure regardless of what they saw on the screen for the total 30 s duration of the balance task measurement.
Ellipse area (EA) and mean velocity in antero-posterior (MVAP) and medio-lateral (MVML) directions were computed from postural sway data acquired. The number of correct and incorrect digit answers was used as a measure of cognitive performance. Kruskal-Wallis test was used in comparative analyses.
In ST, children’s EA, MVAP and MVML was lower than in DT condition. During DT, children obtained a mean of 9.5 (4) correct answers and 0 (0.25) incorrect answers. Children of 4-years-old showed lower postural control when they performed a cognitive task.
Despite the amount of correct answers was high and this new modified Stroop Test could be considered as easy for children aged 4 years, in DT the cognitive task provided enough stimulus to influenced postural control. Keywords: postural control, dual-task, childhood, Stroop Test, stability Run about it? Psychological and personal reflections on long distance group running Irit Bluvstein (Tel Aviv University) This poster will present reflections in regard to the psychological and social benefits following long distance running in a group.
These reflections stems from my personal experience in the last four years as a long distance runner as integrated with my specialization in post-traumatic growth. While experiencing and 544Posters Thursday July 13th examining the different aspects of group running and its psychological effects, I became aware that most effects may be categorized into the five post traumatic growth themes: increased personal strength, appreciation of life, closer relationships, identification of new possibilities and spiritual change. Long distance running is usually characterized by a moderate running pace which allows talking while running.
The group running is viewed as a natural group intervention with an outdoor setting and a time frame dictated by the distance and pace the group members decide to run. These conditions offer plenty of opportunities to discuss and process personal issues concerning coping with life adversities as well as opportunities to socially deal in real time with difficulties that emerge while running. Acknowledging social running as a potential psychological intervention and posttraumatic growth as an organizing theoretical framework for the psychological and social outcomes of running may further elucidate our understanding of running benefits.
Keywords: running, posttraumatic growth, benefits, reflections Relationship between personality trait of elite Latvian football players and their psychological skills Irina Simonenkova (Russian State University of Physical Education, Sport, Youth and Tourism, Moscow) Relationship between personality traits of elite Latvian football players and their psychological skills Irina Simonenkova, sport psychologist, Latvia, Phd Candidate Psychology Department of Russian State University of Physical Education, Sport, Youth and Tourism, Moscow, Russia Keywords: football player, personality trait, psychological skills, football player’sefficiency The paper presents research findings of the relationship between the personality traits and psychological skills of Latvian highly qualified football players. The research population was football players from 6 Latvian Higher League teams. The empirical research sample included 90 male football players 18-35 years of age.
The analysis of theoretical sources on psychological skills in sports activity and expert interviews with the Latvian Football Federation representatives, Latvian Higher League coaches and experienced football players have enabled the researchers to identify 11 most essential psychological skills. Further on, a test of psychological skills assessment was developed; the test included 93 statements rated on a 5-point scale.To measure a football player’s efficiency, the method of expert assessment was applied. The research participants also included 9 experts (6 chief coaches from Higher League teams, 2 members of the Latvian Football Federation Coaching Council and 1 sports journalist, specializing in football).
The research findings have made it possible to identify 5 essential psychological skills as having a statistically significant correlation with game efficiency of Latvian football players. To measure personality traits the five factor model, i.e. BIG FIVE Inventory was applied to the same sample group.
Hence, the association between personality traits and psychological skills was studied, and positive and negative correlations were identified. Further research may be focused on the application of the BIG FIVE Inventory and interpretation of factor scores in the sport environment. Keywords: football player, personality trait, psychological skills, football player’sefficiency Yoga teachers’ motivational trajectories from practitioner to teacher Ineke Vergeer (University of Southern Queensland) Yoga is an ancient Indian practice that has become increasingly popular in western societies in recent years.
Embedded in a holistic philosophy that includes physical, mental, and spiritual elements, it goes beyond what is typically offered in traditional western exercise settings, and this may be reflected in practitioners’ participation motivation. The aim of this study was to shed light on the motives associated with yoga practice, specifically those related to different phases of engagement in the lives of highly involved practitioners, yoga teachers. In-depth interviews were conducted with experienced yoga teachers (n=7; ages 47–67 years; yoga practice experience 9–40 years; yoga teaching experience 3–25 years), querying them about their motivation 545Posters Thursday July 13th for first becoming a practitioner and then a teacher of yoga.
Interviews were recorded, transcribed, and subjected to a thematic analysis. Results showed that initial motives to take up yoga included the need for a suitable physical practice, an interest in mind-body integration, and/or a search for a practice that could help with the deeper meaning of life. Continued practice was reinforced by experiencing a range of benefits, including a changed relationship to one’s body, growing self-knowledge and insight, gaining “tools for life”, having intellectual and experiential access to yoga philosophy, and finding enhanced spiritual clarity.
A strong motivator for teaching was to pass on the benefits of yoga. This was driven by a desire to share the beneficial effects one had experienced oneself, and/or by perceiving a need for yoga in modern society. Seeing a natural fit integrating yoga teaching into their profession also motivated some teachers.
In conclusion, yoga teachers’ motivational trajectories showed an uptake of yoga practice because of physical, psychological, and occasionally spiritual needs, while continued practice and the desire to teach were motivated by the multiple benefits gained through doing yoga. Keywords: participation motives, yoga, teaching Effects of acute stress and cardiovascular fitness on the shifting aspect of executive function: A pilot study I-Lun Huang, Tai-Sheng Chen, Jui-Ti Nien, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Stress is a major issue in public health and its adverse effects have been observed in relation to physical health and executive functions (EF). Fortunately, a higher level of cardiovascular fitness (CF) has been associated with a protective function against these adverse impacts of stress.
The current study aimed to investigate the effects of acute stress and CF simultaneously on the shifting aspect of EF. Based on the Cross- Stressor Adaptation Hypothesis, we expected that individuals with higher CF would have better performance in the stress condition. 20 young males were recruited and assigned into either high-fit (HF, n=10) or low-fit (LF, n=10) groups.
All participants received two treatment conditions, the stress (S) and non-stress (NS) conditions, in a counterbalanced order. The S condition includes immersing participants’ feet in ice-cold water and having them solve mathematic problems. All participants were instructed to perform a Task-Switching Test immediately after both conditions.
Our results revealed that both groups demonstrated significant shorter reaction time (RT) in the homogeneous task-switching condition, compare to the RTs in the heterogeneous condition. Furthermore, regardless treatment conditions, the HF group had shorter RT across both homogeneous and heterogeneous task-switching conditions, as compared to their counterparts. Finally, despites the cognitive performance of both groups was significantly impaired after the S condition, as compared to the NS condition, the HF group’s performance was still superior to that of the LF group’s.
Our findings revealed a general beneficial effect of CF on the EF performance, reflected by the superior performance of HF in both task-switching conditions in the NS condition. Notably, our findings further illustrated the protective effects of CF on EF under the stress condition, supporting the Cross-Stressor Adaptation Hypothesis. Keywords: stress, cortisol, cardiovascular fitness, executive function Examining happiness, subjective vitality, aggression and depression of bodybuilders according to gender Ihsan Sari (Sakarya University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Sakarya, Turkey), G.Yasemin Aldemir (Marmara University, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey) Bodybuilders just like fashion models exhibit themselves on the runway.
This exhibition requires a strict diet, orderly life style, and continues exercise in which the bodybuilders push the limits of their bodies (Sugiyama, 2014). The relevant literature showed that there are mood alterations (Rossow et al., 2013) and 546Posters Thursday July 13th psychological distress (Ross et al., 1995) during preparation to a bodybuilding competition. However, there is also evidence that a range of positive mental states develop through the hard physical trainings and strict dietary practices undertaken by the competitors, (Aspridis et al., 2014).
In addition, the relevant literature showed that gender might affect some psychological factors of individuals (Coulomb-Cabagno and Rascle, 2006; Schuch et al., 2014). Therefore the first aim of this research was to reveal psychological characteristics of bodybuilders regarding happiness, subjective vitality, aggression and depression. The second aim was to determine the gender differences.
203 males (Xage=23.84±5.38, Xexperience=4.24±4.27) and 75 females (Xage=24.21±6.25, Xexperience=4.48±3.74) as a total of 278 bodybuilders voluntarily participated to this research. Subjective Vitality Scale, The Buss-Perry Aggression Questionnaire, The Subjective Happiness Scale and The Beck Depression Inventory were used as the data collection tools. Descriptive statistics and MANOVA analysis were used to analyse the data.
Results showed that there was a significant difference according to gender F (7, 270) = 5.11, p <.05, Wilks’ λ = .88, Partial η2 = .12. While happiness, depression and subjective vitality scores did not significantly differ, males had significantly higher scores on physical aggression. The findings of this research outline psychological features of bodybuilders with regard to happiness, subjective vitality, aggression, and depression.
Moreover, as male participants’ physical aggression scores were higher, some precautions might be taken for this issue. Keywords: bodybuilding, psychological features, gender Psychometric properties of Turkish version of short form of physical self-description questionnaire Hülya Asçi (Marmara University), Emine Çağlar (Hacettepe University), Osman Urfa (Marmara University) The purpose of this study was to test the validity and reliability of the Turkish version of short form of Physical Self-Description Questionnaire (PSDQ-S) for 12-18 years old adolescents. PSDQ-S consists of 11 subscales with 40 items.
The scale was developed by Marsh, Martin, and Jackson (2010) by selecting items from PSDQ long version. Two hundred and twenty-eight females (Mage =14.22, SD=1.52 years) and 262 males (Mage =14.05, SD=1.62 years), totally 490 adolescents (Mage =14.13, SD=1.58 years) participated in this study. We conducted confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to test construct validity of the Turkish version of PSDQ-S and calculated Cronbach alpha coefficients to determine reliabilities of the sub-scales.
The hypothesized model consisted of 40 observed variables and 11 latent variables. The hypothesized model resulted in good fit indices I = 0.98 and CFI = 0.99). Standardized factor loadings ranged from 0.41 to 0.92 for the 11-factor model.
These findings showed that the Turkish version of PSDQ-S had similar factor structure to the original scale’s 11-factor structure. Internal consistency coefficients of the Turkish version of PSDQ-S subscales ranged from .69 (Self Confidence) to .90 (Sport Ability). It can be concluded that the Turkish version of PSDQ-S is a valid and reliable instrument to measure physical self of adolescents.
Keywords: physical self, reliability, validity, adolescents An experimental study of intermediate education mode of water safety of college student Hui Zhang, Rong Fan, Bin Wang, Shi Luo Introduction: Water safety education is one of the most efficient strategy to prevent drowning accidents. This study aims at college students who has mastered several swimming skills but with little water safety knowledge, self-saving skills and skills of saving the near-drowning. Intermediate education mode of water safety of college student is established according to the instructional objectives of "calm coping, skillful rescue".
This study aims at examining the influence of the intermediate education mode of water safety of college student on college students' water safety knowledge, skill, attitude and behavior. Methods: 60 college 547Posters Thursday July 13th students are selected as participants. The experimental group and control group are randomly settled(each group is consisted of 15 female students and 15 male students).
The experimental group is trained for 30 days under the instruction of intermediate education mode of water safety of college student, while the control group is trained by traditional instruction mode. 2×2×2 repeated measure mixed experimental design is applied. Experiment process(traditional swimming teaching mode and intermediate education mode of water safety) and gender(male, female) are between-subjects factor; measuring time(before, after).
Results: There is no difference between the experimental group and control group in dimensions like water safety knowledge, skill, attitude and behavior before the experiment. After the experiment, the experimental group is significantly higher than control group in each dimensions; the delayed measurement(3 months after the water safety education) shows experimental group. Conclusion: (1) intermediate education mode of water safety may help improve college students' water safety knowledge, skill and attitude.
It may also reduce water high-risk behavior. (2) the effect of intermediate education mode of water safety is sustained. Keywords: college students, the intermediate education mode of water safety, layer teaching, water safety skills, water high-risk practices Development of Chinese athlete mental health scale Hui Li (Tianjin University of Sport) Up to the Dual-Factor Model of Mental Health, Chinese Athlete Mental Health Scale was developed from Common Mental Disorders and Positive Mental Characteristics.
Based on overviews of former researchers and the results of the open-ended questionnaire，85 items were collected. The logical structure of athlete mental health was constructed by the exploring factor analysis of the 80 preliminary questionnaires and the confirmatory factor analysis of the formal scale given to 205 athlete, and Chinese Athlete Mental Health Scale was formed. At last, 40 subjects selected were retested 30 days later for the test-retest reliability Chinese Athlete Mental Health Scale was taken Reliability Analysis and Validity Analysis by many indexes.
Through above analysis, athlete mental health has two dimensional structures. They are Common Mental Disorders and Positive Mental Characteristics. Common Mental Disorders includes four factors; those are depression, hostility, anxiety and somatization.
Positive Mental Characteristics includes three factors; those are strong will, social adjustment and Positive intelligence. The result of confirmatory factor analysis of Common Mental Disorders was indicated by χ2/df < 2，GFI>0.80，CFI>0.90，RMSEA<0.08; The result of confirmatory factor analysis of Positive Mental Characteristics was indicated byχ2/df <2，GFI>0.90，CFI>0.9 RMSEA<0.08. The Cronbach α coefficient were 0.
813 for Common Mental Disorders, and test-retest reliability coefficient were 0.918; The Cronbach α coefficient were 0.615 for Positive Mental Characteristics and test-retest reliability coefficient were 0.971. Significant correlation（r=0.3～0.8）was appeared between Common Mental Disorders and SCL-90. Significant correlation（r=0.2～0.8）was appeared between Positive Mental Characteristics and Index of Well-being.Moderate related was present between each factor,and lower than with subscales.
The scale can be regarded as fitting tool of estimating athlete mental health. Keywords: athlete mental health scale, common mental disorders, positive mental characteristics The prediction of mindfulness on subjective vitality and athlete burnout among golfers: The mediating effects of basic psychological needs Hsin-Yun Chuang, Li-Kang Chi (National Taiwan Normal University) The relationship between mindfulness and well- and ill-being has been demonstrated to a great extent in prior studies. However, only few empirical researches explored the structure of mindfulness mechanisms 548Posters Thursday July 13th (Chang, 2015).
Based on previous research, individuals’ fulfillment of their basic psychological needs depends mostly on support from others, such as support from a coach in a sports team context (Adie, Duda, & Ntoumanis, 2008; Adie, Duda, & Ntoumanis, 2012). However, Chang, Huang, and Lin (2015) suggested that a possible way for individuals to fulfill their basic psychological needs is by enhancing mindfulness rather than depending on others. The fulfillment of basic psychological needs plays an important role in mediating the relationship between well-being and other antecedent variables.
Therefore, based on Basic Psychological Needs Theory (BPNT; Ryan & Deci, 2000), the present study examined the mediating effect of basic psychological needs on mindfulness in predicting subjective vitality and athlete burnout. Participants were 97 golfers (54 males and 43 females). Their mean age and golf experience were 23.95 (SD = 8.46) and 10.45 (SD = 7.04) years respectively.
Participants were asked to complete questionnaires which include The Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire, Basic Need Satisfaction Scale, Athlete Burnout Questionnaire, and Subjective Vitality Scale. The Bootstrap mediation analysis revealed that the association between mindfulness and subjective vitality was mediated by autonomy and relatedness. The association between mindfulness and athlete burnout, on the other hand, was mediated by competence and relatedness.
In accord to the hypotheses, this study provides a potential way to achieve the fulfillment of basic psychological needs in golf training that could enhance golfers' subjective vitality and reduce the occurrence of burnout. Keywords: bootstrapping, well-being, ill-being Case study of chronic exercise effect on facial skin condition and subjective well-being Dong-Seop Lee, Dong-Ho Lee, Hosang Yoo (Yeungnam University) The purpose of this case study was to investigate the effect of the 10 weeks of aerobic or combined exercise on facial skin condition and subjective well-being in college students. The study was conducted for 16 weeks (baseline 3 weeks, exercise intervention 10 weeks, exercise withdrawal 3 weeks) with two males and two females.
One male and females participated in only aerobic exercise and the other male and female participated in combined exercise. The results of the Excel program showed that in the facial skin of all participants, the moisture content was increased and the sebum content was decreased in the exercise intervention stage compared to the baseline. The moisture content was decreased and the sebum content was increased at the exercise withdrawal stage.
The positive affect which is a sub-factor of the subjective well-being was gradually increased while the negative affect was decreased over time after the exercise interventions. The life satisfaction, another sub-factor of the subjective well-being, was also found to be increased over time after the exercise interventions. In conclusion, both of aerobic and combined exercise had positive effects on the skin health and the subjective well-being that were not directly correlated.
Keywords: single case study (ABA), aerobic exercise, combined exercise, facial skin condition, subjective well- being Dance program using kinect for education purpose affects body expression of children with intellectual disabilities Hong Sunghee (Shinhan University) The purpose of this study was to design and implement educational dance program using Kinect through body movement of children with intellectual disabilities and to investigate whether children with intellectual disabilities have more influence on body expressions as the utilization of program was higher.The participants of this study were 32 children with intellectual disability, and the period was 5 days from December 20 to December 24, 2016. Educational dance program using Kinect included two songs translated into Korean with the musical "Les Miserables" story and 40 kinds of body expressions (body expressions without movement) that are based on movements of Laban. These body expressions were made with the skeleton body position 549Posters Thursday July 13th and it is possible to control the difficulty of various movements.
If body motion is recognized in motion recognition, it will be appeared as correct answer but if not, then it will be appeared as incorrect answer. The program was set to show body expressions randomly for 3 minutes. For the evaluation method, the number (score) of motion recognized as correct will be displayed on the background of screen with sound effect.
This study was conducted that when the body motion is presented, the motion of the participant appears with music using the chromakey technique in which motion of participants appears on the screen through the camera. Participants who saw this became more aggressive and showed a willingness to move correctly. Accordingly, this study shown that the educational dance program using Kinect can help children with intellectual disabilities to become more confidence with courage and willingness to express their body expression to people close to them.
Based on this study, the program mitigates disadvantages of old education method of body expression. Finally, this study suggests that various dancing programs for education purpose should be developed continuously. Keywords: children with intellectual disabilities, movement physical activity, Kinect program Isotropy bias remains regardless of experienced levels in amateur tennis players Hiroyuki Yamamoto, Masahiro Shinya, Kazutoshi Kudo Knowing own motor variance is important for motor decision making.Previous studies showed isotropy bias of endpoints (estimation of circular distribution) in reaching task.Therefore, we investigated whether the bias remains in tennis players for the ball landing positions of forehand strokes (Exp1) and whether the participants could estimate 95 % confidence interval from the random Gaussian distribution (Exp2) to test whether the bias comes from the recognition of trial-by-trial error and/or estimation of confidential ellipse from the distribution.Tennis players (n=31,5.45±5.17 yrs.
of tennis experiences) participated in Exp1.The participants estimated variability in 50 landing positions by setting parameters of the distribution (SD in x and y axes and correlation coefficient) on Graphical User Interface that display the compacted tennis court and varying Gaussian dots in accordance with the parameters.Then, they hit forehand strokes fed by a ball machine.We compared the eccentricity of the ellipse calculated from estimated and observed landing positions.We analyzed the relationships between error indexes (AE,VE,CE) and the degree of the biases.The eccentricity was smaller in the estimated ellipse than in the observed ellipse (t(30)=10.14, p.05).These results show isotropy bias remains regardless of experienced levels for the amateur tennis players.In Exp2, participants in Exp1 (n=9) estimated confidence interval ellipses for displayed Gaussian dots.The eccentricity was smaller in estimated ellipses than in the ellipses for the displayed dots (t(8)=3.98, p <.01).However, the eccentricity was smaller in the estimated ellipses in Exp1 than in the estimated ellipses in Exp2 (t(8)=4.58, p<.01).Overall, we found the isotropy bias includes the bias of recognizing landing position and the bias of estimating confidential ellipse from the recognized landing position. Keywords: decision making, cognitive bias, motor control, motor variance, estimation of variance Using floor sign to promote physical activity in Japanese women’s University Hiroshi Matsumoto (Mukogawa Woman's University), Junichi Nishida (Kindai University) Physical activity contributes to better health but most young Japanese women do not pursue physical activities at recommended ages. This study aimed to investigate the effectiveness of floor sign as an environmental sustainability intervention to encourage the use of stairs instead of elevators.
For this purpose, we monitored the use of stairs at a women’s university in Japan. A baseline period of two weeks was followed by an intervention period of three weeks, using motivating messages on the floor sign. Post-intervention data was gathered two weeks after removing the messages.
The floor sign featured the message “You can change yourself and save the earth. Take the stairs!”. Observation of stair use were made 24 hours by a counting 550Posters Thursday July 13th machine four days a week.
During the study, 12,247 observations were made regarding the individuals who used stairs at the university. The results of the study indicated that the use of stairs increased significantly during the intervention period when the floor sign encouraging stair use were positioned at the point of choosing to use either the stairs or the elevators. The use of stairs escalated extensively between the baseline and the intervention period (+10.5%, χ2 (1) = 8.22, p < 0.01).
Moreover, statistically significant increases were noted during the post-intervention period compared with the baseline period (+23.3%, χ2 (1) = 38.32, p < 0.01). To conclude, this intervention method was effective in encouraging physical activity in the form of the use of stairs among young Japanese women attending universities. Keywords: physical activity intervention, motivational sign, stair use, young Japanese women Qualitative study of the process of adapting to different cultures in Japanese soccer athletes and coaches Hideaki Takai In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of athletes and coaches that aim to increase their competitive standard by moving their training centers to countries overseas where sports are well developed.
At the same time, a great many of these athletes and coaches need psychological support because they are unable to adapt to the changes in living environment encountered overseas. In the present study, a qualitative investigation of the process by which Japanese soccer athletes and coaches adapt to different cultures was carried out, with the aim of developing a psychological support program for Japanese soccer players and coaches in a different cultural environment. The subjects were 6 male Japanese players and coaches in the German soccer Bundesliga.
Data for the study were collected by interviews. The questions were a combination of three types: main questions, follow-up questions, and probes. The data were analyzed by a researcher specializing in sports psychology, a Bundesliga coach, and a specialist in clinical psychology.
The Grounded Theory Approach was used for analysis. The results showed that language acquisition was the most important issue for Japanese soccer athletes and coaches during the initial period of their stay in Germany. At the same time, understanding and receptiveness toward foreign culture was a requirement for the cultural adaptation of Japanese athletes and coaches.
Subsequently, as their stay in Germany lengthened, it became clear that there was a heightened importance attached to understanding and receptiveness toward Japanese culture. In addition, regardless of their length of stay, Japanese athletes and coaches recognized the diligence of Japanese people and sensitive concern as strong points. Furthermore, having devotion toward one’s team, which is an interdependent construal of self, may be regarded as a psychological trait that allows Japanese athletes and coaches to perform at world level.
Keywords: cultural view of self, interdependent construal of self, soccer The role of teachers’ controlling behaviour in physical education on adolescents’ health- related quality of life: A test of conditional process model Henri Tilga, Vello Hein, Andre Koka (University of Tartu) The potential benefits of teachers’ autonomy support in physical education (PE) for students’ need satisfaction are well established. Still, students may also experience need frustration due to teachers’ controlling behaviour. Several previous studies indicate that controlling behaviours are not the conceptual opposite of autonomy supportive behaviours.
That is, individuals in a position of authority may simultaneously use a variety of autonomy supportive and controlling behaviours in various extents. In current study our main aim was to examine the indirect effect from controlling behaviour to health-related quality of life (HRQoL), mediated by the interaction of perceived need frustration and teachers’ autonomy support in PE context. Therefore, we proposed and tested a conditional process model of students’ self-reported HRQoL based on 551Posters Thursday July 13th Self-determination theory.
Participants completed a questionnaire that included measures of perceived teachers’ autonomy support, perceived teachers’ controlling behaviour, perceived need frustration and perceived HRQoL. Results from a sample of 1031 secondary school students showed that the relation between the perceived teachers’ controlling behaviour and students’ HRQoL was fully mediated by students perceived need frustration in PE classes. This result provides support to argumentation that need frustration might be that “dark” pathway, which is activated by teachers controlling behaviour and results in students’ need frustration.
In accordance with our hypothesis, the indirect relation between controlling teacher behaviour and HRQoL, mediated by students perceived need frustration, was moderated by autonomy support from teachers, such as that the mediation was evident among all levels of autonomy support. These results emphasize the importance of minimizing teachers’ controlling behaviour and increasing teachers’ autonomy supportive behaviour in regarding to promote students’ HRQoL. Keywords: controlling behaviour, autonomy support, need frustration, health-related quality of life, self- determination theory Physical activity positively associated with psychological well-being and loneliness in finnish population sample Henna Hukkanen, Pauliina Husu, Kari Tokola, Tommi Vasankari Aim of the study was to investigate whether self-reported physical activity (PA) is associated with psychological well-being and loneliness in Finnish population sample.
Participants of the Regional health and well-being study (ATH) completed health and well-being questionnaires including questions of PA (light, moderate, vigorous, muscular strength and balance training), psychological well-being (depressed mood and loss of interest) and loneliness. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were obtained from survey- weighted generalized linear models adjusted for sex, age, body mass index, marital status, education years, working hours, employment status, smoking, alcohol use and sitting time. A total of 79565 adult participants (mean age 47-y, 51% women) took part of the study.
Half of the participants did not meet any part of the health-enhancing physical activity (HEPA) recommendation (aerobic, muscle strength or both). Depressed mood and loss of interest were equally common (20%) among the participants and 9% had felt loneliness often. Meeting at least one part of the HEPA recommendation decreased the probability to report depressed mood (OR 0.80-0.87,p <0.01) and loss of interest (OR 0.67-0.80,p<0.001) compared to those who did not meet any part of the HEPA recommendation.
Furthermore those who met either muscular strength recommendation (OR 0.80, CI95% 0.69-0.93,p=0.003) or full HEPA recommendation (OR 0.71, CI95% 0.60-0.84,p<0.001) were less likely to rate loneliness compared to those who did not meet any part of HEPA recommendation. In conclusion, meeting HEPA recommendation fully or partly indicates positive association to psychological well-being and loneliness. Even so we must notice that these results did not reveal causality of the association and thus the interpretation must be done with caution.
In the future, there is a need for longitudinal studies to investigate the causal relationship of PA to psychological well-being and loneliness. Keywords: physical activity,psychological well-being,loneliness,questionnaire Maximal handgrip strength and its control in judo athletes before and after training session Henrique Rodrigues Nunes, Luis Felipe Tubagi Polito, Douglas Popp Marin (Universidade Metodista do Estado de São Paulo - UMESP), Carla Giuliano de Sá Pinto Montenegro (Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein), Luciane Aparecida Moscaleski, Simone Inácio de Lima (Universidade Municipal de São Caetano do Sul), Helton Magalhães Dias (Universidade São Judas Tadeu), Yago de Moura Carneiro (Universidade Metodista do Estado de São Paulo - UMESP), Aylton José Figueira Júnior, Maria Regina Ferreira Brandão, Marcelo Callegari Zanetti (Universidade São Judas Tadeu) 552Posters Thursday July 13th Judo is a combat modality classified as domain fight involving projections and immobilizations. During the Judo combat, the athletes should unbalance its opponents, pushing or pulling them.
In this way, the athletes need have the perception of the applied strength magnitude. In scientific literature there is knowledge about the maximal handgrip strength, but there isn’t much information about of the strength control.: To evaluate the maximal handgrip strength and the strength control capacity in Judo athletes. Thirteen judo athletes volunteers were evaluated (24.14±7.5 years; 1.70±0.1 m; 75.69±16.73 kg).
Handgrip evaluation and 50% of the maximal handgrip strength calculated (C) and performed (P) of both hands (dominant and non-dominant ones) were performed a CROWN® manual dynamometer immediately before and after the training session. Wilcoxon Test for paired samples (pre and post comparison) and Mann-Whitney Test for unpaired samples (comparison between the calculated and performed) were used (p (p<.05). : In the pre-test, the following Handgrip Strength value(Kgf/kg) were found for: 100%(D)=58±15; 100%(ND)=54±16; 50% C(D)=29±7*; 50% C(ND)=27±8*; 50% P(D)=36±14*; 50% P(ND)=37±12* In the post-test: 100%(D)=63±18; 100%(ND)=60±25; 50% C(D)=31±9*; 50% C(ND)=30±12*; 50% P(D)=32±10*; 50% P(ND)=32±8* The Judo athletes showed a good strength control for dominant hand before the training and a good strength control for both hands after the training.
Perhaps, the training session and the technical skills that occurred during the training stimulated the nervous system about the perception of strength on non-dominant hands. However, the dominant hand seems to have good control level due the most use of this hand during the fights. More studies are necessary to understand the strength control in different martial arts and for this is necessary an ecologically validated protocol to evaluate handgrip performance in Judo athletes.
Keywords: judo, handgrip strength, strength control Coping rarely takes place in a social vacuum: The antecedents and outcomes of dyadic coping in coach-athlete relationships Helen Staff, Faye Didymus, Susan Backhouse (Leeds Beckett University) Advances in coping literature suggest that individuals do not always manage stressors alone. Instead, they manage these demands by using their close personal relationships as a way of pooling appropriate coping resources and, thus, employing dyadic coping strategies. Despite the potential importance of dyadic coping for coach-athlete relationships, the topic is yet to be qualitatively explored in sport.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to use qualitative method to explore antecedents and outcomes of dyadic coping within coach- athlete relationships. Using individual and dyadic interviews, the coping experiences of five coach-athlete dyads were explored. The exploration of both coaches’ and athletes’ experiences provides an opportunity to see how individuals in close working relationships form meaning and understanding through the social world.
Interviews were analyzed using dyadic analysis and vignettes were used as a means of presenting the data. Four key themes that were prevalent throughout the data set were identified: (a) the lock and the key, (b) friendship and trust, (c) communication of the stressor, and (d) protection and support. The first three themes represent antecedents of dyadic coping.
The fourth theme encompasses the positive nurturing environment that was discussed as an outcome of dyadic coping processes. This study advances knowledge of coping in sport by highlighting coping as an interpersonal process, rather than an individual phenomenon. The results of this study extend current research by examining antecedents and outcomes of interpersonal coping in sport.
Dyadic coping processes were prevalent in adaptable coach-athlete relationships that involved elements of trust and friendship. Dyadic coping appears to have implications for relationship satisfaction and psychological well-being. Keywords: communal coping, intimate relationships, relational coping, social support 553Posters Thursday July 13th “You’re gonna win and you’re gonna win it easy”: World-class athletes’ experiences of media expectations Helen Heaviside, Andrew Manley, Susan Backhouse, Faye Didymus (Leeds Beckett University) Speculation about athletes who are expected to become champions is a central focus of media reporters’ attention before major sporting events (e.g., Heaviside, Manley, Backhouse, & Didymus, 2015).
Despite the prominence of such expectations within media reports, little is known about the consequences they can have for the athletes to whom they refer. This study aimed to explore the consequences of these expectations by using in-depth qualitative methods to capture athletes’ experiences of performance expectations that are reported by the media. Guided by the first author’s pragmatist perspective, semi-structured interviews (78-128 minutes) were conducted with two athletes (Mage = 23, SD = 2.83 years) who met the criteria of: (a) having performance expectations reported in the media ahead of the London 2012 Games and (b) representing Great Britain within individual events at London 2012.
The small sample size was purposefully chosen to facilitate rich and nuanced accounts of the athletes’ experiences. Two portrait vignettes were used to represent the data because they allow experiences to be represented in a meaningful and accessible manner (e.g., Erickson, Backhouse & Carless, 2016). The vignettes detailed cognitive, affective, and behavioural consequences of performance expectations that were constructed and reported by the media.
The vignettes also represented coping strategies that were used by the athletes to manage these expectations. The findings of this study enhance understanding of multiple factors: (i) behaviours associated with media expectations that journalists might display towards athletes; (ii) cognitive, affective, and behavioural consequences that athletes may experience when faced with media expectations; and (iii) strategies that athletes have used to manage media expectations. By using vignettes, the present study exemplifies an alternative way of presenting data regarding expectations, which other researchers in this area may wish to utilise.
Keywords: pressure, coping, expectation formation, fear of failure Psychological well-being and off-field needs of professional male South African sevens rugby players Ninette Steenkamp, Heinrich Grobbelaar (Stellenbosch University) Rugby (in the popular sevens format) was included in the 2016 Rio Olympic Games for the first time since 1924, with South Africa’s Blitzboks winning bronze. They have also been runners-up of the annually contested World Rugby Sevens Series for the past four seasons. Whilst peak performance is paramount at this elite level there is a growing responsibility to address the psychological well-being and off-the-field needs of players both during and after their playing careers.
The primary aim of a larger study was to analyse the perceived demands (physical, technical, logistical, psychological) of rugby sevens held by professional players from South Africa. This poster specifically explored the participant’s psychological well-being and off-the-field needs. Twenty professional sevens players (age: 21-33 years, number of international tournaments: 0-68) participated in semi- structured interviews (average duration: 40 minutes) conducted by the leading author.
Six main themes emerged from the thematic content analysis: 1) preparation for life after rugby (e.g., shared responsibility, career guidance, mental help), 2) financial concerns (e.g., earning less than 15’s players, better financial advice, earlier contracting), 3) further studies (e.g., funding, options to further education, extra time required), 4) player well-being (e.g., more family time, mentorship needs), 5) physical needs (e.g., individualised training, diets, supplementation), and 6) professionalism and boundaries (e.g., greater exposure, keeping outsiders out, media training). This information together with the perceived physical, technical, logistical and psychological demands of the game will be used to develop an integrated sport psychological and well-being programme aimed at improving the individual and team performance of developing and elite players within the South African sevens rugby structures, as well as facilitating their psychological well-being. 554Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: perceived demands, developmental pathways, career termination Participation in physical activity and sport: Developmental pathways and experiences of elite male South African athletes with cerebral palsy Liza Willemsen, Heinrich Grobbelaar, Jason Bantjes (Stellenbosch University) Physical disabilities tend to impact activity levels and sport participation negatively.
Information on the experiences of elite disabled athletes (including those with cerebral palsy (CP)) is scarce. The aim was to explore the developmental pathways of five elite male South African athletes with CP. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with four track athletes (class T37-T38) and one cyclist (class C3), aged 20 to 29.
Three main themes emerged from the interpretative phenomenological analysis: (1) their pathways in becoming elite athletes, (2) the role of their faith, and (3) identity and acceptance of their disabilities. The participants described common pathways; they were introduced to organised school sport in an able-bodied environment where they did not identify themselves as being disabled. This resulted in an ‘extra push’ to train harder in order to keep up with their able-bodied peers, seemingly playing an important role in their journeys towards becoming elite athletes.
Their introduction to disability sport typically occurred during mid to late adolescence, which, in most cases, facilitated their acceptance of their disabilities. They became more successful, which portrayed strength and ability, in contrast to the stigma that disabled individuals are dependent and weak. Competing and performing in disabled sport helped them to find purpose in their disabilities, with their faith in God identified as a key factor.
This information could contribute to the development of strategies aimed at increasing activity levels among disabled individuals and optimising their transitions from youth sport to elite competition. Keywords: disability sport, transitions, identity Evolution of the teacher´s leadership and their level of self-determined motivation throughout the academic year Héctor Moreno-Casado (University of Extremadura), Ricardo Cuevas-Campos (University of Castilla-La Mancha), Miguel Rodríguez-González, Juan José Pulido (University of Extremadura) Based on the Self- Determination Theory (SDT) and the Transformational Leadership Theory (TLT), the objective of this research was to know the evolution of variables such as leadership, level of motivation and the burnout syndrome in the teachers of secondary education throughout an academic year. For this purpose, 27 Spanish teachers (men=21; women= 6) of Physical Education of Compulsory Secondary Education, with an average of 12.7 years of working experience participated.
Meeting the ethical criteria established, three measures were carried out throughout the same academic year. After carrying out a multivariate analysis of repeated measures, the results did not show meaningful differences in the analysed variables. Specifically, the transformational leadership and the professional efficiency increase lightly in the measure 2 in relation to the measure 1 and they drop again in the measure 3.
As for the transactional leadership and laissez-faire , we notice a progressive drop between the measure 1 and the measure 2 and between the measure 2 and the measure 3, respectively. The autonomous motivation, controlled, demotivation and organization show an increase taking into account the three measures carried out throughtout the academic year. Finally, the emotional exhaustion and cynicism drop in the measure 2 regarding the measure 1, however, they show a moderate increase in the measure 3.
These results show that there are oscillations which must be considered and studied in the future with a more representative sample with the purpose of being able to generalise the data obtained. Keywords: academic year, teenagers, physical education, burnout 555Posters Thursday July 13th Characteristics of event-related potentials for open-skilled players during mental rotation task Haruo Sakuma, Sayaka Matsumoto, Shingo Imagawa (Ritsumeikan University) Open-skilled sports players are asked at every moment to perceive and response rapid situational changes faster and more accurately. Therefore, such cognitive skills are considered components of the competitive level, and cognitive skills should be assessed to provide effective instruction when coaching athletes.
Several psychological operations are thought to play a role in athletes’ cognitive process, of which one is mental rotation. We aimed to determine the underlying cognitive process of the skill in open-skill athletes by using rotation-related negativity (RRN), which is an event-related brain potential (ERP) elicited by mental image rotation. Skilled ice hockey players (athlete group) and non-athlete controls performed the mental rotation task by using letters from the alphabet with simultaneous electroencephalography (EEG) recording.
We calculated the percentage and mean reaction time of the correct responses, and the mean amplitude of the time window when RRN was considered to have appeared, separately for smaller- and larger-angle conditions of the stimulus rotation. The athlete group responded less accurately but faster than the control group, indicating that open-skill athletes prioritized speed over accuracy. No significant group difference in RRN amplitude was found between the athletes and controls, although RRN was observed in most participants when the rotation angle of the stimulus was larger.
Significant positive correlations were found between the RRN amplitude at each electrode and the change in the percentage of correct responses, which were calculated by subtracting the value in the smaller-angle condition from that in the larger-angle condition. In addition, the player position seemed to have affected the distribution of the athlete group in the scatter plots, suggesting that the goal keepers tried to maintain their accuracy, whereas the other field players prioritized making faster responses. Keywords: ERP, mental rotation, open-skilled Leisure-time physical activity levels and the correlation with physical activity self-efficacy in Chinese university students Hao Liu (Shenzhen University, P.R.
China) There is a high prevalence of sedentary habits in Chinese university students, even though they know these benefits of taking part in regular physical activity (PA). In this study, the leisure-time PA levels and its correlation with PA self-efficacy in Chinese university students are investigated. Totally 365 (200 male and 165 female) students from two universities in Shenzhen China take part in this investigation voluntarily (age: 17-23, M = 19, SD = 3.1).
The leisure-time PA is measured using the short form version of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ, Chinese version); the PA self-efficacy is assessed by a scale consisting of a subscale to overcome external barriers (self-efficacy –external) and a subscale to overcome internal barriers (self-efficacy – internal)[1]. The total PA score (MET-min/week) of the male is 3082.30, with 35 students have low PA level (< 600 MET-min/week), 115 students have moderate PA level (> 600 and < 3000 MET-min/week), and 50 students have high PA level (> 3000 MET-min/week). The total PA score of the female is 2130.82, with 40 students have low PA level, 100 students have moderate PA level, and 25 students have high PA level.
The result of a two-way contingency analysis to test differences in the PA levels between the female and males is χ2 = 58.62, p < .001. The multiple regression analysis is used to test the predictor ability of self-efficacy for leisure- time PA. For the self-efficacy – external, r2 = .13, p < .01; for the self-efficacy – internal, r2 = -.20, p < .05.
In conclusion, results of the present study shows that (1) The leisure-time PA level of Chinese female university student is lower than that of male university students; (2) the PA self-efficacy is a reliable predictor for Chinese university students. [1] Dwyer, J. J.
M., Chulak, T., Maitland, S., et al. (2012). Adolescents’ self-efficacy to overcome barriers to physical activity scale.
Research Quality for Exercise and Sport, 83, 513-521. 556Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: physical activity, self-efficacy, outcome expectation, Chinese university students Contextual factors influencing decision-making: Perceptions of professional soccer players Hannah Levi (St Mary's University) To date, decision-making research has predominantly used a reductionist approach to examine each perceptual-cognitive skill in isolation, with a stronger emphasis on experimental control than ecological validity (Williams, 2009). However, with such unpredictability in sport, it has been argued that it is essential that studies begin to consider the behavioural interaction between performers and the real-life sport environment during successful performance to gain a deeper insight into understanding decision-making in sport (Travassos et al., 2013).
In beginning to address this shortcoming, this study explored professional soccer players’ perceptions of how match-dependent contextual, or situational factors influence decision-making in soccer. Eight professional male soccer players aged between 18 and 22 participated in individual semi-structured interviews. The interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim and the data were analysed via an inductive thematic analysis.
The following themes were identified from the data: (a) confidence (sub-themes: personal performance, winning, momentum), (b) communication (sub- themes: coming from behind, weaknesses, unfavourable communication), (c) situational pressures (sub- themes: match importance, personal pressure), and (d) preparation. This study recognises the involvement of contextual factors in soccer players’ decision- making during a match. In line with previous findings, the results revealed that the situational development of the match impacts their decisions.
Furthermore, the players suggested a unique finding that external contextual factors were also involved in their ability to make decisions on the pitch. The present study provides preliminary support for practical implications for soccer coaches and players. Keywords: context, decision-making, soccer, sport The effectiveness of group acceptance and commitment therapy for psychological outcomes among collegiate archers Hanako Fukamachi, Kaori Ishii (Waseda University), Hirokazu Arai (Hosei University), Koichiro Oka (Waseda University) Several previous studies have adapted the Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) for performance enhancement among competitive athletes (Little & Simpson, 2000; Ruiz & Luciano, 2012).
The ACT was also found to be associated with decreased depression and anxiety among waitlist students (Levin et al., 2014). Nevertheless, the group ACT intervention has not yet been examined in the sports field. Therefore, this study aimed to examine the effectiveness of group ACT protocol for psychological outcomes among collegiate athletes.
The participants were 11 collegiate archers. Intervention was carried out over 8 sessions (about 60 minutes/session). The “psychological competitive ability” (Tokunaga, 2001) was used as the performance related outcome.
The health related outcome was measured using the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (Shima, 1985). Assessments were conducted at the baseline (T1), before the intervention (T2), after the intervention (T3), and 3 months follow-up (T4). Using a range of ACT exercises, the participants were able to gain an experiential understanding of the problem of experiential avoidance to set a small goal, and to identify how to achieve it based on values and committed actions.
Since we had the same participants across four trials (without having control groups), the repeated-measures ANOVA test was used to examine whether performance and health related measures were improved over the course of treatment. The ACT was found to have an effect on psychological competitive ability from T1 to T3 and T4 (F (3, 30) =16.27, p < .001), and an effect on mental health from T1 to T3 and T4 (F (3, 30) =3.93, p < .05). These findings suggest that the group ACT intervention may improve collegiate athletes’ psychological outcomes.
However, the contribution of each 557Posters Thursday July 13th intervention is not clear. Future studies using a randomized-control trial are necessary to identify the most effective intervention for psychological outcomes. Keywords: mindfulness, group intervention, archery, performance enhancement, mental health, collegiate athletes Development of mental toughness scale for elite swimmers Hanae Ito (Juntendo University), Kai Yamada (Hosei University), Hiroaki Funahashi, Isao Uebayashi, Yoshiyuki Mano (Waseda University), Masataka Hirosawa (Juntendo University) The purpose of this research was to develop a swimmer-specific mental toughness inventory.
In the pilot survey, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 7 Japanese individual sports Olympic medalists (4 males, 3 females) in order to identify the characteristics of elite swimmers’ mental toughness using a qualitative analysis method, the KJ method, considering higher- and lower-order structures. In the main research, a questionnaire regarding mental toughness was conducted on 254 swimmers (151 males, 103 females) who met the finishing time set by the Japan Swimming Federation with the purpose of enhancing swimmers’ competitiveness (assumed as elite swimmers in this study). The development of a swimmer-specific mental toughness inventory was attempted using a questionnaire developed by extracting swimmers’ mental toughness characteristics revealed in the pilot survey.
After excluding defective answers, 194 (117 males, 77 females) samples were included in analysis. Exploratory factor analysis indicated that the inventory consisted of five factors and three items. After scrutiny of what constituted the extracted five factors, they were named the following: “Fortitude,” “Commitment to the Sport,” “Psychological Conditioning,” “Self-control,” and “Resilience.” Exploratory factor analysis was once again conducted through the maximum-likelihood method and Promax rotation and confirmed internal validity.
Conversion validity and divergent validity were examined, both of which adequately fulfilled the Goodness of Fit Index and standard path coefficient. Finally, adequate criterion-related validity was verified using correlation analysis with DIPCA.3. The factors of mental toughness in elite swimmers were similar to those in other sports.
Japanese elite swimmers’ mental toughness characteristics were identified and a swimmer-specific mental toughness inventory was developed. This scale will be useful for coaches to understand Japanese elite swimmers’ mental toughness. Keywords: mental toughness, swimming, japanese Comparison of anxiety, motivation and imagery scores of professional football players Hakan Kolayis, Nurullah Celik (Sakarya University) The purpose of the study was to compare the anxiety, motivation and imagery scores between The Turkish Super League and First League professional football players.The research group comprised of totally 129 professional football players who play in the Turkish Football Federation (TFF) Turkish Super League (Xage:25,44±4,11 years) and First League (Xage: 23,80±4,33 years).
The participants participated in the study voluntarily. As a measuring tool, Competitive State Anxiety Inventory (CSAI-2), Sport Imagery Questionnaire (SIQ) and Sport Motivation Scale (SMS) was used in the study. In the analysis of data, frequency and percentage distribution calculations and Independent samples t test was used.
The statistical analysis was done by SPSS 16 packet program. According to the findings, statistically significant differences was found in somatic anxiety, intrinsic motivation to experience stimulation, identification and introjection sub-dimensions regarding league levels (p0.05). It was clearly revealed that predictive imagery skill significantly explained all kind of motivation through the predicted instrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation and amotivation sub-scales.
In the light of the findings of the study, using imagery skills increased the willingness of football players to show their behaviours in a self determined way. Keywords: anxiety, imagery, motivation, football 558Posters Thursday July 13th The relationship between Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) and positive psychological states of elite athletes Hakan Kolayis, Nurullah Celik (Sakarya University) The purpose of the study was to examine the relationship between Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) and positive psychological states of elite athletes. The research sample consists of 46 elite athletes (Xage:17,70±2,76) aged between 13-24.
As measuring tools, a personal information form, “Abbreviated Proactivity Scale” (Akın et al., 2011), “Subjective Vitality Scale” (Akın et al., 2012), “Flourishing Scale” (Akın and Fidan, 2012) and “Subjective Happiness Scale” (Akın, 2011), which included positive psychological states in the study, were used. ProComp Infinity 5 biofeedback device was used to get skin conductance values. Just after the scales were filled in by participants, the lowest galvanic skin values values from the Procomp Infiniti device was used in the analysis.
In addition, descriptive statistics and Pearson correlation analysis was used in the study. The statistical analysis was done through SPSS 16 packet program. According to the findings, negative significant relationship was found between skin conductance values and the scores of flourishing scale (r=- 0.293; p=0.048).
on the other hand, no significant relationship was observed between skin conductance values and the scores of proactivity (r=-0.054; p=0.723), subjective vitality (r=-0.053; p=0.726), and subjective happiness (r= 0.230; p=0.123) scales. As a result, negative relationship was observed between skin conductance values and positive psychological well-being states. It can be concluded that the psychological well-being levels of athletes increase as the skin conductance levels decrease.
Keywords: proactivity, vitality, happiness, galvenic skin response Grit, perfectionism and flow among university gold medalists: Implications for performance enhancement Dr. Guneet Inder Jit Kaur (Department of Psychology, Jain University (J.C. Road), Bangalore, India) Positive psychology has helped to consolidate, lift up and celebrate human strengths, define what makes life worth living, as well as carefully delineate the areas where there is a need to know and do more.
One such area, which involves the study of human flourishing and psychological growth is excellence, which thus becomes an essential area to explore. The endeavour of the present study was to examine the role of grit, perfectionism and flow among sports excellers. For this purpose, 100 (73 males and 27 females) university gold medalist athletes within the age range of 20 -26 years, were selected from three universities-Panjab University (Chandigarh), Punjabi University (Patiala) and Guru Nanak Dev University (Amritsar) (Punjab state of India).
The objective of the current research was to see if Grit, Perfectionism and Flow were efficacious predictors and if they were positively related to each other in this sample of sports excellers. Results revealed that grit, perfectionism and flow were positively related to each other in the sample. Furthermore, perfectionism came out as a strong predictor of both grit and flow and more importantly, the females outdid the males in terms of being in possession of most of these psychological attributes.
Keywords: sports excellence, grit, flow, perfectionism Risk taking in chess: The relationship between an opponent’s playing strength and settling for a draw Guillermo Mendoza (Universidad de Malaga) In chess tournaments, after any move of a game both players can agree to end the match in a draw. That decision can be made by taking more factors in consideration than just the actual position itself. One important factor, is the amount of risk that players are willing to take.
While playing against a stronger opponent, accepting a draw can be considered a safer decision than continuing to play regardless of better position on the 559Posters Thursday July 13th chessboard. The present study, analyzed all the 793 games at the 41th Chess Olympiad that finished in a draw. We used the software Stockfish 21 for the chessboard analysis in order to get a score that determines who had a better position and therefore a better chance of winning.
Thus, the objective was to analyze if the ranking (ELO) difference between players has a relationship with the Stockfish score at the end of the game. The result shows a significant negative correlation between those two variables. The more ELO points one player had over the opponent´s, the worse was the Stockfish score relative to his position at the moment of the draw agreement and viceversa.
These findings suggest that chess players are less eager to take risks while facing a rival with a ranking that is perceived as stronger, accepting a draw even with a better chance to win. Our discussion focused on the perception of dominance, in this case represented by the ELO ranking, and how affects the decision making process in chess players. Keywords: risk-taking, decision-making, chess, dominance Coping with permanent loss of physical ability and involvement in competitive sport: A qualitative analysis of experiences of Polish elite wheelchair rugby players Grzegorz Wieclaw, Marzena Śniarowska-Tlatlik (University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Katowice, Poland) It is generally assumed that sudden loss of physical ability due to injury, disease or medical mistake influences all aspects of human functioning.
It is a significant crisis-type situation that requires physical, environmental and socio-psychological adaption to new life circumstances. Although coping with permanent loss has been of interest to general psychology for some time now (e.g., Kübler-Ross, 1969), it is relatively novel to sport psychology. In the available literature on the matter, involvement in sport is considered an important adaptation factor that correlates with positive rehabilitation outcomes (Nash, 2005), resilience response (Machida et al., 2013) and a higher quality of life (Sikorska, 2014).However, the existing research has been mostly conducted in English speaking countries (e.g., Dunn & Brody, 2008).
Furthermore, it has barely taken into consideration the subjective sporting experiences of athletes with acquired disabilities (White et al., 2008). In order to truly understand the role of sport in the process of coping with permanent loss of physical ability, we have set to explore the meaning given to these experiences by the athletes themselves. This study adopted a qualitative methodology.
The data was collected using semi-structure interviews. The participants (N=12) were chosen with purposive sampling according to two criteria: (a) permanent loss of physical ability, and (b) current status of playing wheelchair rugby at an elite level for the Polish national team. The analysis was conducted according to the Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA) protocol (Smith et al., 2009).
In the preliminary results four superordinate themes emerged from the data focusing on physical, psychological, social and existential role of involvement in competitive sport after permanent loss of physical ability. These results are discussed in detail in the light of the existing literature. Implications for further research and applied work are given.
Keywords: permanent loss, coping, resilience, disability sports Identify psychological predictors of primary school teachers’ motivating style and time allocated to physical education Geraldine Escriva-Boulley, Damien Tessier Philippe Sarrazin (Laboratory SENS) Physical education (PE) contributes to adoption of active lifestyle and well-being when practiced during childhood. However, sometime PE teaching could not be able to reach these benefits. Indeed, less than 10% of primary school teacher reach 150 minutes of PE prescribed by academic authorities (i.e., Burgeson et al., 2003).
Additionally, they use motivating style that seems to thwart students’ psychological needs (i.e., low structure and highly controlling; Haerens et al., 2013). According to self-determination theory (SDT ; Deci & Ryan, 2002), 560Posters Thursday July 13th students’ engagement is all the more important and lasting longer as teachers’ motivating style satisfies their psychological needs for competence, involvement and autonomy. Pressures felt, motivation and self-efficacy could be responsible for teachers’ motivating style (Reeve, 2009).
Among these psychological factors the aim of this study is to identify predictors of (1) time allocated to teach PE and (2) teachers’ motivating style. Participants were 190 primary school teachers (79% women, Myears=42 years, Mexperience=17years). They completed an online questionnaire about PE teaching.
Two dependent variables (time allocated to PE and perception of teachers of their motivating style) and eight psychological predictors [autonomous (AM) vs. controlled motivation (CM), self-efficacy (SE), and five type of pressures]. Results from structural equation modeling showed that AM, CM, SE and three out of five pressures [(1) cultural norm (i.e., belief that a teacher have to be authoritarian), (2) implicit theory (i.e., belief that student’ skill in PE cannot be changed), (3) operant maximal principle (i.e., belief that more reward promised is important more motivation is important)] are predictors of time allocated to PE and teachers’ motivating style (ps < .020).
These results showed that in order to increase and improve PE teaching, teacher professional development should focus on these factors. Keywords: pressures, self-efficacy, motivations, structural equation modeling Investigation of subjective vitality and basic psychological needs in traditional dance activities George Mavridis, Stella Rokka, Dimitrios Goulimaris (Democritus University of Thrace,Greece) Traditional dance is one of the most popular activities of sports recreation in Greece. The aim of this study was to examine the extent to which the satisfaction of basic psychological needs for autonomy, competence and relatedness can predict the levels of subjective vitality of adult participants in traditional dance programs and investigate possible differences between gender and age.
The sample was consisted of 336 participants (147 men & 189 women) with a mean age of 56 ± 8, 61 years and members of cultural associations of Komotini. To conduct the research was used: the Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise Scale (Vlachopoulos & Michailidou, 2006), with 12 items grouped into three factors. Answers, were given on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (disagree) to 5 (agree very much) and the Subjective Vitality scale (Ryan & Frederick, 1997), which was modified for the Greek population by Vlachopoulos and Karavani (2009), with 7 items for the assessment of subjective energy of participants.
The ‘Cronbach's a’ internal cohesion indicator in both questionnaires was satisfactory. Descriptive statistical analysis revealed that participants showed satisfactory averages of autonomy, competence and relationships and a higher average of vitality. Hierarchical regression analysis confirmed that satisfaction of the three basic psychological needs contributed statistically significantly to the prediction of the subjective vitality, as it explained 35% of its total variance, while autonomy and social relations contributed with the largest grade to this result.
No statistically significant differences between gender and age were found. The findings of this study support that autonomy and social relations in traditional dance activities contribute to increase subjective vitality regardless of sex and age. Keywords: vitality, autonomy – relatedness, traditional dance activities Personality characteristics of football referees from different Brazilian States Alessandra Monteiro, George Cunha, Marcela Mansur-Alves, Mariana Froeseler (UFMG) The aim of this study was to verify the existence of differences in referees’ personality profile compared to the general population, to identify differences related to sociodemographic variables, and to verify the similarity between referees and other high performance athletes.
The sample consisted of 285 soccer referees from the states of Ceará, Federal District, Maranhão, Minas Gerais, Pernambuco and Piauí. 144 were assistant referees and 141 central referees, ranging in age from 18 to 46 years (M = 31.3 years; SD = 6.1). 254 were males and 137 were graduated, with an average time of experience in refereeing of 6.9 years (SD = 5.5).
The 561Posters Thursday July 13th NEO FFI Inventory was used to evaluate the personality. The results indicated a statistically significant difference between referees and the general population in all five factors, being higher in Neuroticism (d = 0.83) and in Conscientiousness (d = -0.90). The referees also showed higher scores in Extraversion (d = -0.58), which is similar to the profile of high performance athletes presented in the international literature.
Regarding the relationship with gender, age and refereeing time variables, the results showed that the male referees are older (d = 0.4) and present more experience in refereeing (d = 0.7), as well as a higher score in Agreeableness (T = -2.5, p <0.05, d = 0.3) than the female referees. The refereeing time did not show a significant correlation with any personality dimensions, which can be explained by the "Selection Hypothesis" that defends that the psychological abilities are responsible to introduce and keep the athletes in the high-performance sports context. The results showed that the referee sample investigated has a personality profile (high Conscientiousness and Extraversion and low Neuroticism) that is similar to the high-performance athletes and which distinguishes the referees from the general population.
Keywords: personality traits, referees, soccer, high performance athletes Coping strategies and personality traits in Brazilian football referees Alessandra Monteiro, Marcela Mansur-Alves, Mariana Froeseler, Camila Cristina Fonseca Bicalho (UFMG) Coping strategies are coping mechanisms used by individuals in stressful situations in which they feel threatened physically or emotionally. In sports, having proper coping strategies means coping well with stress, condition that makes the athlete adapted to the environment. The international literature has shown that personality traits are predictors of these strategies, as well as of sports performance.
The objective of this study was to identify the coping strategies most used by referees from different Brazilian states, as well as to evaluate their relationship with personality. The sample consisted of 225 soccer referees (113 central and 110 assistant referees), ranging in age from 18 to 45 years (M = 31.1 years, SD = 6.0), being 203 males (90.2% Sample). The instruments used were the Coping Strategies Inventory, the NEO-FFI-R Personality Inventory and a sociodemographic questionnaire.
A frequency analysis revealed that the use of the four strategies occurs at similar levels. Problem-focused strategies showed significant correlations with all of the five personality dimensions. Emotion-focused strategies were only significantly correlated with N and C, as Social Support focused strategies presented a significant, but low, correlation with E.
Avoidance strategies haven’t show significant correlations with any dimension. Conscientiousness, Openness and Extraversion predicted Problem- focused coping, Neuroticism predicted Emotion-focused, Extraversion and the interaction of Neuroticism and Conscientiousness were Social Support focused strategies’ predictors, and finally, Avoidance strategies had, as predictors, the variable gender and the interactions between Neuroticism and Conscientiousness and Neuroticism and Openness. This study points out to the relationship between coping and personality for soccer referees.
Other studies are necessary to include a larger sample of referees, and to use coping instruments that are more appropriated to the sports context. Keywords: coping estrategies; personality traits; football refereeing Relationship between inhibitory control and objectively-assessed physical activity in Parkinson’s disease: A neurotrophical link Geoffory Boucard, Fabienne Collette, Jean-Paul Chéramy (University of Liege), Eva Skawiniak, Sophie Laloux, Joël Pincemail, Gaëtan Garraux (University of Liege) Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is characterized by some deficits in functions relying on basal ganglia–prefrontal interaction (like inhibitory control), but the concentration of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) may promote the neural survival of this neural network. In normal aging, regular physical activity (PA) enhance both serum BDNF and the cognitive performance, particularly in the inhibition tasks.
Although PA increases the 562Posters Thursday July 13th striatal levels of BDNF in hemi-parkinson rats, no study has ever investigated the neurotrophical benefits of PA in patients PD. The global aim of this study was to determine the associations between PA, serum BDNF and inhibitory control in normal aging and PD. Thirty-four older adults and 31 parkinsonian patients performed two versions of an inhibition task, i.e.
the Go/No-Go task (a manual task and an original foot task). Physical activity measures were obtained from the GT3x actimeter (worned for 7 days). Serum BDNF levels were quantified using an enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (R & D Systems).
For the older adults group, there were no effects of PA. For the parkinsonian patients group, results revealed a mediator role of BDNF between PA and inhibition, after controlling for confound variables (disease duration, motor state, dopaminergic medication): serum BDNF predicted the “foot mean reaction time” (foot RT) (R² = -.17), energy expenditure (PAEE) predicted both serum BDNF (R² = .29) and foot RT (R² = -.24), but the effect of PAEE on foot RT was no longer significant after controlling for serum BDNF (R² = .-04). These findings shed light on the potential of PA in PD: regular PA may upregulate striatal BDNF, which in turn may optimize the network interconnecting the prefrontal cortex and the striatum, resulting in a better inhibitory control.
Although it is challenging to found treatment strategies aimed at neuroprotection in PD, regular PA may be a good candidate. Keywords: Parkinson's disease, BDNF, inhibitory control, physical activity, actigraphy Changes of rating of perceived exertion (RPE) and mood state in the different freestyle swimming training sessions Gao Zhiqing Gaozhi, Zhao Zhiguang (Beijing Reaserch Insititute of Sports Science), Hu Jing (Suzhou University) Purpose: To monitor the exercise load during on-land strength training and specialized training in freestyle swimming by using the blood lactic acid (BLC), the ratings of perceived exertion (RPE) and the mood index (Befindlichkeits-Skala, BFS). Method: 3 male freestyle swimmers from Beijing swimming team (average age of 20 years, average height 184.6 cm, average weight 72 kg, 5-6 years of training years).
The RPE scale, the BFS mood scale and the blood lactic acid were used as monitors in both in-water training and on-land strength training. Results and Discussion: 1) After strength training, the scores of positive subscales were reduced and there was no significant difference in positive subscales except the elation. There were almost no changes in negative subscales.
It shows that the strength training has positive effects on the evaluation of the mood and does not cause the increase of the negative mood. 2) After specialized training in water the scores of positive subscales were increased while there was no significant difference. The scores of negative subscales were reduced.
It shows that the specialized training in water also has positive effect on the evaluation of the mood. 3) In 11 training units, the percentage of swimmers feeling light was 18%-37%, feeling somewhat hard was 27%-37%, feeling hard was 18%-27%, feeling very hard was 9%-15% and feeling very hard was 9%.The mean RPE was 13.7 ± 2.28. The trend of the RPE scores were basically the same.
There were some difference after all training units except the 6 75m swimming units. 4) The correlations between RPE and the blood lactic acid were significant in all training units except the 6x150m unit and the 3x1000m unit. Conclusion: In this study, we used BFS mood scale, RPE scale and lactic acid to monitor the exercise load during the training units in one week.
The results show that the mood and RPE could be used to monitor and control the training load. Keywords: Ratings of Perceived Exertion (RPE), mood, training load, swimming Motivation for sport activities and phisical self-concept in students Galina Domuschieva-Rogleva (National Sports Academy) Sport and physical activity has become a major subject of interest to the extent that it affects the quality of health, contributes to physical and psychological well-being. Physical Self-Concept is an important mediator in physical activity.
The aim of the present study is to reveal the characteristics of the motivation for sport activities and their influence on the physical Self-concept in students and the differences between women and 563Posters Thursday July 13th men. We have used Bulgarian adaptations of the Participation Motivation Questionnaire (PMQ) (Gill et al., 1983), measuring motives: achievements, teamwork orientation, energy release, emotions and challenges, skills, affiliation, fitness orientation and Physical Self-Description Questionnaire (PSDQ-S) (Marsh, H. W., Martin, A.
J. & Jackson, S., 2010) – measuring Physical self-concept through nine specific and two general components - global physical self-esteem and global self-esteem. Subject of the study were 160 Bulgarian students (82 women and 78 men), from the technical and economic sciences in Sofia, mean age 20.6 +/- 2.4, who participate in sport activities twice a week for one year.
Main motivations for sport activities are fitness, improvement of skills, affiliation. Both measurings of the Physical self-concept show that main components are global physical self-esteem and appearance. The comparative analysis (Mann-Whitney criteria) shows significant differences between women and men regarding health (U=2,37*), appearance (U=2,47**) and strength (U=2,33**) in the beginning of the study.
In the end of it those differences are shown between women and men regarding health (U=2,77**), appearance (U=2,93**) and flexibility (U=3,06**). A significant improvement (Wilcoxon criteria) is examined in the end of the study in health (T=2,91**); and coordination (T=2,31*) indicators. The results may facilitate our understanding of the role of exercise participation and physical activity on the positive physical Self-concept of students.
Keywords: motivation, physical activity, global self-esteem, self-concept Sensation seeking and coping with stress for the participants in the Antarctic expedition Galina Domuschieva-Rogleva (National Sports Academy), Tatiana Stancheva (Iancheva), Aleksander Metodiev (Shopov) The security need refers to the basic motivation of personality and is one of the parameters that affect the behavior of the major strategies in situations of danger and risk. Sensation seeking is often viewed as the key to researching motivation for participation in adventurous and highly risky activities. The ХХV Bulgarian Antarctic expedition on the Livingston isles, which included scientists and alpinists, began in November 2016.
The aim of the present research is to study security need and sensation seeking and to find a relation with the participants’preferred strategies for coping with stress in highly risky activities in an extreme climatic and social environment. Subject of the study were 21 participants in the ХХV Bulgarian Antarctic expedition, mean age 27 and 70. We have used: Security need scale (Velichkov A., et al.
1998); Scale for assessment of Psychic Instability and Sensation Seeking Scale (Radoslavova &Velichkov, 2005) – based on Zuckerman’s scale (1994) for sensation seeking and Dickman’s impulsiveness scale (1990) and the Bulgarian adaptation of Coping Orientations to Problems Experienced scale – COPE 1. Low levels of Security need are established. The leading subscales of the Sensation Seeking Scale are those of sensation seeking, followed by disfunctional impulsiveness.
Functional impulsiveness is characterized with the lowest values. The cognitive engagement coping strat-egies are the main ones, whereas cognitive and emotional disengagement strategies are the least used. The results from the regression analysis show that the high levels of sensation seeking influence negatively the use of the strategic behavioral disengagement.
The present study adds to the understanding the role of security need and sensation seeking being a motivational power of human behavior, which is in the base of the desire to participate in difficult and challenging missions in extreme conditions in highly risky activities. Keywords: security need, sensation seeking, risk-taking activity, coping Association between profile variables and sport-confidence of Brazilian gymnasts and football players Gabriela Frischknecht (UFSC), Andréa Duarte Pesca (CESUSC), Roberto Moraes Cruz (UFSC) Sport-confidence is considered by coaches, athletes and professionals as a key ability to be successful in sports. It’s characterized as the athlete’s conviction that he/she will obtain success in sports.
Scientific 564Posters Thursday July 13th literature states that, in general, male athletes and athletes that practice individual sports tend to present higher levels of sport-confidence. This research aimed to investigate the association between profile characteristics of athletes and sport-confidence levels. This research was composed by a sample with 47 artistic gymnasts, 93 rhythm gymnasts and 239 football players, with ages between 12 and 22 years old.
They answered the “Questionário de Autoconfiança no Esporte” (Frischknecht, Pesca & Cruz, 2016). This is an adapted version of Sport-Confidence Inventory (Vealey, 2003). Data analysis was made by parametric and nonparametric statistics, according to normality distribution of variables.
Results: Results showed that male athletes and football players present higher levels of sport-confidence. Significant levels of association between sport-confidence and educational level, age, age that started in training and competitions were not found. But it was noticed that athletes that started to practice sports before 6 years old and the ones that started to participate in competitions between 6 years and 10 years 11 months years old present higher levels of sport- confidence.
Results reinforce the scientific literature about comparison of sport-confidence levels between sexes. Educational level does not seem to be directly associated to sport-confidence, but scientific literature suggests that education may affect sports performance. Future researches could deepen the investigation about start ages in trainings and competitions and relate self-confidence with personality and other profile characteristics.
Keywords: sport-confidence, profile characteristics, athletes; gymnastic, football Developmental trajectories of individual and team sports participation during childhood (ages 6 to 10): Distinct associations with psychosocial outcomes Francois Poulin (UQAM), Anne-Sophie Denault (University Laval) Participation in organized sports during childhood is associated with beneficial psychosocial outcomes such as reduced externalizing and internalizing problems (Eime et al., 2013). However, most of the existing studies are cross-sectional or do not include repeated assessments of sport participation. Heterogeneity could potentially be observed in children’s patterns of sport participation over time.
Moreover, individual sports (IS) and team sports (TS) offer different forms of social experiences (Denault & Poulin, 2007) and might thus present distinct associations with psychosocial outcomes. The goals of this study was : 1) to identify developmental trajectories of IS and TS from ages 6 to 10 based on annual assessment; 2) to investigate the psychosocial outcomes (externalizing and internalizing) associated with these trajectories. A sample of 1095 children was recruited in kindergarden and followed longitudinally up to age 10.
Each year, parents listed the number of organized IS and the number of TS in which their child participated. At ages 6 and 10, teachers reported on the child’s externalizing and internalizing problems (70 items; ISSQ, 2001). Two trajectory groups were found for TS : Low and increasing (74% of the sample) and High and increasing (26%).
Two trajectory groups were found for IS : Low and stable (70%) and High and stable (30%). Using ANCOVAs, TS trajectory groups were compared on age 10 externalizing and internalizing including the age 6 score as a covariate. Same analyses were conducted for the IS groups.
For TS, results showed that children in the High group presented reduced levels of internalizing problems compared to the Low group; no difference emerged for externalizing. For IS, no difference were found between the groups. These findings suggest that the positive association between sport and lower internalizing problems is found only for TS and for children who maintain high participation levels throughout childhood.
Keywords: childhood, psychosocial outcomes, team versus individual sport Transactive memory as a mediator of the association between cohesion and and collective efficacy in professional sport Francisco M. Leo, Inmaculada González-Ponce (University of Extremadura) 565Posters Thursday July 13th The relationship between cohesion and collective efficacy in sport is well established, despite which, few studies has investigated the mechanism through which cohesion improves collective efficacy. In this regard, cohesion can foster players’ greater knowledge of each other, the creation of coordinated and specialized functions and greater credibility among team members (Filho et al., 2015).
These factors, linked to transactive memory— defined as the knowledge stored in each individual's memory combined with metamemory containing information about the different teammates' domains of expertise (Wegner, 1995)—, are variables that can help to achieve greater collective efficacy (Peterson et al.,2002). Thus, the aim of this study was to examine whether transactive memory serves as a mediator between cohesion and collective efficacy in sport. Participants were 581 soccer players, 356 males (M=25.30, SD=4.57) and 225 females (M=22.23, SD=4.59), who participated in a professional league.
They completed the Group Environment Questionnaire (Leo et al., 2015), the Transactive Memory System Scale (Leo et al., 2016) and the Football Collective Efficacy Questionnaire (Leo et al., 2014). Following Holmbeck’s (1997) suggestions, structural equation modelling was employed to test mediation. Overall results indicated that transactive memory mediated the relationships between task cohesion and collective efficacy whereas transactive memory did not mediate the relationship between social cohesion and collective efficacy.
In summary, these findings clearly indicate the importance of transactive memory for professional players. Task cohesion in particular seems to be crucial to improve collective efficacy through transactive memory. Findings imply that coaches and sports psychologists who want to increase collective efficacy will not only have to foster cohesion, but also take advantage of this cohesion to create specific, credible and coordinated shared memory systems among players.
Keywords: group processes, high performance, mediating effects, transactive memory Examining the motives for participating in dance activities, using the “Behavior Regulation in Sport Questionnaire” (BRSQ) Filippos Filippou, Aikaterini Koupani, Stella Rokka, Evangelos Bebetsos ΤThe main aim of the study was to cross-validate the “Behaviour Regulation in Sport Questionnaire” (BRSQ) (Lonsdale, Hodge & Rose, 2008) in a Greek dance context. Secondary, the research study focused on the various motives people nominate for engaging in theatrical dancing activities as well as if factors such as the sex and dance’s kind differentiate their participation motives. Study’s participants were recruited from ten groups offering lessons of Greek traditional dance and six schools offering classic and modern dance’s lessons.
The sample of the study consisted of 390 dancers, 89 male and 301 female. From participants, 249 coming from traditional dance and 141 from non-traditional dancing forms. Τhe following statistical analyses were performed: Descriptive statistics, Confirmatory Factor Analysis, Reliability analysis, and One Way Anova.
The fit indices which were considered are: namely minimum discrepancy, degrees of freedom, minimum discrepancy divided by the degrees of freedom, Root Mean Square Error of Approximation, Standardized Root Mean Square Residual, Comparative Fit Index, and Normed Fit Index. The results of this study obtained in the confirmatory factor analysis demonstrated that the hypothesized model produced a significant χ2 (390, 558) = 1528.31, p < .05. The NFI, CFI, RMSEA, and SRMR value were found to be 0.92, 0.93, .067 and .044 respectively.
From the analysis, we came to the following conclusions: a. The Greek version of BRSQ supports its use in Greek dancing context. b.
The participants are mostly internally motivated. c. Gender is a differentiation factor for motive participation with men being more internally motivated.
d. The kind of dancing is a motivation factor for participating with traditional dance participants being more internally motivated than the one who participates in non-traditional dances. Keywords: cross-validate, traditional dance, classic and modern dance 566Posters Thursday July 13th Youth sport coaches’ perceptions on the value of positive youth development within coach education courses Fernando Santos (Portuguese Field Hockey Federation, Portugal), Martin Camiré (School of Human Kinetics, University of Ottawa, Canada), Dany MacDonald (University of Prince Edward Island, Canada), Henrique Campos, Manuel Conceição , Ana Silva (Portuguese Field Hockey Federation, Portugal) Positive youth development (PYD) is a strength-based approach that aims at promoting a successful transition from childhood to adulthood through appropriate environments and support from influential adults.
Past research has indicated how coaches play important roles in facilitating PYD through sport and yet, PYD- related material remains largely absent from mainstream coach education courses (CEC). The purpose of the present study was to examine youth sport coaches’ perspective on PYD and its worth in mainstream coach education courses. Two research questions guided the study: (a) What place does PYD occupy in the participants’ coaching philosophy?
and (b) What do the participants’ believe is the worth of PYD-related material in mainstream CEC? The participants were twelve Portuguese youth field hockey coaches who coached athletes between four and eighteen years of age. The data were collected through semi-structured interviews and a hybrid (i.e., inductive/deductive) approach to thematic analysis was utilised to organize codes into low and high order themes.
For the first research question, most participants appeared to understand the importance of including PYD principles in their coaching philosophy. However, the perceived amount of attention that ought to be directed to the technical/tactical aspects of field hockey versus PYD was markedly influenced by athletes’ age and competition level. Coaches working with elite athletes in late adolescence (i.e., 15-18 years old) elaborated further on technical training, while coaches working with athletes in childhood and early adolescence (i.e., 4-14 years old) focused on enjoyment, respect, and inclusiveness.
For the second research question, the participants indicated the need to prioritize PYD in mainstream CECs, integrate an explicit approach, and use informal types of coach training. The findings have practical implications for coach educators: Keywords: life skills, philosophy, field hockey, coaching practice Using object visual research (Lego Serious Play®) to evaluate a life skills program Fernanda Serra de Queiroz, Stephanie J. Hanrahan (University of Queensland) Interviews and surveys that rely on participants giving quick replies often assume that these answers are reliable accounts of participants’ thoughts, feelings, and attitudes.
Nevertheless, often participants’ quick replies in interviews and surveys do not originate from a reflective process. Visual methods are often chosen as a research tool because they can facilitate the communication of content that may be subconscious, or under social or psychological inhibitions. A 3D visual research method that has been gaining momentum in the last decade is Lego® Serious Play (LSP).
LSP is defined as a thinking and problem-solving approach, where individuals build metaphors as a response to challenges using the traditional Lego® bricks. The aim of the present study was to evaluate LSP as tool to investigate the effects of a life skills program for at risk youth. According to Lego® a LSP session should be divided in to three phases: challenge, building, and sharing.
During the challenge phase the session’s facilitator formulates a question based on the session purpose. This question or challenge prompts participants to respond using Lego® bricks. Finally, during the sharing phase participants have the opportunity to share the meanings they have assigned to their Lego® models.
The experience of using LSP to evaluate a life skills program showed that LSP could be a useful evaluation tool when working with youth in a situation of social vulnerability. Low literacy levels are often a barrier to completing written evaluation for this population. This barrier was especially true in this research context, where participants were from a school for students who had disengaged from mainstream education, and had low literacy levels.
Participants’ answers to the Lego® challenges provided a more in-depth account of their perceptions of the life skills program than their written feedback. 567Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: visual research, youth, program evaluation, life skills The influence of cognitive effort on the efficiency of tactical behavior of young soccer players Felippe da Silva Leite Cardoso, Felipe Ruy Dambroz, Israel Teoldo da Costa (Centre of Research and Studies in Soccer) The pupilometry technique has been used to evaluate the activities of the nervous system, in different tasks. Research shows that small changes in pupil diameter occurs in responses to mental activity.
Researchers have demonstrated in a numerical recall experiment that the pupils progressively dilate as a greater degree of cognitive effort (CE) is requested and, as the requirement effort becomes smaller, the pupils gradually return to their resting size. In sport, this pupilometry technique has been used to evaluate CE during tasks that measure the abilities of decision making, anticipation, knowledge, among other cognitive components. However, studies about the relationship of CE and the tactical component of the game need to be investigated, so this study aims to investigate the influence of CE on the efficiency of tactical behavior (ETB) of young soccer players.
The sample comprised of 52 male youth soccer player of the first division in Brazilian Championship (Mean age = 14.89, SD = 1.42). The ETB was measured through the System of Tactical Assessment in Soccer (FUT-SAT). The conceptual structure of FUT-SAT is based on the ten core tactical principles of soccer.
For the evaluation of the CE, tests of video simulations using Mobile Eye Tracking-XG were used. After data collection, players were divided into two groups based on the amount of CE during the task. Statistical analysis was performed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
The independent t test for comparison of the ETB between-groups with higher and lower CE. The results suggests differences in the ETB of players based on the amount of CE t(50)=7.522, p<0.001, r=.72. Players with less ETB presented greater CE during the task.
It is concluded that the CE influences the ETB of soccer players, with the less CE the better ETB. Keywords: soccer, cognitive effort, efficiency of tactical behavior, evaluation A low-intensity psychological intervention to prevent sport injuries: the adaptation of the “Mental Warmup for Athletes” program to Spanish young soccer players Felipe Turbay, Victor Rubio (University Autonoma Madrid, Spain) This study presents the Spanish adaptation of the “Mental Warmup for Athletes” program (Brewer, 2006). The program consists of a low-intensity intervention based on stress management and attention focus in order to reduce the prevalence of sports injuries (SI).
SIs are a multifactorial phenomenon involving different variables. Psychological factors have also shown to be strongly related to the vulnerability to sustaining an injury. Particularly, stress response has been pointed out as responsible for making athletes more vulnerable to sustain an SI.
According to the Stress and Injury Model (Andersen and Williams, 1998), two mechanisms mediate the relationship between stress response and SI: muscle tension and the attention deficits. There have been several attempts to reduce the prevalence of SI using psychological interventions, but results were inconclusive partially due to implementation issues. In light of the fact that many sports and/or categories, particularly among young athletes, still do not have psychologists to provide such mental training and contribute to the prevention of sport injuries, the program designed is a non-facilitated and guided self-help low-intensity intervention were the coach supports the activities and several online self-help materials, including scripts and videotapes, are provided.
The script presented includes techniques such as Mindfulness, Diaphragmatic Breathing, Progressive Muscle Relaxation, and Visualization. Implementation is conducted to reduce the anxiety levels and increase the attentional focusing of young players right before the competition. Results of a pilot administration of the program are shown.
Keywords: prevention, sports injuries, psychological intervention, mental warmup 568Posters Thursday July 13th Visual search strategy of soccer players according to positional roles Felipe Dambroz, Guilherme Machado, Felippe Cardoso, Teoldo Israel (Center of Research and Studies in Soccer) Visual search strategy (VSS) has been considered one of the most important aspects within the process of decision making in soccer. The literature shows that there are differences on VSS between different competitive levels but in relation to positional roles, further investigation is necessary due to differences demands for positional. The sample comprised 17 U-13 youth soccer players.
The instrument used to collect and analyze VSS was the Mobile Eye Tracking – XG. The players were grouped according to the following positional roles: defenders, midfielders and forwards. The video stimuli were the same as the one employed by video based test.
VSS stimuli was classified in five categories: “player in possession of the ball”; “ball”; “teammates”; “opponent”; “space”. The number of fixations made by players, in each stimuli category was analyzed. Data distribution was verified by Shapiro-Wilk's test.
One-way ANOVA was performed to compare mean values. The “ball” category displayed significant differences between midfielders (15.50±5.85) and forwards (27.80±7.36). Other significant difference found was in “teammates” category, between midfielders (22.00±5.62) and forwards (34.60±1.81).
These findings may be related to the specific task of each positional role in the game. Forwards tend to focus their actions on receiving the ball and therefore are more likely to look at the ball while midfielders need to focus on different stimuli to read the game. Other of forwards' task is to create space in order to enable the team to advance up the field.
Thus, it is necessary that the forwards are aware of their teammates' movements and that they are able to make the best decisions. These findings are important for coaches and researchers to know how VSS changes according to positional roles, in order to provide their athletes with proper feedback. Keywords: visual search strategy, positional role, youth soccer How do individual team members regulate their behavior to achieve spatiotemporal collective behavior?
Feigean Mathieu (University of Bern) This study aimed to analyze processes of the emergence of collective behavior patterns. Collective behavior, considered as self-organized, emerges from individual activities that interplay as the activity unfolds. The purpose of the present study was to explore how co-agents actively (co-)regulate their involvement to contribute to the emergence of collective behavior on-site.
To this end, we aimed at describing the variety of ‘modes of regulation’ achieved by team members during a soccer game. One team of expert soccer players (i.e., national level) participated in this study. We video recorded a complete official game using a drone.
A sequence of ten minutes was selected, based on which phenomenological data was collected for all of players through individual self-confrontation interviews. The verbal data obtained were transcribed verbatim, from which we reconstructed the visual perception and the associated behavioral adjustment as players can comment it for each instant of the activity under study. Then, a thematic analysis helped to identify patterns of meanings within verbalization data, leading to the characterization of various modes of regulation.
These modes were then re-positioned within the course of the experience of each teammate, so that co-regulation modes could be identified at each instant of the game. The results showed the amount of typical patterns of regulating activity carried out by participants, going from a mode of ‘local couplings’ to one of ‘couple through grasping a global picture’. When associating each identified mode of regulation with a degree of ‘collective adoption’, that is the probability to simultaneously appear across the various participants involved in the collective behavior, the results showed that all the team members were able to share the same mode of regulation at the same time.
Occasionally, one or several members switched to another mode of regulation, thus helping to avoid the disruption of collective behavior. 569Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: collective behavior, emergence, mode of regulation Effects of the Teaching Personal and Social Responsibility Model (TPSR) through sport on youths' perception of positive development Federico Carreres (University of Alicante), Amparo Escarti (University of Valencia) An increasing number of studies have demonstrated that TPSR Model is effective in creating a positive learning environment (Wright & Burton, 2008), increasing responsible behavior among youth (Escartí, Gutiérrez, Pascual y Wright, 2013), and encouraging youth to explore the application of TPSR goals and life skills in other life domains (Walsh, Ozaeta, & Wright, 2010). This qualitative study examined the effects of youth participation in an out of school sport program based on TPSR Model.
Participants were 17 male adolescents who played football as extracurricular activity in a city of Alicante (Spain) aged between 14 and 16 years old (M age= 15,12; SD= 0,72). The implementation of the TPSR model took place over six months, three days per week during the sport training sessions that lasted 90 minutes each. The coach of the intervention group received an initial 30 hours course to implement the TPSR and an ongoing meetings 2-hr biweekly seminar, focused on the practical aspects of TPSR implementation.
The units of analysis were: (a) Learning acquired, in regard to the program’s impact on their demonstration of responsible behaviors, and (b) Transfer of acquired learning, in regard to the program’s impact on other domains of youth life. Each adolescent participated in one semistructured interview (Patton, 2002) that lasted approximately 20 min. Questions included: “What effects has the TPSR program on you?” What have you learned through the TPSR program?” What lessons have you transferred in your life due to participation in the TPSR program?”.
The results are related to an increasing in personal and social responsibility, better time management and concentration techniques as learning acquired through the program. The transfer of acquired learning appears to indicate family relationship improvements and better academic and sport performance. These findings provides the importance of the qualitative approach to assess TPSR impact in youths' lives.
Keywords: TPSR, positive youth development, qualitative study, out-of-school sport A study of quiet eye’s phenomenon in the shooting trial of combined event Andrea Chirico, Dario Fegatelli, Federica Galli (University of Rome), Stefano Pecci (Coaching Education Unit Italian Modern Pentathlon Federation), Fabio Lucidi (University of Rome) The aim of the study was to analyze Quiet Eye’s phenomenon during the shooting section of “Combined Event” of Modern Pentathlon, that consists in shooting and running. The study involved 18 experienced athletes of the Italian National Team of Modern Pentathlon (“élite” group) (mean age= 24.3; SD= 4.76) and 13 non-expert athletes of a local Pentathlon club (“novice” group) (mean age= 15.7; SD= 1.53). Participants performed, in ecological conditions, five trials of four series of shootings (as it occurs in the combined event competitions), for a total of 20 series.
During the shooting trials athletes worn a mobile Eye Tracking System (SMI-Eye Tracking Glasses (ETG)-version 2.0) to record eyes movements (saccades, blinks, and fixations). The Quiet Eye Duration (QED), the Performance (Shooting duration and Accuracy) as well as the Relative QED were considered as key measures of the study. The results showed that athletes during the best shoots had a shorter QED then in worst shoots (F(1,29)= 16.79, p <.001).
Furthermore, overall the novice athletes showed a longer QED than the élite athletes. However, when the shoot duration were considered, the non-élite showed a longer Relative QED during the best shoots than during the worst shoots (F (1,29)= 7.26; p=.012). Again, the Quiet Eye Onset’s results showed that novice started later when performed worst shoots than the best shoots (F(1,29)= 16.22, p<.001).
Whereas, the élite did not show significant differences. But, the experts started the QE earlier than novice. Regarding inter-shots fixations the results showed a lower number of fixation’s novice before the best shoots than the worst shoots (F(1,29)= 5.99, p=.021).
The experts showed the same number of 570Posters Thursday July 13th fixations before the best and the worst shots. These results provide insightful information about different cognitive and perceptual processes involved in Modern Pentathlon’s athletes’ performances at both élite and non-élite level. Keywords: quiet eye, eye tracking system, modern pentathlon, combined event The role of perceived autonomy support and needs satisfactio in the intention to do exercise and physical activity of older adults Federica Galli (University of Rome), Luca Mallia (University of Rome, “Foro Italico”), Andrea Chirico, Laura Girelli, Fabio Lucidi (University of Rome) The health benefits of physical activity and physical exercise for older adults have been widely acknowledged.
Recent studies approached to this field integrating the tenets of Self Determination Theory (SDT) and Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB). The purpose of the present study is to investigate, through a mediation model, whether perceived autonomy support, and satisfaction of basic psychological needs (autonomy, competence, relatedness) predict intention to do physical activity or exercise in older adults, through TPB variables (attitude, subjective norms, perceived behavioural control). Therefore, using a longitudinal design, the study also estimated intention in predicting actual behaviour both directly and indirectly, through its relationship with planning.
The study evaluated two different samples: the first (i.e. exercising group attending regularly an exercise course) comprised 145 old people (mean age=70.39; SD=6.34); the second (i.e. people reporting regularly spontaneous physical activity) comprised 101 old people (mean age=76.21; SD=7.30).
Structural equation models (VB-SEM) were used to test the study hypotheses. The VB- SEM exhibited a good fit with the physical exercise behavior (GoF = .510; APC = .321, p < .001; ARS = .287, p= < .001; AFVIF = 1.964), and physical activity (GoF = .487; APC = .352, p < .001; ARS = .288, p < .001; AFVIF = 1.767). The model confirmed its validity in predicting the hypothesized relationships showing also some differences between the two groups.
Keywords: integrated model, older adults, physical activity, exercise The contribution of early auditory and visual information to the anticipation of volleyball serves Fabrizio Sors, Mauro Murgia, Alessandra Galmonte, Tiziano Agostini (Universitu of Trieste) Within the research framework of interceptive actions and anticipation skills, previous studies highlighted that visual information has a key role in ball sports, as its correct interpretation fosters accurate predictions concerning ball motion. Other research revealed that auditory information provides important cues in various sport situations. The present study combines these two lines of research, with the aim to investigate the contribution of early auditory and visual information in anticipating volleyball serves.
To this purpose, overhand serves were audio- and video-recorded from the perspective of a defence player. The recordings were edited to create two kinds of stimuli – auditory and visual – lasting 1250 ms (1000 ms before the hand-ball impact and 250 ms after it). Seventeen volleyball players competing in amateur leagues were recruited as participants for the experiment.
Their task was to predict the landing zone of the serves on the basis of their length, relying either on auditory information (Audio condition), or on visual information (Video condition). A within subjects design was used, with the two conditions administered in a counterbalanced order among participants. The results revealed that, as concerns response accuracy, participants performed above chance in the Audio condition, but not in the Video condition; moreover, accuracy was higher in the former condition than in the latter one.
As concerns response times, no difference was observed between the two conditions. The results suggest that for predicting the landing zone of volleyball serves on the basis of their length, early auditory information would provide more relevant cues than the respective visual information. Future studies should 571Posters Thursday July 13th further investigate in this direction, considering also other sports, to better understand the contribution of auditory and visual information in anticipating ball motion; the outcomes would be useful from both a research perspective and an applied one.
Keywords: early information, auditory information, visual information, temporal occlusions, anticipation, volleyball serves Impact of doping control experience and learning on anti-doping knowledge of Japanese sports university students Yuka Murofushi, Yujiro Kawata, Masataka Hirosawa (Juntendo University) The aims of this study were to understand the experience of Japanese sports university students taking a doping control and learning about Anti-Doping and to examine the impact of this Anti-Doping learning experience on the knowledge they gained about Anti-Doping. We collected data from 1,266 Japanese sports university students (574 male, 692 female; M = 19.70, SD = 1.36). We asked them about their experience in undergoing the doping control and the education on Anti-Doping they received; we then assessed the Anti- Doping knowledge they gained by this experience using World Anti-Doping Agency’s ALPHA test.
The percentage of correct answers on the ALPHA was taken as the ALPHA score. The results showed that 3.71% among them had undergone a doping control and 54.42% of them had undergone Anti-Doping education. We conducted the t-test to compare ALPHA score.
Results showed that comparing the ALPHA scores of students with/without test experience revealed no significant differences. Comparing ALPHA scores of students with/without Anti-Doping education revealed a significant difference. Students with Anti-Doping education obtained significantly higher ALPHA scores (t(1165)=4.92, p <.001).
Doping control experience is not correlated to gaining knowledge about Anti-Doping. However, Anti-Doping education is associated with knowledge gain, suggesting that students who have received this education have more accurate Anti-Doping knowledge. This indicates the need for Anti-Doping education to be provided to students involved in competitive sports.
Keywords: anti-doping education, doping control, ALPHA, sports university students Adaptation and validation of Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS) to assess motives for participation leisure time physical activity and sport in Finnish high school students Ezgi Aypar, Montse C. Ruiz (University of Jyväskylä, Finland), Tony Morris (College of Sport and Exercise Science, Victoria University, Australia) To understand adolescents’ motives for participation in physical activity is crucial for the development of interventions or preventive measures of health problems that may emerge during adulthood. Therefore, it is important to have a valid measure for adolescence.
The Physical Activity and Leisure Motivation Scale (PALMS; Morris & Rogers, 2004) consists of a 40-item self-report measure of motives for participation in physical activity and consists of the following eight subscales: (a) mastery, (b) physical condition, (c) affiliation, (d) psychological condition, (e) appearance, (f) others’ expectations, (g) enjoyment, and (h) competition/ego. The aim of this study was to develop the Finnish version of the PALMS to examine the different motives to be physically active in a sample of high school students. Participants (N = 285, M age = 16.74; 55% female) completed the Finnish version of the PALMS.
Back translation procedures and expert review were utilized to develop the Finnish PALMS. Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was conducted to examine the factor structure of the scale. Results supported a solution that included 34 items loading onto six factors, namely, intrinsic motivation, competition/ego, appearance, psychological condition, physical condition and affiliation.
Mastery and enjoyment items loaded into the same factor (intrinsic motivation), while others’ expectations subscale revealed low loadings into its factor. Cronbach’s alpha coefficients were acceptable, ranging from mastery (α = 572Posters Thursday July 13th .88) to affiliation (α = .93), except for other’s expectations (α = .53) subscale. Significant mean differences in specific motives were found across groups and gender.
The findings support the use of the Finnish PALMS to assess adolescents’ motives for participation in physical activity, with the exclusion of the others’ expectation subscale, or using its items in an individual manner. The future study will discover factor structure with confirmatory factor analysis. Keywords: motivation, leisure, self-determination theory, adolescents, factor analysis Being a rollerskater in Barcelona: Putting the focus on lifestyle sports' passion & experiences Andres Chamarro (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona), Mateu Capell (Club Patí Barcelona) Urban skating has been consolidated in cities like Barcelona.
As a lifestyle sport, its practice can influence on the construction of personal identity. Despite the growing interest in this phenomenon, research into urban skating and practitioners’ engagement is still scarce. Several studies have shown that passion, a complex motivational concept imbricated in the identity, could play a central role on sports participation.
The dualistic model of passion (Vallerand et al., 2013) proposes that individuals can have two distinct types of passion toward an activity, a harmonious passion (HP) or an obsessive passion (OP), leading to more or less adaptive outcomes, respectively. The aim of the present research was to investigate the differential role of passion toward skating experiences and outcomes. Participants were 522 urban skaters, who answered a questionnaire accessible through social networking sites.
The questionnaire asked for socio-demographic and socio-sportive variables, included the Spanish version of the Passion Scale (Chamarro et al., 2015), and a scale for measuring urban skating experiences and outcomes. Results show a high prevalence of passion among roller skaters (85%). ANOVAs show a differential pattern of passion with respect to skating modalities: experienced skaters and those who practice intensively (i.e., more than 10 hours/week) or practice the more risky modalities (i.e., descent) experience higher OP.
Novice, recreational and competitive skaters experience higher HP. Both high engagement and the practice of those modalities connected to the subculture of skating seem to be associated to OP. In contrast, we remark that urban skaters are passionate, that implies that their identity is built with skating as a central point, and that HP leads to positive experiences.
Overall, the present findings highlight the importance of distinguishing HP from OP for emerging urban sports. Keywords: lyfestyle sports, urban sport, passion, identity, skating The role of perceived autonomy support from coaches and basic psychological needs in determining motivation of girl soccer players Aydan Gözmen Elmas, Nurgül Keskin, F.Hülya AsÇi (Marmara University) The aim of this study was to investigate the role of perceived autonomy support from coaches and basic psychological needs in determining sport motivation of girl football players. One hundred twenty-one (Mage=15.24±1.72) girl soccer players voluntarily participated in this study.
“Personal Information Form”, “Perceived Autonomy Support Scale (Coaches Form)”, “Sport Motivation Scale” and “Basic Needs Satisfaction in Sport Scale” were administered to adolescent soccer players. Descriptive statistics and hierarchical regression analysis were conducted to analyze data. Hierarchical regression analysis indicated that both basic psychological needs and perceived autonomy support from coaches were not significant predictors of intrinsic motivation and amotivation (p>0.05).
Perceived autonomy support was significant and positive predictor of both identified (R2=0.11;β=0.33;p0.05). In conclusion, perceived autonomy support from coaches of motivate girl soccer players externally and considering personal gains. On the contrary, basic psychological needs in sport have no influence motivation.
573Posters Thursday July 13th Keywords: autonomy support, basic psychological needs, motivation Influence of parental support in anger levels in athletes Higinio González-García, Antonia Pelegrín, José Luis Carballo (Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche) Parental support for physical activity has shown a huge influence on sport practice. Thus, higher levels of support are related to greater physical activity practice. In addition, parental education has been linked to psychosocial development in all areas of life.
There are many variables that influence in anger levels and it can be divided into personal variables and environmental variables. In this case, parental support is included into environmental variables. There are no previous studies that have examined the relationship between parental support and anger levels in athletes.
Therefore, the aim of this study is to determine if parental support influences in anger levels of athletes from different sports. The total sample consisted of 502 athletes. In order to measure the different variables were used, an ad hoc Sociodemographic questionnaire, the Oviedo Scale of Infrequency Response (INF-OV) and the Trait-State Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI 2).
The results showed significant differences in internal anger expression (p<.05) and temperament (p<.05), in benefit of athletes who perceived parents support in sport career. Finally, to determine the predictive value of the statistically significant variables in the t-test, a binary logistical regression was performed using the introduce method (X2=181,54; R2 Nagelkerke=.53). The results showed that internal anger expression (OR=.81; p<.01) is linked with didn´t perceive parents support in sport career.
It was concluded that athletes who perceived parental support in sport career have higher levels of internal anger expression and temperament. Furthermore, there is a predictive relationship between internal anger expression and didn´t perceive parents support in sport career. Keywords: parents, emotion, sport, sport career Influence of parental education styles in athletes satisfaction Higinio González-García (Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche) Parental educational styles have been related to physical activity and sport.
In addition, studies have shown the relationship of democratic parents with life satisfaction in general and the satisfaction with educational career. In this case, there are no studies that examined the relationship between parental educational styles and satisfaction with sport career. Parental education has been linked to psychosocial development in all areas of life.
Therefore, the aim of this study is to determine if parental education styles influence in athletes satisfaction in sport. The total study sample consisted of 502 athletes. In order to measure the different variables were used, an ad hoc Sociodemographic questionnaire, the Oviedo Scale of Infrequency Response (INF-OV) and the “Multifactor Self-Assessment Test of Child Adjustment” (TAMAI).
The results showed significant differences in authoritarian father (p<.01) and permissive mother (p<.05), in favour of athletes who were satisfied with sport career, who obtained lower levels. On the other hand, democratic father (p<.05) obtained significant differences in favour of athletes who were satisfied with sport career, who obtained higher levels. Finally, to determine the predictive value of statistically significant variables in the t- test, a linear regression was performed (F2=118; R2 =.23).
The regression analysis showed that democratic father (p<.01) influenced in satisfaction with sport career of athletes. Consequently, democratic father is linked with athletes satisfaction in sport career. It was concluded that athletes who felt satisfaction with sport career have greater levels of democratic father and lower levels of authoritarian father and permissive mother.
In adittion, democratic father influenced in sport career satisfaction. Keywords: parents, sportsman, wellness, sport career 574Posters Thursday July 13th Measuring states of goal involvement in specific achievement situations: Development and validation of a 6-goal questionnaire Hervé Le Bars (Western Catholic University of Angers), Anne Teboul (University of Montpellier), Arthur Pineau (Western Catholic University of Angers), Christophe Gernigon (University of Montpellier) The latest refinements of achievement goal theory (Elliot, Murayama, & Pekrun, 2011) led to distinguish six goals: task-approach, self-approach, other-approach, task-avoidance, self-avoidance, and other-avoidance. A French questionnaire measuring these goals in terms of motivational orientations (general tendencies) has been recently developed by Mascret, Elliot, and Cury (2014).
However, given the proximal role of states of goal involvement in the determination of motivational patterns, there is a need to measure such states as they are here-and-now activated. Hence, the present research aimed to develop and validate a French questionnaire that measures states of involvement in the six goals in specific achievement situations: the Achievement Goal Involvement Questionnaire (AGIQ-6). A 40-item preliminary version was created from previous achievement goal questionnaires.
Confirmatory Factorial Analyses (CFA) were then computed on the answers of 442 high school students having to learn a specific motor skill in a PE lesson. The CFA supported Elliot et al.’s (2011) six- factor structure (Chi2/ddl = 2.45 ; CFI = .95 ; NFI = .92 ; RMSEA = .057) and led to the selection of 18 items (3 items per goal). The internal consistencies were acceptable for short scales (.66 ≤ Coeff.
α ≤ .86). A follow-up study intended to test the congruent validity of the 18-item AGIQ-6 was conducted on 317 other high school students confronted with a similar PE task. Approach goals were found to be associated with an adaptive motivational pattern including perceived competence, incremental theory of competence, absorption in the task, and intrinsic motivation.
Other-avoidance goals were associated with a maladaptive pattern as they were positively related to entity theory of competence and anxiety, and negatively related to entity theory of competence. These findings show that the AGIQ-6 is a valid questionnaire that opens new avenues of research regarding the dynamics of goal involvement. Keywords: achievement goals, motivational states, competence, valence The psychological skills inventory for footballers Henrique Martins (Maia University Institute, Portugal), Pedro Teques (Polytechnic Institute of Maia, Portugal) Debates continue with regard to the assessment of psychological skills, and studies of measuring instruments specific to each sport have become evident over the last decade (e.g., Dosil, 2006).
The present study describes the development of a new multidimensional scale that measures five dimensions of psychological skills specifically developed for footballers. The first version of the Psychological Skills Inventory for Footballers (PSIF) consisted of 87 items of widely varied content based on specific psychological skills referred in the literature as the most important for football, such as cohesion, self-confidence, motivation, anxiety management, and concentration (Freitas et al., 2013). Participants were 285 professional men footballers participated in the study, aged between 18 and 36 years (M = 24.01, SD = 5.31).
Footballers’ completed the paper and pencil questionnaires during training camps of the teams, or before the training sessions. Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) revealed that the measurement model [χ2(160) = 360.11, p < .001, CFI = 0.96, TLI = .95, RMSEA = 0.04 (CI = 0.04, 0.05), SRMR = 0.04] indicated a good fit to the data (Hair et al., 2010). A final version of 20 items showed moderate to strong factor loadings ranging from 0.535 to 0.859.
All factors also show reliability (values ranging from 0.71 to 0.85), and most part of them show convergent (Average Variance Extracted values from 0.38 to 0.59) and discriminant validity (Maximum Shared Variance < Average Variance Extracted). In many instances, a global measure of psychological skills such as that provided by the CPRD (Gimeno et al., 2001), PSIS (Mahoney et al., 1987) or ACSI-28 (Smith et al., 1995) total score is sufficient, but in others, investigators need a measure of specific and relatively distinct psychological 575Posters Thursday July 13th characteristics for football. This measure is our attempt to provide a psychometrically sound measure that can meet both needs.
Keywords: psychological skills, assessment, football, confirmatory factor analysis, reliability, validity The organization of sports psychology in Brazil: structuration and training in the sports training center of the federal university of Minas Gerais George Cunha, Camila Bicalho, Talita Santos, Franco Noce (UFMG) The Sports Training Center of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (STC/UFMG) is a training site for basic and high performance athletes regarding Track & Field, Judo, Swimming and Taekwondo. In the STC/UFMG the sector of Sport Psychology was structured on three pillars. The "Applied Sport Psychology " pillar (1) refers to the continuous monitoring of coaches and athletes during the sports season, with emphasis on the mental preparation associated with training and competition routines.
On the other hand, the "Clinical Psychology" pillar (2),refers to the individualized care of the athletes considering their personal demands. Lastly the third pillar - "Career Orientation" (3) - refers to group and individualized counseling for athletes whose, for the purpose of (vocational) and career orientation, assisting in the present and future (re) organization of their careers inside or outside sport. This symposium will present in detail the actions related to pillar 1 - " Applied Sport Psychology ".
The field of sports psychology is composed of physical education professionals (research position) and psychologists (research and practice), both with specific training (lectures for all members and internship program for psychology students) in Sport Psychology field. It is organized into groups by sports modality to meet all needs of the STC-UFMG. The sport psychology actions are developed on three stages: team diagnosis/profile (1), composing the preliminary or entry evaluation, laboratory and field evaluations (training / competition); Instruction/orientation of the technical committee, composition, presentation and explanation of evaluation results, guidance on interpretation and application of results, field orientation (training/competition) (2); Intervention involving individual treatment on athletes/teams and field service (training/competition) (3).
Both the evaluation instruments used and the intervention techniques are adapted to each modality and group profile. Keywords: applied sports psychology, sports center training –UFMG, Olympic sports, sports psychology in Brazil The role of alexithymia and competitive emotions in predicting flow in athletes Duygu Karadag, F. Hülya Asçi (Marmara University) Flow is a state in which people become completely immersed in an activitiy.Alexithymia and competitive emotions may be important emotional variables that may influence flow since alexithymia is a subclinical phenomenon characterized by the that reduced ability to describe one's feelings,difficulty in distinguishing feelings from the bodily sensations of emotional arousal,impaired symbolization.The aim of this study was to examine whether or not alexithymia and competitive emotions predict flow in elite athletes.150 females(Mage=24.63;SD=4.80 years),150 males(Mage=24.88;SD=5.15 years),totally 300(Mage=24.76;SD=4.97 year)elite athletes voluntarily participated in this study.Personal Information Form,Turkish versions of Toronto Alexithymia Scale-20,Emotion State Profile and Short Form of Dispositional Flow Scale were administered to all participants.
These scales are valid and reliable for Turkish sample.Hierarchical regression analysis was conducted to test the role of alexithymia and competitive emotions in determining flow.Gender,year of sport experiences and type of sport were a control variable in Step 1 and 2 respectively.In Step 3,alexithymia and in Step 4,competitive emotions were included to the model.Hierarchical regression analysis,controlling gender,type of sport and year of sport experiences,indicated that alexithymia didn't predict flow in athletes(R=0.09;Adjusted R2=-0.000;F(4,299)=0.57;p>0.05).Competitive emotional states were significant predictor of flow(R=0.40;Adjusted R2=-0.14; F(8,299)=6.89;p<0.01).Analysis revealed that N- emotion was 576Posters Thursday July 13th negatively correlated with flow(β=-0.27;p<0.01);N+(β=-0.20;p<0.01);P-(β=-0.29;p<0.01);P+(β=- 0.12;p<0.05)were positively correlated with flow.Results showed alexithymia has no influence on flow state in athletes,but competitive emotional state plays an important role in understanding flow experiences in athletes.This indicated that regulation of competitive emotion is important for experiencing flow in elite athletes. Keywords: alexithymia, emotional state, flow, elite athletes 577Posters Friday July 14th Friday July 14th Posters Session 6. (9.30-10:30) Intention to be physically active in low motivated Physical Education students Evelia Franco Álvarez (Centro Universitario Cardenal Cisneros - Universidad de Alcalá), Javier Coterón (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid), Valeria Gómez (Universidad de Flores), Jorge Brito (Universidad de Cuenca) One of the Physical Education (PE) major goals is to develop students who will engage in physical activity (PA) during their extracurricular time and will keep practicing it in the future.
A concept deemed critical and strongly associated with this engagement is motivation (Wang et al., 2016). An area of limited inquiry has been focused on those students with low levels of motivation (Perlman, 2015). The aim of this study was to test a predictive model of intention to be physically active through motivational variables in a sample of low motivated PE students.
Questionnaires were administered to 483 high school students aged 14-16 years. Spanish versions of the PE adaptions of TEOSQ, intrinsic motivation factor of the PLOC, DFS-2 and the Intention to be Physically Active Questionnaire were used in Spain. These all quesionnaires were adapted and validated to be used in other participant countries.
A model widely accepted among adolescents was tested through a structural equation model. Multi-sample invariance testing revealed that the proposed model was not invariant across students showing different motivational patterns. A new hypothesized sequence was tested in low motivational students in which the effect of intrinsic motivation on intention was deleted and the direct effect path from task orientation to intention was added.
A new structure equation model supported the new predictive model and a multi-sample invariance test revealed that it was largely invariant across different countries. Findings suggest that underlying motivational processes behind PA engagement are different between high motivated and low motivated students in line with previous works pointing differences between motivated and amotivated students (Haerens et al., 2010). This study contributes to the body of knowledge of physical activity engagement by demonstrating the existence of a different motivational sequence for students with low forms of motivation.
Keywords: amotivation, intention, invariance Effects of the language use on students' motivation within a bilingual physical education setting Evelia Franco Álvarez (Centro Universitario Cardenal Cisneros - Universidad de Alcalá), Cássia Hess (Universidade Estadual de Campinas), Javier Coterón (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid), Eliana de Toledo (Universidade Estadual de Campinas) Over the last few years bilingual education has been increasingly implemented in Spain. Physical Education (PE) is one of the subjects which has more frequently been selected to be taught in English language. The nature of this new PE setting could influence perceptions students have about this subject as well as their motivation towards physical activity (Baena-Extremera & Granero-Gallegos, 2015).
In the present study the effect of a bilingual methodology on motivation was analyzed. The sample consisted of 94 students aging from 12 to 14 (M=13,76; SD= .86). Experimental group (n=46) was formed by two classes with different bilingual programs (high and low English level) and control group (n=47), by two equivalent classes.
Achievement Motivation to learn in Physical Education Test and intrinsic motivation factor of the Perceived Locus of Causality in Sport were used. The intervention lasted for 12 weeks and consisted in the implementation of different language uses. While the teacher only used English language in the control condition, sessions in the 578Posters Friday July 14th experimental condition were taught interchanging English and Spanish by using code-switching.
After the intervention a significant decrease in intrinsic motivation was found in the high English level experimental group. In line with other studies which have reported associations between intrinsic motivation and task challenge (Standage, Duda, & Ntoumanis, 2005), it is suggested this could be due to students in this group were used to take their lesson entirely in English and the use of code-switching (interchanging English and Spanish) could have made the classes not challenging enough and trigged the decrease in intrinsic motivation. No more significant differences were found.
Findings suggest that the use of a monolingual or bilingual methodology does not have a great influence in the studied variables. Further investigation would be needed to better understand the effect of bilingual PE on motivation. Keywords: physical education, bilingualism, intervention Reliability and validity of the “Student Interest-in-the-Arts Questionnaire” (SIAQ) in Greek elementary traditional dance educational context Evangelos Bebetsos, Aikaterini Koupani, Stella Rokka, Filippos Filippou The aim of this study was to confirm the “Student Interest-in-the-Arts Questionnaire” (SIAQ) (Brandon & Lawton, 2013) in a Greek elementary traditional dance educational context.
The internal consistency of the SIAQ was also examined. The sample of the study consisted of 304 male and 348 female elementary school students of the 4th, 5th and 6th class all over Greece. For the data collection was used the Greek version of SIAQ.
The questionnaire’s validity and reliability were checked by performing a confirmatory factor analysis, and an internal consistency analysis. Descriptive statistics, t-test for independent samples and One Way ANOVA analysis were used for the data statistical process. The fit indices which were considered are: namely minimum discrepancy, Root Mean Square Error of Approximation, Standardized Root Mean Square Residual, Comparative Fit Index, and Normed Fit Index.
The results of this study obtained in the confirmatory factor analysis demonstrated that the hypothesized model produced a significant χ2 (134.82) p < .05. The NFI, CFI, RMSEA, and SRMR value were found to be 0.98, 0.99, .080 and .028 respectively. From the analysis we came to the following conclusions: a.
The Greek version of SIAQ has shown stable psychometric properties, which partially support its use in Greek elementary traditional dance school context. b. The students show a moderate interest in participating in Greek dance classes and there were statistically significant differences in interest concerning gender and school class.
c. Gender is a differentiation factor for interesting with girls being more interesting than boys. d.
6th grade’s students showed more interest in traditional dance than those in the 5th and 4th. Keywords: traditional dance, learning theories, learning style, teaching method, motivation The factor structure and reliability of the Movement Imagery Questionnaire for Rehabilitation Settings-Second Edition (MIQ-RS2): A multi-trait, multi-method approach Eva Monsma (Professional), Ali Brian (Professional), Samantha Weber (Student), Brian Seiler (Professional), Ryan Sacko (Student), Roger Newman-Norlund (Professional) The factor structure and reliability of the Movement Imagery Questionnaire for Rehabilitation Settings- Second Edition (MIQ-RS2): A multi-trait, multi-method approach Injury rehabilitation outcomes are an understudied area in the motor imagery literature. Aligned with the approach that established the factor structure of the Movement Imagery Questionnaire-3 (MIQ-3: Williams et al., 2012), this study extended the two-factor structure of the Movement Imagery Questionnaire for Rehabilitation Settings (MIQ-RS2: Monsma et al., 2016).
The extension involves assessment of both internal and external visual imagery abilities along with kinesthetic imagery ability. Healthy participants (N=400) completed the MIQ-RS2 along with the MIQ-3 and the Vividness of Movement Imagery Questionnaire-2 (Roberts et al., 2008) which measure the same three imagery 579Posters Friday July 14th abilities. Alpha coefficients (α > 0.87) and within-scale Spearman correlations for internal (r=0.73, 0.72), external (r=0.77, 0.75) and kinesthetic (r=0.69, 0.77) abilities demonstrated internal consistency and convergent validity, respectively.
The three scales were not multicolinear (r=0.47 to 0.61), supporting the three abilities were related, but separate constructs. A multitrait-multimethod confirmatory factor analysis, with gender invariance was conducted to examine the factor structure of the MIQ-RS2. Results indicated the best fitting model was the correlated-traits correlated-methods model (CFI = .845; SRMR = .069; RMSEA = .111), while displaying gender invariance but did not fit the data.
Results are discussed in terms of employing bootstrapping procedures and the effects of completing three questionnaires which improved model fit to some extent. Subsequent studies should examine rehabilitation participants prior to making any model modifications. Keywords: injury rehabilitation, motor imagery, psychometrics Physical activity and quality of life: focus group interviews with korean immigrants Eungwang Oh, Diane Gill, Youngsun Lee (UNCG) Quality of life (QoL) serves as a principal motivator and benefit of physical activity (PA) across cultures.
However, previous research seldom included participants’ perspectives of PA and QoL or ethnic minority populations. As a follow-up study of a larger investigation of PA and QoL in Korean immigrants residing in the U.S. (Oh, Jang, & Gill, 2016), this study examined patterns and trends of older generation and younger generation Korean immigrants using a multiple-category design with focus group data.
Cross-group comparison was based on previous research which showed age as a moderator of the relationship between PA and QoL. A total of six focus groups of 5-6 participants each were conducted, which were audio-recorded, transcribed, and organized to main themes corresponding to the research questions. Interview questions included current PA behaviors, meaning of QoL, role of PA in QoL, and difference of PA experiences in the U.S.
and Korea. The data were checked by a three-member research team and further reviewed by a second author. Research procedures following Framework Analysis offered clarity, transparency, and an audit trail.
The findings indicated that while both generations reported positive benefits of PA in multiple dimensions of QoL, preferred types of PA and the role of PA in QoL differed. Concerning the meaning of QoL, both groups had similar responses. On the relationship between PA and QoL, both groups highlighted mental and emotional health benefits.
Participants’ different PA experiences between Korea and the U.S. were viewed as both advantages and disadvantages. The younger generation saw more advantages being in the U.S.
than the older generation did. Also, cultural assimilation and gender may play a critical role in the relationship between PA and QoL. Keywords: quality of life, physical activity, culture, focus group interview Analysis and evaluation of psychological skills associated with performance in rhythmic gymnastics Estefania Lopa Peralto (Universidad Pablo de Olavide), Patricia Jaenes-Amarillo (Universidad de Sevilla), Rafael Peñaloza Gómez, María del Pilar Méndez Sánchez (Universidad Autonoma Nacional de México), Alejandro Parejo (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) Analysis and evaluation of psychological skills associated with performance in Spanish rhythmic gymnastics Rhythmic gymnastics, psychologycal skills, performance,evaluation Summary: The main goal of this research project is to discover, when using the Questionnaire of Sports Performance related Psychological Characteristics (CPRD in Spanish) (Gimeno, Buceta, y Pérez-Llantada, 1999, 2001) the level of psychological skills associated with performance in Spanish rhythmic gymnastics, a sports specially considered very difficult to cope with from a psychological point of view.
The CPRD has a very acceptable reliability level (Cronbach alpha coefficient = 0.85). 86 female gymnastic who participate in national competitions: Group A: successful: 36 580Posters Friday July 14th subjects, and Group B: 50 subjects who was working under an intervention program with Sport Psychologist, unsuccessful gymnastics –they didn´t have intervention-, who participate in local competitions. Age between 8,1-17,2 years old (Mean 12,04, SD 2,3) and may be useful to explain behaviour observed and to help in direct and indirect interventions.
Results shown significant differences between successful and unsuccessful it points to differences between pre-elite (group A) and non-elite groups (B). The gymnasts who work with sports psychologists as part of their training obtain higher scores in Stress Control SC), Performance Evaluation (PE), Mental Ability (MA). Keywords: rhythmic gymnastics, psychologycal skills, performance Impact of received and perceived social support upon athlete’s psychological well-being Eriko Katagami, Kahori Tsujita, Hironobu Tsuchiya (Osaka University of Health and Sport Sciences) Recently, the importance of social support in sport has been broadly recognised.
While the correlation between received social support and sport performance related factors such as self-confidence, the relationship with well-being has not been fully examined. The current study aimed to examine the impact of received support and perceived support on athletes’ psychological well-being. Furthermore, the relationship between received social support, perceived social support was investigated.
Two hundred and thirty-nine Japanese university student athletes (Mage=19.69±1.01years) completed the questionnaires regarding social support and psychological well-being. The Athlete Received Support Questionnaire (Freeman et al., 2014), Social Support Scale for Athlete (SSSA: Tsuchiya, 2012), and Psychological Well-Being Scale (PWB: Nishida, 2000) were used to measure athletes’ social support and psychological health. The results demonstrated that received support and perceived support were positively correlated each other.
In addition, the results showed that an aggregate psychological well-being was positively correlated with received support (r=.31, p<.01) and perceived support (r=.31, p<.01). Specifically, it was shown that there was a positive correlation between ‘personal growth’ and received support (r=.30, p<.01) and perceived support (r=.28, p<.01). Also, ‘positive relationship with others’ was positively correlated with received support (r=.44, p<.01) and perceived support (r=.51, p<.01).
In addition, multiple regression analysis reveal that received support positively predicted athletes’ psychological well-being (β=.36, p<.01), while perceived support did not significantly predict it when we assumed psychological well-being as an outcome variable (β=.12, n.s.). In conclusion, received support can be a salient predictor of athletes’ psychological well-being. Keywords: social support, psychological well-being SERVQUAL for the evaluation of the quality of the educative service for the class of health and physical culture in high school in México Erika Gadea (UANL) At present day, mechanisms of quality evaluation in the academic institutions become more necessary at the different levels of education.
Providing quality education is more complex and implies the update of the mechanisms of evaluation. These mechanisms require to be innovative and with a high reliability and fiability to allow the application and comprehension of the academic authorities. Given that, the objective of the current research is to analyze the psychometric properties of the questionnaire applied in the Mexican society.
On this work, the SERVQUAL questionnaire, which is known as the deficiencies model, was applied. Through the questionnaire, the statistics and data were intriduced into the LISREL program. SERVQUAL was adapted to the Mexican scholar Context like the one made in Spain made with the secondary school and college levels.
The test sample collected a total of N=1038 students, with a range age level of 15 to 18 years old, students of 8 different academic institutions of Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León in the state of Nuevo León, México. After the results obtained from the factorial analysis confirmatory of the two scales (expectations and 581Posters Friday July 14th perceptions) it can be considered that there are recommended scores to accept the model. As for the fitting criterion indexes, there are located superficially 0.90 (0.99 for the Comparative Index of Adjustment CFI; 0.95 for the Index of Fitting criterion AGFI and 0.99 for the Index of Kindness GFI).
The error indexes place for below 0.10 (RMSEA=0.0, RMR=0.05, RMR =0.052) for the expectations and the indexes of fitting criterion of the scale of perceptions, there are located superficially 0.90 (0.99 for the Comparative Index of Adjustment CFI; 0.99 for the Index of Fitting criterion AGFI and 0.99 for the Index of Kindness GFI). The error indexes place for below 0.10 (RMSEA=0.0, RMR=0.052, RMR =0.052) The SERVQUAL questionnaire can be considered as a tool for evaluation of educational services- Keywords: quality, educational service, mexican service educative, highschool, physical education and health, education The contribution of coping related variables and vagal tone on working memory performance under pressure Emma Mosley (Southampton Solent University, Bournemouth University), Sylvain Laborde (German Sport University, University of Caen), Emma Kavanagh (Bournemouth University) Skill failure under pressure is closely linked to excessive load on working memory (WM). Recently a combined approach to this phenomenon has been examined including facets of psychophysiology such as personality traits, stress appraisals and vagal tone, inferred from heart rate variability measurement.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to assess the predictive role of personality traits (trait emotional intelligence and reinvestment), challenge and threat appraisals and vagal tone on WM performance under low (LP) and high pressure (HP) conditions. 49 participants (28 male, 21 female; Mage: 24.1 ± 6.5 years) completed the personality questionnaires: Decision Specific Reinvestment Scale, Movement Specific Reinvestment Scale and the Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire. They were invited to the laboratory on two occasions and completed a working memory task in LP and HP conditions, which were counterbalanced.
During the task vagal tone measurements were taken at baseline, task and recovery for 5 minutes with stress ratings via a visual analogue scale. After testing self-report measures of motivation, stress appraisal, attention and pressure were taken. Stepwise regressions were run for vagal tone WM performance prediction.
Baseline vagal tone predicted levels of vagal tone at task (p <.001) and recovery (p <.001) in HP and this was mirrored in LP for task (p <.001) and recovery (p= <.001). The change from baseline to task in the HP condition was predicted by a challenge appraisal (p = .004). There were no salient predictors for WM performance, although correlation results suggested lower vagal tone in HP impaired performance (r = -.47, p <.001).
From a theoretical perspective the findings support the notion that resting vagal tone can predict changes in vagal tone and subjective appraisal can influence physiological reactions to HP. Overall, this study provides scope for future research combining psychophysiological facets in differing pressure situations. Keywords: working memory, vagal tone, heart rate variability, pressure Basic psychological needs in exercise and exercise motivation among elderly candidate and elderly people Alev Aktürk, Emine Çağlar (Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey) We investigated exercise motivation and basic psychological needs in exercise among elderly candidate and elderly people.
Total 476 Turkish exercisers (Mage = 58.23, Sd = 6.14 years) participated in this study. The participants were classified into three age groups as 50-54, 55-64, and 65 and older ages. The participants younger than 65 years were considered as elderly candidates.
Data were collected by using Behavioral Regulations in Exercise Questionnaire (BREQ-2), Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise (BPNE) and Borg Scale and were analyzed with independent sample t-Test and One-way ANOVA. We found statistically significant 582Posters Friday July 14th gender differences on the competence and autonomy subscales of BPNE and on the intrinsic regulation, external regulation and introjected regulation subscales of BREQ-2 (p < 0.05). Female participants had higher scores on these subscales.
We also found significant age group differences on the both scales (p < 0.05). Tukey test revealed that 65 years of age and older participants’ scores of both scales significantly differed from than those of the other age groups. The scores of all BNPE subscales and Internal regulation and Introjected regulation subscales of BREQ-2 were lower in the 65 years of age and older participants, while their scores of External regulation and Amotivation were higher.
Furthermore, we obtained significant RPE group differences only on the Relatedness subscale (p < 0.05). Tukey test yielded that light RPE group significantly differed from hard and very hard RPE group. The light RPE group had lower scores on the Relatedness subscale.
Regarding exercise motivation, results showed significant differences in the Introjected regulation and External regulation subscales of BREQ-2 among RPE groups. The light RPE group had lower scores than the moderate and hard RPE group. It can be concluded that female participants internally motivated and felt more autonomous and competence in exercise.
Additionally, 65 years of age and older. Keywords: autonomy, competence, relatedness, elderly people, exercise motivation How do illness stories shape physical activity experiences? Insights into arthritis as redemption and contamination Emily Hunt, Anthony Papathomas (Loughborough University) Although regular physical activity is often considered therapeutically beneficial for people living with arthritis, most still lead inactive lifestyles.
Efforts to understand physical in/activity in arthritic populations have been limited to descriptive accounts of barriers and facilitators, which give no insight into how these factors are constructed within the context of the whole life. In this narrative inquiry, we explore the life stories of participants with arthritis to gain a holistic perspective into why some people overcome barriers to exercise and why some people do not. We conducted open-ended life story interviews with 6 men and 14 women aged between 24 and 79 years (M = 57, SD = 14.4), who were diagnosed with inflammatory and degenerative arthritis.
Participants told their story of arthritis, with particular emphasis on their experiences of physical activity. Interviews lasted between 56 and 159 minutes, with a total of 34 hours of data collected. We transcribed the interviews verbatim and carried out an analysis of narrative structure and content.
Participants’ stories were told through contamination and redemption narrative structures. As part of the contamination narrative sequence, participants felt negative or ambivalent towards exercise, perceived greater barriers to exercise and emphasised negative exercise experiences. Alternatively, when narrating a redemption sequence, participants described personal growth, overcoming barriers to participation and were able to relate to exercise in a more positive manner.
We suggest that how people story their lives with illness (through contamination or redemption) plays a role in shaping their physical activity experiences. Identifying the type of story a person with arthritis lives by can provide an insight into how they interpret and approach inevitable barriers to exercise. Practical implications consider how working with stories can support physical activity promotion efforts.
Keywords: narrative analysis, exercise medicine Relaxation techniques in stress control Pedro Reynaga Estrada, Elvia Alexandra Valadez Jiménez, Ivonne Michel Jiménez Ortega, Christopher David Flores Tello (Universidad de Guadalajara), Rossana de Fátima Cuevas Ferrera (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán) The psychophysical response of stress, not being effectively confronted, can cause an impact on the nervous system that generates biochemical and hormonal changes with repercussions in the endocrine and 583Posters Friday July 14th immunological systems. So using the right relaxation techniques is critical to stress management. A quasi- experimental study on the use of different relaxation techniques was carried out, the objective of the study was to analyze the effect of different relaxation techniques on the electrical response of the skin and the peripheral temperatura.
A total of 92 students and professors participated in the undergraduate degree in physical and sports culture at the University of Guadalajara, with a mean age of 24 years, of which 42.4% (n = 39) were men and 47.8% (n = 44) Women, 9.8% (n = 9) refrained from specifying their sex. All the participants were given psychophysical indicators using the Psicotronic EDG-1500 Electrothermodermometer, through this device the participant obtained an instant visual and / or auditory biofeedback. The work session consisted in measuring the electrical response of the skin and the peripheral temperature in three stages: baseline, self- regulation and controlled relaxation where the participant had to choose one of three relaxation techniques.
No statistically significant differences were found between baseline and use of different relaxation techniques. However, a statistically significant correlation was found between the peripheral temperature and the electrical response of the skin at the baseline. Based on the results it is concluded that the relaxation techniques do not generate significant changes in the psychophysical indicators of stress.
Probably because the time intervals are insufficient to modify psychophysical measures so it will be necessary to deepen this variable in future investigations before discarding the effectiveness of relaxation techniques with biofeedback in this population. Keywords: relaxation responde, stress, biofeedback Public shaming of professional athletes through social media Ellen MacPherson, Dr. Gretchen Kerr (University of Toronto) This study sought to explore the nature of public shaming practices directed towards professional athletes by sport fans through social media.
Public shaming refers to social acts intended to express disapproval when an individual behaves in a way that violates perceived societal norms (e.g., Braithwaite, 1989; Massaro, 1997). The rise in social media use has given sport fans opportunities to connect with athletes on an individual basis, which fosters “unprecedented access to professional athletes and their personal and social lives” (Hambrick et al., 2010, p.455). While there are benefits that may be gleaned through this communication, little is known about the potential harmful interactions that may occur between fans and athletes.
As a result, this study was designed to explore the nature of public shaming of professional athletes on social media when athletes violate perceived legal, social, or sport-related norms. A content analysis of fans’ tweets, photographs, and online posts on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter toward ten professional athletes who had engaged in a perceived norm violation was conducted. The norm violations ranged from disappointing sport performances and the use of performance enhancing drugs to various criminal charges.
The data were analyzed thematically and revealed that fans’ interactions with professional athletes on social media following norm violations included: expressing one’s withdrawal of support for the athlete, personal attacks on sport-specific character and desired consequences for the athlete as a result of his/her perceived norm violation. Moreover, the findings indicated that the fans’ interactions varied according to the athlete’s gender and level of performance success. This study highlights the importance of social media as a vehicle by which strangers may interact with and potentially harm professional athletes, thus presenting a new challenge for the well-being of these athletes.
Future directions will be discussed. Keywords: social media, public shaming, content analysis, professional athletes Investigating the relationship between authentic leadership and follower outcomes in sport: A cross-sectional study Ella Malloy (University of Birmingham) 584Posters Friday July 14th Authentic leadership (AL) is a newly recognized style of leadership which could have promising outcomes in sport. Authentic leaders are genuine and show consistency between their behaviours and personal values, possess high moral values, which are mirrored by their followers, and are concerned with their followers’ development (Avolio et al, 2004; Gardner et al, 2005).
Only two studies have been conducted on AL in sport and found that AL is positively related to athletes’ enjoyment and commitment and these relationships were mediated by trust. This study sought to investigate the relationship between coach AL and athlete commitment, drop out, wellbeing and moral behaviour, and whether these relationships are mediated by trust and the team coach created climate. Participants were 400 male and female adult and adolescent athletes, recruited from various team sports teams in the West Midlands.
Data collection is ongoing but we expect to find a positive relationship between authentic leadership and followers commitment, morality and well-being and a negative relationship between AL and athlete drop out. Team climate and trust are expected to mediate these relationships. These findings will mean AL could be key to creating more positive follower outcomes which could help to address the issues of low sport participation levels and antisocial behaviors in sport.
Keywords: morality, commitment, trust, well-being, drop out, team climate Development and transfer of life skills in high level skating: Comparison of the experiences of female coaches and their skaters Elise Marsollier, Christiane Trottier (Université Laval, Québec) The coach-athlete interactions are essential in the process of life skills development and transfer (e.g., Gould & Carson, 2011). Few studies have simultaneously considered the experiences of athletes and their coaches to examine the development and transfer of life skills, and even fewer have focused on female athletes and coaches. The aim of this study was to compare how elite female figure skaters and their female coaches experienced the development and transfer of life skills.
We used a qualitative multiple-case study approach (Yin, 2014), with each case representing one coach and two of her skaters. In total, six coaches and 12 skaters aged 14 to 21 years were interviewed twice about the life skills thought, learnt and transferred during the last year. First, the content of each transcript was analyzed deductively and inductively (Miles et al., 2014; Yin, 2014).
The deductive analysis was based on the literature, including Pierce et al.’s (2017) model. Second, the six cases were cross-analysed. All coaches and athletes reported that the demands of the sport largely explained the development of life skills such as perseverance, commitment, and stepping out of one’s comfort zone.
There were also discrepancies across cases. Some coaches reported teaching life skills such as maintaining focus or other life skills important for healthy development (e.g., self-esteem, respect), and some athletes reported learning life skills that differed from those that the coaches reported teaching. Furthermore, the athletes explained that, with time and experience, they underwent personal improvements through the learned life skills.
The coaches reported that they rarely focused on life skills transfer, believing this to be the athletes’ or their parents’ responsibility. Overall, the athletes and coaches described an indirect development of life skills, with mostly implicit transfer, and the athletes appeared to be the key actors in this transfer. Keywords: life skills, elite figure skating, implicit transfer, demands of sport, identity change, female coaches Integration of psychological and physiological activity during fencing competition: consequences on mental preparation Elisabeth Rosnet (UFRSTAPS, University of Reims), Philippe Dedieu (IRFSS Croix Rouge Française), Michel Salesse, Maxime Bourdageau, Eric Srecki, Olivier Hanicotte, Jean-Pierre Philippon (Fédération Française d'Escrime) Characterization of psychological and physiological activity during competition is of high interest to better understand elite performance and to help to define more efficient training applications.
A fencing match 585Posters Friday July 14th include offensive and defensive actions with repeated back and forth movements (Lavoie and al., 1985; Bottoms and al., 2011) before and during the final action leading to hit. These movements are of high intensity and are mixed with lower intensity level periods allowing recovery (Bottoms et al., 2011). The issue of this study is to explore the possible relationships between heart rate, lactatemia and psychological states during performance in a competitive context.
37 fencers (international level) aged between 18 and 20 years old participated to the study during 6 national level competitions in U20 or adult category, one for each weapon and gender (foil, epee, sabre x male and female). Lactates were determined from 20 µl of capillary blood. Heart rate was registered all day long with a heart rate monitor.
Psychological states include perceived stress, perceived activation, perceived fatigue, and perceived stake and were rated with 10 cm visual analogic scales. Measures were done when arrival on site, at the end of warm-up, before and after each match during the pool phase (only before and after the whole pool for the psychological data), and before and after each match during the direct elimination phase. A log book of the matches (time, duration, pauses, score evolution) was written for each participant.
Analyses are presented according to weapon, gender and opponent’s level (rated by national and international rankings). They show significant relationships that may highlight and reinforce the processes explaining the efficiency of mental preparation techniques and explain from a different point a view some phenomenon like “fear of victory”. Keywords: mental preparation, fencing, lactatemia, competition, performance Comparison of athletic identity levels between athletes from collective and individual sports Walan Robert da Silva, Elisa Ferrari, Fernando Luiz Cardoso (Santa Catarina State University) Athletic identity (AI) can be understood as the way in which the subject-athlete constructs the notion of him/herself in relation to the emotions of his/her interpersonal conviviality and his/her interactions from sports practice and environment.
The objective of the present study was to compare the level of AI among athletes of collective sports (CS) and individual (IS) between both biological sex (men and women). To measure the AI it was used the Brazilian version of Athletic Identity Scale Measurement (AISM). The study included 197 athletes, 71 from individual sports (athletics and judo) and 117 from collective sports (indoor soccer and handball), 110 women and 70 men.
In order to verify the differences among the athletes, the t-test was used for independent samples and a significance level of 5% was adopted. Significant differences were found in AI levels between sports types (t = 4.38, p = 0.001), with IS` athletes presenting an average of 40.1 scores (sd = 3.8) and CS` athletes mean of 37, 4 (sd = 4.37). Regarding the comparison between the sexes, men presented higher levels of AI (39.5; sd = 3.6) when compared to women (37.8; sd = 4.7) (t = 2.42, p = 0.016).
The results found in this study may be related to gender culture issues perceptions in sport, besides of aggressiveness and competitiveness perception` factors that characterize the sports studied. Keywords: athletic identity, collective sports, individual sports, gender culture Mental training in the management of anxiety and self-confidence in selected athletes in Chile Eliot Brito (Instituto Nacional de Deportes) This work consisted in a program of Mental Training in the management of Anxiety and Self-confidence, in selected Chilean national discus throwing and javelin. Its aim is to be an efficient instrument for all those athletes who suffer problems at motor, physical and physiological level, which added to the loss of self- confidence, feel as their sports level has decreased.
The sample that configures this proposal is 5 participants ladies, whose Ages range from 14 to 17 years. It was not possible to find some type of study in relation to the control of the anxiety and the increase of the self-confidence in athletes who threw the disc, the javelin or the 586Posters Friday July 14th hammer. It was only possible to collect information from other individual sports that related to these psychological variables, as well as bibliography related to the variables indicated above.
With the objective of increasing management in the control of anxiety through the application of relaxation techniques and improving self-confidence through the application of cognitive restructuring techniques. For data collection, we used tests that measured STAI anxiety and LOHER and ACEP self-confidence. STAI, score less than 28 in 4 of them and one of 31, a low state anxiety type.
ACEP in all athletes the level of self-confidence is less than 50%. The first objective was to work with Jacobson's progressive muscle relaxation technique and Visualization, yielding a decrease in anxiety and trait status. For the second objective, cognitive restructuring sessions were performed, obtaining improvements in the results.
ACEP, raised their score and LOHER, three athletes gets 150 out of a total of 210, and two gets 158 out of a total of 210. Changes were observed in the athletes through the information collected by the tests and mainly in the results at the competition level, that three of the athletes achieved gold medal in South American sub 18 (discus throw) and South American school in javelin and discus throw. Keywords: mental training, anxiety, self-confidence Match-Fixing: a threat to the values of sport.
Representations of the phenomenon among Italian League B football players Eleonora Reverberi, Eloisa Cianci, Diletta Gazzaroli, Caterina Gozzoli (Catholic University of Sacred Heart) Today, March-Fixing (MF) is a phenomenon of great relevance and, unfortunately, more and more widespread in sport context; it originates from the failing of morality and in the non-application, or the lacking safeguard, of those values that characterize healthy sport (Mcnamee, 2013). Moreover, despite the existence of a significant amount of policy implementation lines related to MF, at both national and European level, the scientific literature from psychological, relational and organizational point of view, is still very limited (Hill, 2009; Huggins, 2017). The aim of this contribution is to present what professional football players belonging to the second division of Italian professional Football League (League B) know and think about MF and their disposition toward it.
The purpose of this study, therefore, has been to fill the abovementioned gap in literature, trying to understand 1) player’s personal and socio-relational characteristics, 2) their knowledge about MF and 3) their behaviour toward MF. For this purpose, a structured questionnaire has been developed and proposed to 283 professional players members of the 22 Teams belonging to Italian Football League B. Due to the explorative nature of this project, it has been done descriptive analysis of collected data.
Results show that players have a great awareness of MF. However, when players perceive their possible, or effective, involvement in an illegal situation, as “members of a team”, they deal with the situation by keeping it limited into the sport context, without involve others actors from outside this context, generating a situation of “code of silence” about it. This research represents the first step of an ongoing project granted by the European Union, aimed to increase our knowledge of the MF phenomenon and its social and relational dynamics.
Keywords: match-fixing, values in sport, football Validation of the portuguese version of the work motivation scale in sport coaches Eduardo Jorge Brazâo Vacas de Sousa da Silva (Universidade Lusófona, Lisbon), David Sánchez-Oliva (University of Extremadura, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon), António Labisa Palmeira (Universidade Lusófona, Lisbon) The Motivation at Work Scale (MAWS, Gagné et al., 2010) was developed in accordance with the multidimensional conceptualization of motivation postulated in Self Determination Theory (SDT). Research in different domains (e.g., Sports), has supported that autonomous motivation leads to positive motivational consequences, whereas controlled motivation should be associated with negative outcomes, which could lead 587Posters Friday July 14th to the use of need thwarting strategies as a coach. The aim of this study was to develop a validated version of the Portuguese MAWS, in Sport Coaches.
Participants were 369 coaches (males = 288; age: 18–67 years, M=32.4, SD=11.04) from various sports. Factorial, discriminant and nomological validity were analyzed. The Confirmatory Factor Analysis obtained acceptable values, with high factor weights (λ ≥ .500) and appropriate individual reliabilities (λ 2≥.25).
The adjustment indexes were: TLI = .889; CFI = .916; GFI = .915; SRMR = .069 and RMSEA = .077. Cronbach's alpha [.646-.810] and composite reliability [.650-.833] scores were acceptable. Regarding discriminant validity, Intrinsic, Identified and Introjected motivation were negatively related with Amotivation and positive related with each other.
Weak positive associations between Intrinsic and Introjected and Extrinsic motivation were observed. In nomological validity, the correlations between MAWS and the Portuguese version of Coach Motivation Questionnaire (CMQ: McLean et al., 2012) were moderate positive between autonomous regulations and weak positive between autonomous and controlled regulations. Amotivation had a weak negative relation with the three more autonomous regulations and had a moderate positive relation with External.
This study suggests that the Portuguese version of MAWS is a promising, parsimonious questionnaire to assess work motivation on the sport coaching context, even though its development remains a work in progress. Keywords: motivation, work, validation, coaches, confirmatory factor analysis Validation of the Portuguese versions of the need satisfaction and need frustration scales in sport coaches Eduardo Jorge Brazâo Vacas de Sousa da Silva (Universidade Lusófona, Lisbon), David Sánchez-Oliva (University of Extremadura, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon), António Labisa Palmeira (Universidade Lusófona, Lisbon) Coach motivation may have a cascade effect on the athletes’ motivation. The Basic Needs Theory (BNT), a mini-theory of Self-Determination Theory (SDT) posits that individuals possess three innate psychological needs which, when satisfied, provide the necessary nutriments for psychological growth and wellbeing.
The aim of this study was to develop validated versions of the Portuguese version of Basic Psychological Need Frustration Scale (BPNFS: Chen et al., 2015) and Basic Psychological Needs at Work Scale (BPNWS: Sánchez-Oliva et al., 2016) in sport coaches. Participants were 369 coaches (males = 288; age: 18–67 years, M=32.4, SD=11.04) from various sports. Factorial, discriminant and nomological validity were analyzed.
The Confirmatory Factor Analysis obtained acceptable values for both scales, with high factor weights (λ ≥ .500) and appropriate individual reliabilities (λ2≥.25). BPNWS and BPNFS had respectively the following adjustment indexes: TLI = .887 and .860; CFI = .913 and .892; GFI = .914 and .918; SRMR = .051 and .065 and RMSEA = .095 and .087. Cronbach's alpha [.748-.841], [.724-.759] and composite reliability [.758-.850], [.728-.780] were good.
The discriminant validity was also demonstrated through the interfactor correlations (BPNWS = .536-.720; BPNFS = 405-.461). Lastly, the nomological validity was evaluated through the associations with the Portuguese version of Coach Motivation Questionnaire (CMQ: McLean et al., 2012). A weak negative association between the needs frustration and autonomous regulations was found, as well as a weak positive relation with controlled regulations.
This study suggests that the Portuguese versions of BPNFS and BPNWS are promising, parsimonious questionnaires to assess need satisfaction and frustration on the sport coaching context, even though its development remains a work in progress. Keywords: basic needs, validation, coaches, confirmatory factor analysis Peer leadership, cohesion and team performance in intramural football Edson Filho, Alex Toward (University of Central Lancashire) 588Posters Friday July 14th The majority of research on leadership across domains of human performance has been focused on coaches and managers rather than on peer leaders (see Hiller, DeChurch, Murase, & Doty, 2011). To advance research beyond this known “leader-follower dichotomy”, we explore the relationship among peer leadership behaviors, cohesion and team performance in an intramural college 5-a-side football tournament.
Seventy-two players (40 male and 32 female; Mage = 20.58; SD = .73) participated in the study. The participants completed a demographic questionnaire and surveys on peer leadership (Revised Peer Sport Leadership Behaviour Inventory; Shipherd, 2013), cohesion (Group Environment Questionnaire; Widmeyer, Brawley, & Carron, 1985), and perceived team performance (Team Outcome Questionnaire; Coleman, 2011). Objective performance scores (i.e., percentage of total points) were obtained from the official league website.
A backward stepwise regression analysis was conducted with subjective performance as the dependent variable. Noteworthy, subjective performance correlated highly with objective scores (r = .88; p ≤ .01), thus attesting for the predictive validity of this psychometric measure. The final parsimonious regression model accounted for 85.1% of the variance of performance scores.
Character (β = .45; p < .01) was the only peer-leader trait predicting performance. Group-integration task cohesion scores (β = .52; p <.01) were also positively related to performance, as well as the age (β = .10; p =.04) and gender (dummy coded 0/1 variable; β = .20; p <.01) of the players. Together, these findings suggest that, at this level of competitive play, character is the most valued peer leadership trait.
Furthermore, in addition to peer leadership style, players’ personal characteristics (e.g., age and gender) and team-level processes (e.g., cohesiveness levels) should be taken into account by practitioners working towards improving team dynamics and performance in sports. Keywords: peer leadership, cohesion, team dynamics Self-esteem and empathy toward obese people in university students of exercise sciences Edda Lorenzo-Bertheau (National University of Chimborazo, Ecuador), Francisco Cruz-Quintana (University of Granada, Spain), Athanasios Pappous (University of Kent, UK), Yaira Barraco-Ruiz (University of Granada, Spain), Emilio Villa-González (University of Almeria, Spain), Jacqueline Schmidt Rio-Valle (University of Granada, Spain) Self-esteem and empathy toward obese people in university students of exercise sciences Objective: to determine the level of self-esteem in university students of exercise sciences and their empathy toward obese people. Methods: A total of 80 exercise sciences university students of the National University of Chimborazo, Ecuador (22.1±2.09-years; BMI=22.4±1.49 kg/m2 normal-weight; 81.3% men y 18,7% woman) participated in this study.
Emotions versus obese people was studied through the Bason empathy scale, which contains 8 emotions (sympathy, compassion, tenderness, affection, repugnance, kindness, pity and contempt), with a score scale from 1 to 7 (1=nothing; 7=much). Self-esteem was measured by the Rosenberg self-esteem scale (categorized in high, medium and low self-esteem). Comparisons between percentages of self-esteem categories were analyzed by Chi-2.
Descriptive analysis of emotions percentages was performed. Student t-test was used to compare by gender the mean score of Bason empathy scale. Results: Low levels of self-esteem were shown for the 73.8% of the sample (x2=0.03).
Only 7.7% of men showed high level of self- esteem versus 0% of women. Independently of the gender, tenderness and contempt were the emotions with the highest score percentages (26.3% and 30%, respectively). There were statistical differences between gender for all emotions except, sympathy and compassion.
Women presented higher score than men (p<0.05) in all emotions versus obese people, except in kindness. Affection, pity and contempt presented the highest differences in score between women and men (Affection: women=5.7±1.4 versus men=4.8±1.3, p<0.001; Pity: women=6.1±1.1 versus men=4.9±1.5, p<0.001; contempt: women=5.4±1.4 versus men=3.9±2.1, p<0.001). Conclusions: Most exercise sciences university students presented low levels of self-esteem.
There are important gender differences related to the empathy emotions toward obesity in this population Keywords: obese people, emotions, self-esteem, exercise sciences students, empathy 589Posters Friday July 14th For sport versus through sport: The role of the coach in youth athletes’ moral character development Eoin Murray, Susan H. Backhouse, Nicholas Stanger (Institute for Sport, Physical Activity and Leisure, Leeds Beckett University, UK) Sport has been promoted as a vehicle for moral character development in young people. However, the coaches’ role in the moral development of youth athletes across both performance (e.g., academy) and participation (e.g., local level) domains has not been investigated.
Accordingly, this research explores the perceived role coaches’ play in facilitating moral character development in youth soccer players across performance and participation domains. Semi-structured face-to-face interviews were conducted mid-season with seven performance and seven participation domain coaches of boys’ soccer teams. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematic analysis.
Though developing moral character in youths was perceived important by both performance and participation coaches, the rationale and approaches employed differed between domains. Performance domain coaches placed more emphasis on promoting moral character to benefit sports performance (e.g., encouraging respect amongst team mates to improve on-field performance), whereas, participation domain coaches sought to discourage undesirable behaviours (e.g., antisocial acts) and promote desirable (e.g., honesty) behaviours to benefit athletes moral character through sport. Coaches across both domains drew upon previous experiences to inform their approach to player moral character development and expressed several domain-specific challenges (e.g., parental involvement).
Moreover, the approaches used by participation coaches were predominantly reactive in nature (e.g., consulting parents following antisocial acts), whereas performance coaches employed more expectation based approaches (e.g., emphasised responsibilities within the club). In sum, our findings suggest that greater emphasis is placed on developing moral character “for sport” in the performance domain and “through sport” in the participation domain. This insight provides further justification for tailored domain-specific coach education programs.
Keywords: coach education, morality, positive youth development The use and application of mental-imagery in triathlon Heeju Kim, Duksun Chang (Korea National Sport University) The purpose of this study was to investigate the use and application of mental-imagery among Triathlon athletes. For this study, in-depth interviews were conducted with 10 male and female athletes who were national team members and participated in international competitions. From the interview, a model for the use and application of mental-imagery of elite triathlon athlete model was constructed.
First, A total of 215 raw data and 13 sub-areas were classified from the interviews that were on the mental-imagery types prior to a competition. Major areas were categorized into five, such as operational mental-imagery, goal mental-imagery, positive mental-imagery, video mental-imagery & routine mental-imagery. Second, A total of 128 raw data were classified from the interviews that were on the mental-imagery types during competitions..
This data was classified into 7 sub-areas, including game strategy, knowing opponents, preparing for the game, understanding game situation, negative mind and positive mind control. Third, A total of 110 raw data were classified from the interviews that were on the mental-imagery types after competitions. This data was classified into 5 sub-areas, including replay mental-imagery, regret, review, positive image, and scenario reconstruction.
Fourth, A total of 51 raw data were derived from the interviews that were on the mental- imagery(M-I) types in transition. This data was classified into 6 sub-areas including position-preoccupancy M-I, sport switching M-I, group formation M-I, equipment arrangement M-I, root M-I and penalty M-I. Finally, we found that the purpose of the athletes' M-I was to improve their performance.
The M-I was being conducted before, during, after the game and transition M-I that were related to peak performance. A a comprehensive model that maximize the technical and self-care M-I on better imagery practice was presented. 590Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: triathlon, transition, experience imagery, utilization imagery Motivational climate and youth beliefs about sport Marcio Domingues (ULHT) Past research (Pensgaard & Roberts, 2002) tells us that the motivational climate is essential for youth athlete development.
The purpose of the study was to characterize the clubs with different goal achievement regarding their coaches and to analyse the effects of the climate in sportsmanship and goal orientation variables. In Study one we examined the results associated with the training environment resulting from the Task and Ego Orientation and Sports Attitude Questionnaire (SAQ). We sampled 132 football youngsters with ages 13-16 years old, six coaches from the two clubs in the centre and north region of Portugal an elite club and a regional club.
In study two we investigated the context effect on the relationship between perceived motivational climate questionnaire (PMCSQ) and social–moral functioning (SAQ) in a group of young male Portuguese football players from a professional club and a regional club. A cross sectional quantitative study of 125 male football players (aged 13–17 years) was conducted. The results from study one point out a difference in goal attainment in the perspective of the coaches and to the existence of an environment effect on the dependent variables (higher in the elite club).
Both clubs showed similar results in ego orientation which could be conducive of different ego orientations as an expression of different sporting contexts. Also, Study two shows higher scores both in moral attitudes (Sage, Kavussanu & Duda, 2006) and perceived motivational climate for the youth athletes from the professional club with clear task orientation and a more prosocial acceptance of sport (Pensgaard & Roberts, 2002). Conclusion: Findings illustrate the importance of studying contextual cues in order to determine motivational climate and provide an understanding of perceived coach created climate.
A mastery oriented climate poses as an imperative on youth sports development and can be considered a possible implication in future studies. Keywords: goal achievement, motivational climate, context, sport Integrated mindfulness-based intervention to enhance performance-relevant psychological skills of elite badminton players Doron Julie (French Institute of Sport (INSEP), France), Rouault Quentin (French Institute of Sport (INSEP), France; University of Nantes) Jubeau Marc (University of Nantes), Bernier Marjorie (University of Western Brittany Brest, France) While the application of mindfulness in the sport domain and its enhancement has exploded in recent years, mindfulness-based intervention programs for elite performers need further development and validation with the scientific rigor, appropriate openness, and sport-specific relevance (Sappington & Longshore, 2015). This study aimed to design an integrated program, drawn heavily on MAC approach (Gardner & Moore, 2007), that suited the characteristics of the elite athletes and the specific demands of badminton.
Specifically, the purpose was to evaluate the efficacy of an integrated mindfulness-based intervention (MBI) on the self- regulation attentional skills and performance of elite badminton players. 25 young elite badminton players from two French Badminton Federation’s National Training Centres were recruited for this study. They were assigned either to the experimental group (MBI program; n = 13, Mage = 16.15, SDage = 1.34) or to the active control group (Relaxation program; n = 12, Mage = 16.58, SDage = 1.24).
All participants completed the online questionnaire (Mindfulness Inventory for Sport, Thought Occurrence Questionnaire for Sport, subjective performance) one week before the intervention (lasting 8 weeks) and two weeks after the end of it. The results of MANOVA yielded a significant multivariate effect of the intervention on the delta scores of self-regulation indicated that delta scores of refocusing (F (1, 23) = 4.03, p = .06) and task-irrelevant thoughts (F (1, 23) = 591Posters Friday July 14th 13.05, p < .01) differed significantly across the two programs. MBI may be a useful mental training intervention for improving self-regulation attentional skills.
Considering that the elite sport is quite different from others contexts, applying and integrating mindfulness-based interventions that successfully meet the demands of elite athletes and sport seems crucial. Keywords: mindfulness-based-intervention, elite sport, badminton, performance-relevant psychological skills, performance Aerobic exercise training ameliorates craving and inhibitory control in methamphetamine dependencies: A randomized controlled trial and event-related potential study Dongshi Wang, Chenglin Zhou (Ningbo University, P.R.China) Methamphetamine (MA) usage has been recognized as a prominent substance-abuse issue. While exercise training reportedly improves fitness and mental status in the MA-dependent, how exercise training affects addiction and cognitive deficiency has yet to be established.
The current study aimed to determine the effects of aerobic exercise training on both MA-associated cravings and inhibitory control among those with MA dependencies. Design: A 12-week randomized controlled trial. Sixty-two people with MA dependencies recruited through the Drug Rehabilitation Bureau were assigned to either an aerobic exercise or attentional control group, with 50 participants completing the trial.
The aerobic exercise program involved three 30-min sessions of moderate-intensity exercise per week. Along with a pre-test assessment, craving levels were evaluated every three weeks, and data on neutral and MA-related inhibitory control as well as its elicited neuroelectric activation were collected at the end of the intervention. Compared with the control group, the exercise group experienced attenuated MA craving levels after 6 weeks of the exercise program, and the decreased trend was maintained until the termination of treatment.
In the post-test, the exercise group also demonstrated more accuracy in behavioral inhibitory control as well as greater N2 amplitude in the Nogo condition of both the standard and MA-related tasks than those in the control group or pre-test. The current study provides the first evidence that aerobic exercise training may be efficacious for MA-associated cravings and inhibitory control from behavioral and neuroelectric perspectives among MA-dependent individuals. Keywords: aerobic exercise, executive function, ERP, methamphetamine, rehabilitation Repetitive transcranial stimulation on the somatosensory and premotor cortices modulates the level of kinesthetic perception Dong-Chan Huh, So-Hee Shim (Sungkyunkwan University) The effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on kinesthetic perception, when applied to the somatosensory and motor parietal cortices, were examined.
Further, the facilitatory and inhibitory effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation(rTMS) using different stimulation frequencies were tested. For the somatosensory cortex stimulation experiment, six female and nine male participants were asked to perceive the tendon vibration illusion of the left wrist joint and to replicate the illusion with their right hand. When comparing changes in the corresponding movement amplitude and velocity after three different repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation protocols (sham, 1 Hz inhibitory, and 5Hz facilitatory rTMS), both movement amplitude and velocity were found to decrease with the inhibitory rTMS, while there was no increase of both variables when the facilitatory rTMS was applied.
Next, the identical protocols were used to stimulate the premotor cortex experiment. Another group of 15 subjects (8 female, 7 male) participated for this experiment. The results showed significant increase and decrease of kinesthetic perceptions for both variables.
Decrease of the movement perception is possible by simply limiting the source of somatosensory information during the early stage of the somatosensory processing pathway. However, to perceive the increased amount of movement sensation, this type of perception should be available. Therefore, with the existing somatosensory 592Posters Friday July 14th information processed by the somatosensory cortex, only the facilitation of the pre-motor cortex could generate the increased amount of movement perception.
These contrasting results from 2 experiments suggest that, while the somatosensory cortex functions as a primary input pathway for the somatosensory processing, the pre-motor cortex is the cortical area where the perception of movement (kinesthetic perception) is generated. Keywords: kinesthetic perception, tendon vibration, transcranial magnetic stimulation Bioenergetics and psychological profile of an ultra-endurance walker Donatella Di Corrado (University Kore of Enna) Ultra-endurance non-stop walking provides athletes with significant physiological and psychological challenges. In this study ultra-endurance walking races are intended as events where the participants have to cover the largest distance within a given time, usually 24, 36, 48 hours, or longer, keeping the pause time within 5% of the total walking time.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the metabolic, bioenergetics, and psychological characteristics of a world record ultra-endurance walker during three different non-stop ultra- endurance events characterized by different durations (36h, 48h and 70h non-stop). The participant investigated in this study is an experienced male (age 41 years; mass 69 kg; height 173 cm), who walked using always the Nordic walking technique. During the 70h event, our walker broke the “Longest Marathon Nordic Walking” Guinness World Record covering 274 km in 70h.
An overall time-dependent increase of oxidative stress, as assessed by lipid hydroperoxide levels, was observed over all of the tree events. Speed and metabolic cost of walking decreased rather linearly with walking time over all the three events. The results of the psychological response demonstrated that the participant reported significant fluctuations in emotions during each event.
Nevertheless, the results show how the walker was able to apply “energy-saving strategies” allowing him to reach the goal of the completion of each non-stop event. Keywords: endurance, walking, exercise intensity Health risk perception and perception bias by the physical activity level among middle- aged adults Dojin An (SeoulTech), Hyunmyung Chang, Youngho Kim The study was to identify the differences between individuals' own health risk perceptions and those of others at the same age. Moreover, this study tried to explore the differences in perception bias toward health risks by gender and the physical activity level.
Three hundred fifty questionnaires were initially distributed to company employees and sports center members. Among them, total 332 were finally used in this study(male: 166, female: 166, Mage=49.32 years). Self and other risk judgment profile was revised into Korean and applied in the study.
Frequency analysis and independent t-test were carried out by SPSS 23.0. Results indicated that middle-aged adults tend to have unrealistic perceptions of their vulnerability to most health risks and perceive their own likelihood of encountering all health risks events as lower than that of others. In addition, the finding revealed that there were significant differences in perception bias toward to health risks by gender and the physical activity level.
The significance of this study lies in the fact that it made a unique contribution to the existing knowledge about middle-aged adults' health risk perceptions. Keywords: health risk perception, perception bias, physical activity, middle-aged adults 593Posters Friday July 14th Effects of a physical fitness program on fear of failure, physical self-perception and physical fitness in physical educational classes Marco Correia (University of Lisbon, Portugal), Diogo Teixeira (Lusófona University, Portugal) Properly designed physical conditioning is an effective method for developing childrens' health-related physical fitness. However, changes in fear of failure and in physical self-concept levels of school students due to an intervention of a fitness program are limited and sparse.
The purpose of this study was to assess the short- term effect of a physical fitness program on fear of failure, physical self-concept and physical fitness among school students. An experimental 8-week program was developed in Physical Education (PE) classes with a sample of 218 students, randomly divided in two groups (Control: M=12.03 years, SD=1.234; 61 M/43 F; Experimental: M=11.99 years, SD= 1.109; 57 M/57 F). Fear of failure (Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory), Physical self-concept (Physical Self-Description Questionnaire) and physical fitness (FITESCOLA battery tests) were measured at the beginning and end of the intervention.
Descriptive and inferential analyses were extrapolated to identify possible differences across time and groups. Main results show an improvement in physical fitness in both groups, being more evident in the experimental group. Regarding fear of failure and physical self-concept, no reported differences were found over time.
However, general fear of failure in the last fitness test evaluation was strongly and positively correlated with several fitness scores, in the control group. General fear of failure presented a strong negative correlation with sports competence, general physical competence, flexibility and resistance subscales at baseline. Overall, results presented in this study identify: a) the importance of short term specific fitness programs in physical educational classes; b) a correlation between fear of failure and fitness testing score, and; c) a negative correlation between fear of failure and perceived self-concept.
Consequently, PE teacher should be aware of such findings when planning physical activities and in-class fitness programs. Keywords: physical fitness, physical education, fear of failure, perceived competence Understanding motivational determinants of enjoyment and intention to continue in competition of persistent Portuguese swimmers Diogo Monteiro, João Moutão, Raúl Antunes, Nuno Couto, Luís Cid (Sport Science School of Rio Maior) The aim of this study was to analyse the hypothetical causal relationships of a model that integrates self- determination theory and achievement goal theory in order to understand the impact of the motivational climate, basic psychological needs, motivational regulation and enjoyment in the intentions to keep swimming. The present study is different, regarding other´s studies that have been using the same sequence, because included the enjoyment as antecedent of intention the future practice.
This study included 799 participants (450 males, 349 females) who were swimmers with at least six years of practice and aged between 12 and 22 years. The data was collected using reliable questionnaires: MCSYSp; BRSQp, BPNSSp,PACESp and three items for assessed the intencions) , all translated and validated for the Portuguese language, and analysed through structural equation modelling. For the purpose of cross-validation, the participants were split in two samples: calibration sample (n=400) and validation sample (n=399).
For the gender invariance the sample was split by gender. The obtained results support the model’s fit (final model) in both samples: calibration sample: (S-B χ²=618.45; df=185; p=.001; SRMR=.079; NNFI=.901; CFI=.908; RMSEA=.071; CI90%=.071-.084) and validation sample: (S-B χ²=516.45; df=185; p=.001; SRMR=.071; NNFI=.927; CFI=.937; RMSEA=.068; CI90%=.061-.075), showing that a task-involving climate has a positive and significant effect on the basic psychological needs satisfaction (β=.58; .67); basic psychological needs satisfaction has a positive and significant effect on the autonomous motivation; autonomous motivation has a positive and significant effect on the enjoyment (β=.39; .50); and finally, enjoyment has a positive and significant effect on the intentions to keep swimming (β=.39; β=.50). In total, the model explains 26% and 34 % of variance in the intentions to keep swimming both in calibration and validation samples.
Besides that, the model s. 594Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: motivation, swimming, achievement goal theory, self-determination theory, enjoyment, intentions Differences between leadership behaviour of coaches and the perceived and preferred leadership behaviour of their young table tennis players Diana Zerdila, Stella Rokka (Democritus University of Thrace), Ioannis Kordoutis (Municipality of Kalithea), Giorgos Mavridis (Democritus University of Thrace) Leadership behaviour of sports coaches is one of the most important topics in sport psychology. The relationship between athletes and coaches is very important because it has a tremendous impact on the quality of training and on their performance in competitions (Conroy & Coatworth, 2007).
Moreover, the leadership behaviour of a coach can have a great impact on the emotional, psychological, and physical condition of the athlete (Duda, 2001). The main purpose of this study was to examine the differences between the leadership behaviour of table tennis coaches in Greece and the perceived and preferred leadership behaviour of their young table tennis players and secondly to investigate possible differences related to gender, competition league and years of practice. The sample consisted of 162 table tennis athletes from Greece with a mean age 15,3¬ ± 1,52¬.
Data was collected through Leadership Scale for Sports (LSS: Chelladurai & Saleh, 1980), in its three versions. The statistical methods included reliability analysis, t-test and one-way analysis of variance. The results indicated that table tennis coaches evaluated themselves with higher scores than their athletes in training and instructions, positive feedback, social support and autocratic behavior.
For both players’ perceived and preferred leadership behaviours, the highest scores were found in training and instructions and positive feedback and the lowest in autocratic behaviour. Significant differences were also found between all dimensions of players’ perceived and preferred leadership behaviour. Results also indicated that boys perceived more autocratic behaviour from their coaches.
These findings can help table tennis coaches to adapt specific behaviours, so they can be more effective and have better results. Table tennis coaches especially of young athletes should be more objective of their own leadership behaviours by increasing their self-knowledge and self-criticis. Keywords: perceived, preferred Leadership behaviour, table tennis players Factors associated with success in high-performance sports Diana Vázquez, Cecilia Silva Gutiérrez (UNAM), Eugenio Pérez Córdoba (Universidad Sevilla) Studying the factors influencing athletes holds great relevance to be able to improve the intervention strategies for them.
Meseguer (2009) mention that self-efficacy relates to performance, while Medina (2007) points out that emotional management plays an important paper, Cáceres (2013) remark the great relevance of goal-establishment, Velásquez (2007) signals coping strategies as indispensable, and Weinberg & Gould (2015) highlight the importance of situational and external factors. Aiming to know the factors that impact athletes’ success, 104 high-performance athletes from 12 to 22 years old (x=16, S.D.=2.19) were assessed with the following instruments: Perceived General Self-Efficacy Scale (Baessler & Schwarzer, 1996); Goal- achievement in Sport Questionnaire (Cáceres & Nieto, 2013): Coping Styles (Sotelo & Maupone, 2000), Approach to Coping in Sport Questionnaire ACSQ-1. (Kim & Duda, 2003); Skills for Life Instrument (Alfaro, 2010); Psychological Performance Inventory (Loehr, 1986); State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger & Díaz- Guerrero, 1975) and the Situational and External Factors for Athletes Scale (Vázquez & Silva, 2015).
Two groups were formed based on the results from the National Olympics: the first group was called “successful” (n=52) and the second group named “unsuccessful” (n=52); a Student’s t- test for independent samples was carried out. Results show that successful athletes cope better with uncertainty (Successful χ= 20.89 Unsuccessful χ= 18.90), anger (S. χ= 16.27 U.
χ= 14.60) and anxiety, have a lower expression of negative emotions (S. χ= 11.94 U. χ= 14.54) and greater coping skills, specifically greater active planning (S.
χ= 18.34 U. χ= 16.54), and take 595Posters Friday July 14th greater risks than their low performance peers (S. χ= 10.28 U.
χ= 9.04). Finally, a factor analysis was performed to investigate how these variables aggregated, revealing a two-factor structure: “Pro-activity” and “Emotional”. These findings will help to design better interventions.
Keywords: sports, sports psychology, success, performance Sports psychology: Intervention with children who practice american football Diana Vázquez Cruz, Alfonso Ignacio Martínez Samperio (UNAM) Proper child development in sports is achieved through programs that favor the learning of positive experiences. Interventions in sport psychology emphasize both human development and improvement of sport performance (Weinberg & Gould, 2010). A correlational research was carried out (Sampieri, 2014) via a repetitive measures design (Coolican, 2005).The project was divided into two phases.
The first one resulted in a propositive non probabilistic sample (Kerlinger, 2002) of 12 participants (within a range of 7 to 13 years of age), which served as a diagnostic pretest to elaborate the intervention plan, prior obtaining parental consent. The second phase of the study involved the application and assessment of the intervention program, which included the following variables: attention, group cohesion, motivation, emotional control, self-esteem and communication. Sessions were conducted twice a week, over a period of ten weeks.
While self-report measures were used, due to the participants’ age, psychologists assisted them during the application. The following instruments were used: Questionnaire of Psychological Features Related to Sport Performance, adapted for Mexican athletes (Ramírez, Tobías & Alba, 2010), and the Approach to Coping in Sport Questionnaire, ACSQ-1 (Kim & Duda, 2003). A Wilcoxon signed-rank test for related samples was performed, considering a significance level of p>.05.
Results revealed statistically non significant differences. Nevertheless, qualitative differences were observed in team work: team members interacted more and were more supportive, communicative and respectful of one another. Even though we did not find quantitative results in performance variables, we found growth in the values that are necessary for the integral development of children athletes (Buceta, 2004), such as discipline, respect and punctuality.
It is concluded that work with kids should focus on the development of values rather than on the promotion of sport performance. Keywords: sports psychology, children, intervention program, football Perceived motivational climate, attitudes to moral decision making and prosocial and antisocial behavior in youth team sports: examination of relations Bahri Gürpinar, Merve Ayvalli, Serefcan Çalli, Berkant Özmen, Hüseyincan Göçmen (Akdeniz University, Faculty of Sport Sciences) The purpose of this study is to explore the relationships of motivational climate on attitudes to moral decision making and prosocial and antisocial behavior in youth sport. The questionnaires were applied to 378 (118 female 260 male) team sport athletes from 5 different types of sports.
The students were aged between 11-19. The mean age was 15.48±2.37. The mean sport experience was 3.53±2.64.
Turkish versions of Perceived Motivational Climate in Sport Questionnaire (Seifriz et.al, 1992), Attitudes to Moral Decision Making in Youth Sport Questionnaire (Lee et. Al, 2007) and Prosocial and Antisocial Behaviors in Sport Scale (Kavussanu and Boardley, 2009) were used as data collection tool. In the analyses regression analyses were used.
When the bilateral and partial correlations between the variables are examined, there is a positive moderate correlation (r=.32) between the mastery climate and keep winning in proportion. There is a positive-low level of correlation (r = .255) calculated between the mastery climate and prosocial behavior to the teammate. The scores on mastery climate show a moderate and significant relationship together with variables of keep winning in proportion, prosocial behavior to the opponent and prosocial behavior to the teammate (R=0.377, R^2=0.142, p=.000).
At the same time, there is a positive moderate correlation between the performance 596Posters Friday July 14th climate and acceptance of cheating (r=.323), acceptance of gamesmanship (r=.338), antisocial behavior to the teammate (r=.385) and antisocial behavior to the opponent (r=.329). The scores on performance climate show a moderate and significant relationship together with variables of acceptance of cheating, acceptance of gamesmanship, antisocial behavior to the opponent and antisocial behavior to the teammate (R=0.441, R^2=0.194, p=.000). Besides, there were also modarete level correlations determined between the subscales of AMDYSQ and PABBS.
As a result, some variables predict motivational climate. Keywords: motivational climate, moral decision making, prosocial and antisocial behaviors, youth team sports The influence of psychological factors on pain levels among circus arts students Diana van Winden (Codarts Rotterdam) Literature suggests psychosocial factors influence the stress response and, thus, the likelihood of injury occurrence. The daily training load of circus artists is associated with maximum stress.
A better understanding of causes of injuries can have a positive impact on the artists’ health and performance. However, there is a lack of studies focusing on the association between stress and coping and pain levels in Circus Arts. Therefore, the aim of this study is to examine the association between pain and the independent variables stress and coping resources by using a prospective cohort design.
33 Circus Arts students (1st & 2nd year, 54.5% male, 5 1.5% freshmen, mean age=22.39±2.50 years) from Codarts University of the Arts Rotterdam were followed for three months during the academic year 2014-2015. At baseline, participants completed the Athletic Coping Skills Inventory–28. Additionally, participants completed the Subjective Units of Distress and the Self-Estimated Functional Inability because of Pain (a measure of how much current pain is limiting activities, ranging from “very well” to “cannot work in the production because of pain” for 14 body areas) every two weeks.
One-way Spearman correlations and regression analyses were used. Pain (M=4.2±9.00) was significantly associated with stress (M=34.14±15.58; r=.56, p<.000). Stress could predict 28.2% of the variance in pain (F(1,31)=12.16, p<.001).
Furthermore, pain was significantly related to the total coping score (M=38.88±8.75; r=-.34, p<.05). Specifically, scores of concentration (r=-.29, p<.05) and freedom from worry (r=-.34, p<.05) were significantly correlated. High stress levels are associated with high pain levels, while high coping resources are correlated with low pain levels.
To prevent injuries it can be useful to lower stress levels of students by teaching them stress management skills. In addition, lectures about coping and other mental skills can be taught to raise the coping resources of students. Keywords: injury, stress, coping Difference in visuo-spatial cognition as a function of physical activity in children Dennis Fung, Shu-Shih Hsieh (National Taiwan Normal University), Heng Tsai (Jinwen University of Science and Technology), Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University), Chun-Ju Huang (University of Taipei), Tsung-Min Hung (National Taiwan Normal University) Children with insufficient amount of physical activity might have learning difficulties in school, because it is assumed that a sedentary lifestyle may negatively affect the function of attention and working memory, which both are important cognitive functions that work complimentary in learning.
Therefore, this study is designed to examine how daily physical activity levels is associated with visuospatial attention and working memory in children. Thirty-two children, aged 8 – 11 years, who voluntarily participated in the current study were classified into an active or inactive group based on their amount of physical activity as measured by an accelerometer. Visuospatial attention and working memory were measured by the Non-delay (attention) and Delay (working memory) Matching-to-sample test, with response accuracy and reaction times serving as performance indices.
Data analysis revealed that the active group had significantly higher accuracy rates for attention and working memory relative to the inactive group. For reaction times, no significant difference in 597Posters Friday July 14th attention was observed, whereas a significant group difference was found on working memory. Our findings suggest that children with higher levels of physical activity could be associated with better visuospatial attention and working memory.
While childhood PA could be associated with visuospatial attention and working memory, the cognitive benefits of higher PA could be more comprehensive to working memory. Keywords: attention, working memory, accelerometer, children "I am really good at sports!" The physical self-concept of children in Kindergarten and primary school Dennis Dreiskämper, Lena Henning (University of Muenster), Christine Graf, Nina Ferrari (German University of Sport Sciences), Till Utesch, Maike Tietjens (University of Muenster) The physical self-concept is related to several factors of childhood development like physical activity behaviour or global self-worth (Babic et al., 2014). Harter (1999) describes that the physical self-concept develops throughout childhood becoming more differentiated, organized and hierarchical.
However, it still remains unclear in which age stages children are able to make valid statements regarding their physical self. Research question of this study is, if children in kindergarten and primary school differ in the quality of their self-assessments and how the physical self-concept is differentiated and organized in different age groups. In a project funded by the German ministry of education children from kindergarten (n=376), primary school class 1 (n=429) and class 3 (n=434) participated.
Physical self-concept was measured using the P-PSC-C (Tietjens et al., subm., eight items on a 4-point pictorial scale) in class 1 and kindergarten (one by one interviews) and the PSC- C (Dreiskaemper et al., 2015, 22 items on seven subscales on a 4-point-Likert-scale) in class 3. Objective motor ability data was assessed by using the Dordel-Koch-Test (Dordel & Koch, 2004) with five (Kindergarten) respective seven (school) items. Rank correlations (Kendalls-τ) showed no substantial correlations between motor items and physical self-concept items in Kindergarten (-.10 ≤ τ≤ .11) and with one exclusion (strength: τ = .24) in class 1 (.01 ≤ τ ≤ .10).
In class 3 Pearson-correlations showed significant relations between self- perception and motor items (.14 ≤ r ≤ .39). Boys in class three had a higher physical self-concept than girls (t(299.04)=3.15, p=.002, d=0.36), whereas no gender differences were found in kindergarten and class 1. The results show that children in the first two age groups are not able to make valid judgements about their motor abilities.
Their physical self-concept seems neither to be differentiated nor realistic due to missing experiences and comparisons. Keywords: physical self-concept, childhood development, motor abilities, kindergarten, primary school Psychological intervention with recreational runners at Valencia Marathon expo David Peris Delcampo (Spanish Federation of Sport Psychology. Valencia, Spain.), Eva M.
Agea-Pérez (Psychological Association of Sport of the Valencian Community, Valencia, Spain), J. Joaquín García-Lluch (Psychological Association of Sport of the Valencian Community, Valencia, Spain), Larumbe-Zabala Eneko (Clinical Research Institute. Texas Tech University HSC.
Lubbock, Texas, USA) A team of 22 volunteer sport psychologists performed a brief psychological intervention with recreational marathon runners at 2016 Valencia Marathon (Spain), which had a participation of more than 19,000 runners. Counseling was delivered at the marathon expo during 2 days prior to competition. The objective of this cross- sectional study was to describe familiarity and preferences regarding counseling delivery, and psychological performance in association to performance level, broken down by demographics.
The number of participants was 162, aged M=39.5 years (SD=10.2), 16% females. Median experience as a runner was 6 years (IQR=3–10), although 37% did no run a marathon before. Training was described as 4 days per week (SD=1.3); 65% followed a training program, and 26% had a coach.
Personal best time ranged 2h 25 minutes to 5 hours (Median=3h 40 minutes). Less than 10% of runners had previous experience with a sport psychologist. The instruments used 598Posters Friday July 14th were a demographic survey and the Podium questionnaire, in order to assess self-perceived motivation, self- confidence, fitness, social support, and anxiety; each runner had the opportunity to get a report and interview with a specialist.
The intervention procedure included information brochures and posters, administration of a demographic survey and the PODIUM questionnaire, and an interview of about ten minutes, which included counseling. The results indicated that psychological variables were within expected values: very high motivation and self-confidence; high fitness and social support; moderate somatic and cognitive anxiety. This counseling model has been shown to be efficient to provide useful assistance to the runners.
A half of the participants reported no previous contact with sport psychologists, and just a minority considered counseling with a specialist. Both the practical implications of our findings and the possible ways to optimize service delivery are discussed. Keywords: psychological intervention, recreational runner, marathon, psyching team Key points for the efficient coaching application as a tool for the psychological intervention in sports David Peris Delcampo (Spanish Federation of Sport Psychology, Valencia, Spain) The psychological intervention in sports requires more and more quality and efficiency.
The professional of psychology should offer adjusted tools to the aiming population (sportsmen, teams, leaders, coaches…) to whom this intervention is dedicated. Therefore, it´s necessary to use these tools in an adequated way, by the indicated professional and in adequated conditions. The term coaching is often used in sports as a synonym of psychological intervention without employing the necessary conditions to this purpose; it is known by the scientific literature as well as by the professional experience to be an important tool, if used adequately for the psychological interventions in sports, offering efficieny, quality and adaptability to the aiming population.
The main scientific and practical conclusions are summed up in this paper as a psychological strategy in sports, defining the professional roles on which this methodology and conditions should be applied in order to be really efficient in the psychological intervention in this working field. It´s only in this way, how a correct application can be achieved and how this tool and in the sight of the professional role could really be useful for the different sports agents. Keywords: coaching, psychological intervention, sports, performance Case report on a clinical sport psychological intervention for a rugby player David John Edwards, Stephen David Edwards (University of Zululand, South Africa) Clinical sport psychology is a differentiated and specialized discipline, requiring appropriate adaptations in helping relationship and chosen interventions (Edwards & Edwards, 2016).
Recovering from injury can be a challenging time (Brown & Brughelli, 2014). The goal of this case study was to evaluate an integrated, clinical, sport psychological intervention for a 24 year old, male, professional rugby union player, who self-referred to a 24 hour rugby helpline service owing to depression and anxiety experienced following a rugby injury. The 15 month intervention covered Person Centered, Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, Psychological Skills Training, Mindfulness, Flow and HeartMath Techniques.
A mixed methods, quantitative and qualitative approach, including appreciative inquiry, was used. Coherence scores ranged from 0.4 to 5.20 with a mean of 2.73 (SD = 1.04). Achievement scores ranged from 2.0 to 193.0 with a mean of 90.79 (SD = 44.72).
Analysis of variance comparisons indicated a significant learning effect over time for both coherence (F =13.46, p = .00) and achievement (F = 19.51, p = .00). Intervention was experientially positive, appreciated and recommended. The case study is instructive with regard to (a) integration of theory and practice of clinical and sport psychology (b) integration of different types and modes of intervention.
599Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: clinical sport psychology, case study, cognitive behavioral therapy, psychological skills training, HEARTMATH Case study on hypertension, physical exercise and psychophysiological coherence biofeedback Stephen David Edwards, David John Edwards (University of Zululand, South Africa) Hypertension is a serious stress related disorder, typically requiring pharmacology and health promotion including physical exercise, diet, specific lifestyle and/or psychophysiological techniques (Oberg, 2009). This case study describes treatment of a hypertensive crisis in a 63 year old woman with special reference to relevant, optimal, physical exercise and psychophysiological, heart rhythm variability, biofeedback interventions. Standardized blood pressure recordings were taken after both 30 physical exercise and 30 HeartMath practice sessions.
Physical exercise sessions, measured on Borg scale, consisted of 16 walks, 5 individual sessions of tennis, 3 yoga, 3 shopping and 3 house cleaning. HeartMath biofeedback tool, Inner Balance, recorded coherence and achievement. Quantitative findings provided highly significant (p<01) support for the hypothesis that both physical exercise and HeartMath interventions would be individually associated with blood pressure improvements.
Qualitative, diarized experiences strongly endorsed quantitative findings. As is typical in case studies, healing included many specific and non-specific, bio-psycho-social-spiritual variables, such as support of family and friends, the relaxation response and biofeedback function of the blood pressure monitor. Mixed and integrative, qualitative and quantitative, methodologies have unique advantages.
Single case study methodology has the particular advantage of readily elucidating the typically holistic, multifactorial nature of aetiology, diagnosis and treatment (Edwards, 2016). Keywords: introspection, case study, hypertension, blood pressure, physical exercise, HeartMath, psychophysiological coherence Identifying information for anticipation in complex sport actions Alfredo Higueras-Herbada, David Travieso, Jose A. Navia, David M.
Jacobs The development of modern motion tracking systems has encouraged many studies of biomechanically complex actions and of the anticipatory information contained in the actions (Troje, 2002). This type of studies is especially relevant for fast sports tasks, where, due to temporal constraints, performance often relies on information from the opponent’s body movements. The large amount of data that is to be analyzed in sports performance has led to the extensive use of dimensionality reduction algorithms, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
Recording a human walker or runner, for example, usually takes about 16 markers with 3 Cartesian coordinates each. The recordings therefore result in a 3 x 16 = 48 dimensional dataset, with many frames recorded per second for each dimension. PCAs reduce the redundancies that biological movements contain.
The use of PCAs has allowed the description of complex, high-dimensional sports actions like tennis groundstrokes with only 4 to 6 dimensions (Huys, Smeeton, Hodges, Beek, & Wiliams, 2008). Nevertheless, PCAs by themselves fail to identify the sources of information about crucial features of the actions under study, such us the direction of handball or football penalties (Bourne, Bennett, Hayes, & Williams, 2011). In the present study, we propose that combinations of dimensionality reduction techniques (i.e., PCA) and pattern recognition algorithms (i.e., Linear Discriminant Analysis, LDA) are better suited to identify informational variables contained in the biomechanics of sports actions.
We have applied this combination of techniques to registered football penalties. Whereas the left-right differences in the penalties were distributed over all PCA dimensions, our LDA successfully concentrated them in a few dimensions. Our believe is that this approach will lead to a deeper understanding of the informational basis of anticipatory behavior and that it will therefore facilitate the development of training programs.
600Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: anticipation, biomechanics, linear discriminant analysis, training Tramadol effects on physical performance and sustained attention during a 20-min indoor cycling Time-Trial Darias Holgado, Thomas Zandonai, Mikel Zabala, Daniel Sanabria (University of Granada) The purpose of the present study was to test the hypothesis that acute oral administration of tramadol improves exercise performance during a 20-min cycling Time-Trial (TT) in a group of cyclists (Experiment 1). Furthermore, given the common side effects reported followed the consumption of tramadol, we tested if sustained attention would be impaired during the 20-min TT while the participants perform an Oddball sustained attention task (Experiment 2). Indeed, tramadol might enhance cycling performance but at the expense of reducing the ability to stay focused, i.e., to sustain attention.
This study is a clinical trial using a placebo-controlled, double-blind, within-participants, counterbalanced methodology. In total, were recruited 56 cyclists; Experiment 1: 19 males and 9 females. Experiment 2: 30 males.
A single dose of 100 mg of tramadol or placebo were administered to participants 120 min before starting the 20-min TT. The Psychomotor Vigilance Task (PVT) was performed prior to and after the cycling TT. We also obtained measures of rate perceived effort (RPE-6-20), Profile of mood state questionnaire (POMS) and a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for mental fatigue.
Electroencephalography measures (EEG) were recorded throughout the cycling exercise and at rest. In Experiment 1, power output was higher under tramadol condition than under placebo condition. However, in Experiment 2, there was an interaction of tramadol and time during the TT.
The power output during the second half of the TT was higher for tramadol, while no differences were observed in the first part of the TT. Overall, under tramadol condition, participants were slower in the PVT task. Tramadol may improve performance, but it may be mediated by fatigue (as we have seen a difference in the second half of Experiment 2).
Tramadol does not seem to impair cognitive performance during exercise in an Oddball task, but it may affect reaction time during a PVT task. Keywords: analgesic, sport performance, cognitive performance, EEG, athletes The relationship between the sport moral disengagement and the athletes’ pro-social and anti-social behavior in sport: The meditation of moral identity Dapeng Zhu (Wuhan Sport University) Purpose The moral disengagement in sport has important influence on the athletes’ pro-social and anti- social behavior in competition. The purpose of this study is to (1) examine the relationship between sport moral disengagement and pro-social and anti-social behavior in competition, and (2) the mediate effect of the moral identity on the relationship between sport moral disengagement and pro-social and anti-social behavior in competition.
Method Participants 267 athletes participated in this study. Participants were male (n = 173) and female (n =94) athletes competing in soccer, basketball, volleyball and handball. measures Pro-social and Antisocial Behavior in Sport Scale (PABSS).
(Kavussanu & Boardley, 2009). Moral disengagement. Moral Disengagement in Sport Scale (Boardley & Kavussanu, 2008).
Moral identity. The moral identity scale (Aquino & Reed, 2002). Results The results suggested that: (1) the moral identity has significant negative correlation with moral disengagement and anti-social behavior in sport , and has significant positive correlation with pro-social behavior in sport; the moral disengagement has significant negative correlation with pro-social behavior in sport, and positive correlation with anti-social behavior in sport;(2) the moral identity has significant positive influence on the athletes’ pro-social behavior in competition, and has significant negative influence on the athletes’ anti-social behavior in competition; (3) the moral identity has significant mediate effect on the relationship between sport moral disengagement and pro-social and anti-social behavior in competition.
Conclusion The sport moral disengagement has significant influence on the athletes’ pro-social and anti-social 601Posters Friday July 14th behavior in sport, and the moral identity of the athletes can mediate the relationship between the moral disengagement and moral behavior in sport. Keywords: moral disengagement, pro-social and anti-social behavior, moral identity Comparison of the motivational productivity of Brazilian elite soccer athletes in different conditions Daniella Paína, Varley Costa (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais) Motivation is a psychological variable that interferes in the performance of elite soccer athletes in an objective task of achievement motivation. However, little is known about the variation of motivational productivity, for same task but under different situational conditions, in elite soccer athletes.
The objective of this study was to compare the motivational productivity of elite soccer athletes during the same task, but under different situational conditions. Forty six male athletes (M age= 23.97 years, SD= 3.73), from an elite club of the first division of Brazilian soccer participated in the study. The test used was the Objective Achievement Motivation Test (S1/Vienna Test System SPORT®).
This test consists of three situations (subtests): task-related effort (TE), motivation through goals (MG), motivation through competition (MC), in which athlete performs 10 runs in each subtest. The statistical procedures adopted were: mean (M) and standard deviation (SD), the Shapiro Wilk and ANOVA with repeated measures (p TE (p=0.001), MC>MG (p=0.025), MG>TE (p=0.001). In conclusion for this sample, the athletes presented a higher motivational productivity in the task where they were submitted to the competition than in task-related situations or goals.
Keywords: motivation, soccer, elite athletes, Vienna Test System Sport® Burnout and coping among elite athletes: a longitudinal perspective Daniel Pires (Federal University of Pará), Herbert Ugrinowitsch (Federal University of Minas Gerais) Burnout is a psychological syndrome of reaction to chronic stress. One technique to prevent and control the syndrome is through coping, which is the ability to use specific strategies to deal with stressful situations. One of the main recommendations for a better understanding of burnout is the elaboration of longitudinal studies that can describe the syndrome development process.
The study aimed to: investigate burnout and coping characteristics over time in elite athletes; and analyze the relationship between the burnout dimensions and the coping strategies during a sport season. Seventy-four Brazilian high level volleyball and judo athletes were investigated into three groups (general, volleyball and judo) and completed paper-and-pencil measures of burnout (Athlete Burnout Questionnaire) and coping (Athletic Coping Skills Inventory). Data collection occurred in four moments: preseason and three competitive moments.
In order to answer the first objective, Friedman test and Dunn post hoc were used, whereas Spearman coefficient was used to answer the second objective. The results showed increment of the reduced sense of sport accomplishment and sport devaluation perceptions during the season in volleyball and general groups. Regarding coping perceptions, differences were observed in confidence/motivation dimension in judo and general groups.
Finally, the analysis of correlations showed a significant, moderate and inverse correlation between burnout dimensions and coping strategy confidence/motivation in all moments of the season. Increase of burnout perceptions in volleyball and general groups could be explained by the accumulation of training and competition, as well as the requirement for high performance in the season’s key competitions. The study also pointed out the relevance of the motivational factor in the emergence of burnout.
Overall, the findings suggest that burnout perceptions increase as the season progresses. Keywords: burnout, coping, athletes, sport, season 602Posters Friday July 14th What are the psychological changes during the final round in female sport pistol? Daniel Mon (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain) Several anxiety levels can be defined according to different situations, during which stress levels can vary, such as training or actual shooting conditions.
Furthermore, different level shooters show different levels of anxiety: higher anxiety values have been reported in lower level shooters. Anxiety can lead to a significant impairment of the performance in Olympic shooting, as influences the goal-directed attention of the shooters [1]. The objective of the study is to identify the changes in psychological parameters during the final round in female 25m pistol modality.
Twenty three female shooters, who competed at a national Spanish Olympic shooting championship, participated in this study. The shooters completed a demographic and a CSAI-2 questionnaire 10 minutes before each competition stage. The competition consisted of one qualification round and one Olympic rapid fire final round.
Performance was significantly lower during the finals in comparison to the qualifications round (Z=-1.97; p0.05). The results showed that, during the qualifications round, the shooters’ performance was not affected by pre-competitive anxiety, although a tendency of inverse correlation could be observed between performance and somatic/cognitive anxiety. The inverse correlation between performance and anxiety became, however, significant, during the final stages of the competition.
The results of the present study also revealed that the trigger time is also influenced by anxiety, in accordance with other studies. Keywords: pistol, anxiety, performance Anxiety effects on trigger timing in female elite sport pistol shooters Daniel Mon (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain) Shooting performance can be influenced by many parameters, both physical and psychological ones. Anxiety has been identified as a very important psychological parameter that influences performance in Olympic shooting.
Evidence suggests that anxiety caused by highly stressful conditions (competition) can cause differences in trigger times between novice and experienced athletes [1]. The objective is to analyse the effects of pre-competition and competition anxiety in female pistol shooting during the qualification and the final round. Twenty three female shooters, from whom 5 were elite, who competed at a national Spanish Olympic shooting championship, participated in the study.
The shooters completed a demographic and a CSAI-2 questionnaire 10 minutes before each competition stage. Performance was measured by the use of electronic targets during competition. The competition consisted of: One qualification round and one Olympic rapid fire final round.
Performance was found to be inversely correlated with somatic anxiety during the final round (F1,6= 8.93; P<0.05). The trigger times as well as the shooters’ cognitive anxiety were significantly increased before entering the finals (Z=-2.17 and Z=-2.37; p<0.05). The results showed that, during the qualifications round, the shooters’ performance were not affected by pre-competitive anxiety, although a tendency of inverse correlation could be observed between performance and somatic/cognitive anxiety[1].
The inverse correlation between performance and anxiety became, however, statistically significant, during the final stages of the competition. The results of the present study also revealed that the trigger time is also influenced by anxiety, in accordance with other studies. Keywords: anxiety, elite, shooting Establishing linkages between emotional intelligence, efficacy beliefs and coaches’ competitive behaviors Daniel Duarte (Polytechnic Institute of Maia), Pedro Teques (Polytechnic Institute of Maia) 603Posters Friday July 14th The purpose of this study was to determine whether coaches’ efficacy beliefs mediated the relationship between EI and coaches’ reactive behaviors during a game.75 males head coaches of soccer volunteered to participate in this study during an youth football tournament.
Participants ranged in age from 21 to 66 years old (M = 33.05, SD = 10.69). To obtain a more holistic understanding of the coaching environment, naturalistic observations were carried out in a football field (Smith et al., 2007). Subsequently, coaches were approached at the end of the game to participate in the study.
Four sets of multiple mediation analyses (Preacher & Hayes, 2008) were conducted: one for each EI dimension of self-emotions appraisal, others-emotions appraisal, regulation of emotion, and use of emotion were used as independent variables. Coaching behavior was entered as dependent variable. In all sets of analysis, the coaching efficacy beliefs, such as game strategy efficacy, motivation efficacy, technique efficacy, and character building efficacy were considered as mediators.
Findings suggest that the indirect and direct effect of motivation efficacy were significant between others- emotions appraisal and regulation of emotion, and positive coaches’ reactions during game, suggesting a full mediation. Moreover, the indirect and direct effect of motivation efficacy and character building were negatively significant between others-emotions appraisal and regulation of emotion, and negative coaches’ reactions during game, suggesting a complementary mediation (partial). In general, findings of this study suggest that coaches’ efficacy beliefs that they have the capacity to affect the learning and performance of their athletes transfers the effects of EI competencies on coaching reactive behaviors in competitive settings.These findings may help practitioners in making interventions to improve coaches’ EI and to enable them to deal with environmental difficulties in competitive settings.
Keywords: emotional intelligence, efficacy beliefs, coaching behaviors, multiple mediation analysis, soccer Athletic trainers’ views on psychosocial issues and referral practices Damien Clement (West Virginia University), Monna Arvinen-Barrow (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) Research has highlighted athletic trainers’ (ATs) lack of access to sport psychology consultants (SPCs; Clement et al., 2013) and their desire for increased access to SPCs’ services (Arvinen-Barrow & Clement, 2015). Coupled with the increased evidence regarding the psychological distress, sometimes reported by injured athletes, the NATA Executive Committee for Education revised its educational competencies to include psychosocial (PS) content to ensure that ATs are better prepared to deal with these issues. As a result, the purpose of the study was to: (a) identify the range of injury and non-injury related psychosocial and /or mental health issues athletic trainers typically discuss with athletes; (b) gain an insight into athletic trainers’ level of comfort, perceived competence, and perceived responsibility in discussing psychosocial and mental health issues with athletes; (c) understand the frequency of mental health referrals; and to (d) further explore availability and perceived effectiveness of allied health professionals.
A cross-sectional research design using an online survey consisting of quantitative items was utilized in the study. A total of 132 ATs (n = 60 males; n = 72 females) representing a response rate of 13.2% completed the survey. Results revealed that ATs discussed a number of injury and non-injury related psychosocial issues with their athletes and felt comfortable, competent, and perceived it was their responsibility to discuss some of the mental health issues associated with the PS content area.
Athletic trainers did make referrals for injury and non-injury related issues primarily to medical doctors/physicians, physical therapists, and school counselors and on average, perceived these professionals to be effective in dealing with psychosocial and mental health referral needs. These findings appear to be positive with regards to the changes set forth by the Executive Committee for Education while also highlighting gaps in existing education. Keywords: psychosocial, preparedness, comfort, competence 604Posters Friday July 14th Investigating the influence of intra-individual changes in perceived stress symptoms on injury risk in competitive soccer: a prospective study Damien Clement (West Virginia University), Andreas Ivarsson (Center of Research on Welfare, Health and Sport (CVHI), Halmstad University), Ulrika Tranaeus (Performance and Training Unit, The Swedish School of sport and health sciences GIH and dMusculoskeletal & Sports Injury Epidemiology Center (MUSIC), IMM, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), Urban Johnson (Center of Research on Welfare, Health and Sport (CVHI), Halmstad University), Andreas Stenling (Department of Psychology, Umeå University) Research has shown that high levels of stress and stress responsivity can increase the risk of injuries.
However, most of the research that has supported this notion has focused on between-person relationships ignoring the relationships at the within-person level. In an attempt to address this gap in the literature, the objective of this study was to investigate if within-person changes in perceived stress symptoms over a one month time period could predict injury rates during the subsequent three months among competitive soccer players. A prospective design with two measurement points (Time 1 – at the beginning of the season and Time 2 – one month into the season) was utilized.
A total of 121 competitive soccer players (85 males and 36 females; Mage = 18.39, SD = 3.08) from Sweden and the United States of America completed the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (KPDS) and a demographic sheet at Time 1. The KPDS was also completed at Time 2 and all acute injuries that occurred during the subsequent 3-month period were recorded. A Bayesian latent change scores model was used to determine if within-person changes in stress symptoms could predict the risk of injury.
Results revealed there was a credible positive effect of changes in stress symptoms on injury rates, indicating that an increase in reported stress symptoms was related to an increased risk for becoming injured (β = 0.18, [0.04, 0.35]). Finding that within-person changes in stress symptoms highlight the importance of preparing soccer players prior to their competitive seasons for both the physical and psychological demands especially during the first month of their season. Emphasis should also be placed on increasing sports medicine personnel and coaches ability to help athletes improve their ability to deal with stressors without experiencing strong stress responses.
Keywords: stress, psychological, sport injury, athletes, soccer, stress management The difference of the perceived competitive environment in Japanese college athletes from the view of dysfunctional family Daisuke Takeda (Tokai University), Kosuke Sasaki (Ryutsu Keizai University) A common focus of research attention has been the real and perceived violence to young athletes from coaches in Japanese sport clubs. Typically the culture in Japanese sport clubs values dominance and rigidly. Some young athletes feel that they cannot resist a coach, or authority figure, and thus they have low feelings of self-worth.
This profile is analogous to those of youth brought up in dysfunctional families, sharing four characteristics: denial; isolation; rigidity; and shame. An adult with these is so-called adult children of dysfunctional families (AC). It’s important to investigate whether these psychological characteristics are reflected in sports settings as well as in dysfunctional family settings, because this knowledge may add an alternative viewpoint how sports contribute to the personality formation.
Thus, the purpose of this study was to examine differences in perceived competitive environment (PCE) and the tendency towards AC in Japanese college athletes. 309 athletes answered the questionnaire including the perceived competitive environment scale (PCES), Adult Children Scale (ACS) and the Dysfunctional Family Scale (DFS). The PCES consisted of two factors: a feeling of fear, and self-disparaging.
Participants were classified as high dysfunctional family (HDF), middle dysfunctional family (MDF) and low dysfunctional family (LDF) based on their DFS score. ANOVA and Tukey’s post hoc comparisons were conducted to confirm significant difference. Results showed that HDF and MDF perceived higher a feeling of fear than LDF.
There was no significant difference between HDF and MDF. Thus in the HDF group reported higher self-disparaging than LDF, but no significant differences in other 605Posters Friday July 14th measures. These results suggest the possibility that a family environment structure may be comparable in some ways to a competitive sport, especially, a feeling of fear.
These findings suggest there is a risk that competitive environment develops tendencies towards AC. Keywords: college athletes, competitive environment, adult children of dysfunctional family Coach-athlete relationship: Gender differences at professional and amateur competition level Cristina Sanz-Fernández (Universidad del País Vasco (UPV/EHU)) Coach-athlete relationship is a social bond that impacts positively in the athlete’s sport performance (Lafrenière, Jowett, Vallerand, Donahue, & Lorimer, 2008; Jowett, 2007). It has been described as characterised by three elements: Closeness, Commitment, and Complementarity (Jowett & Ntoumanis, 2004).
Athlete’s gender is a variable that could be hypothesized to make a difference in the way this relationship shapes, especially in the Closeness dimension, and in relation with the competition level. However, no empirical study has been conducted hitherto to examine this issue. The aim of the study was to examine gender differences in the three dimensions of coach-athlete relationship taking into account two possible level of competition (professional vs.
amateur). The sample was made of 133 Spanish athletes practising a wide range of sports (48.12% women; years ranging from 16 to 59; 52 professionals and 81 amateurs). Multivariate Kruskal-Wallis tests were conducted for the three relational dimensions.
Results showed an interaction effect between gender and competition level in the Closeness dimension, but no differences were found for the other two dimensions. Professional sportswomen are closer with their coaches than professional sportsmen and amateurs in general. These gender and competition level differences point out to interesting suggestions for training plans.
Keywords: coach-athlete relationship, CART-Q, closeness, gender differences, competition level Ratings psychological in hockey Cristina Reche García (UCAM), Verónica Tutte Vallarino (UCU) There are few relationships between burnout, resilience and optimism studies in sportive context. It becomes even more difficult to find literature to flesh out these concepts in team sports. The aim of this study was to describe the prevalence and relationship between the symptoms of burnout, resilience and optimism in women hockey players.
And its relationship with variables such as age and dedication of sports. Study participants were 130 (age 13 to 19; M = 18.5, SD = 4.3). Spanish version of Resilience Scale (Ruíz, De la Vega, Poveda, Rosado y Serpa, 2012), Inventario de Burnout en deportistas revisado (IBD-R; Garcés, De Francisco y Arce, 2012), and Life Orientation test (LOT-R; Scheier, Carver y Bridges, 1994) were administrated.
The results show that 4.6% of the athletes score burnout and a 50% shows symptoms, the 8.5% high resilience, and a 66.2% optimism in the moderate and high level. The age of the athletes seems to be an indicator of vulnerability to the possibility of suffering from burnout, as it presents statistically significant differences in two of the three subscales, being the younger players that have higher risk. More experienced athletes are those that appear as more likely to suffer burnout symptoms, to be less optimistic and to have a lower acceptance of oneself and life, pointing to a lesser resilience.
Sports dedication appear as a risk factor to suffer sports burnout and maturity as a protection against sports burnout factor. Finally, we found that who have burnout symptoms have a lower resilience and optimism. These results show psychological indicators that can be evaluated by a sports psychologist for early detection and intervention in athletes of different levels and dedication, contributing sports resources, coping strategies, provide an adequate handling of adversity, as well as the ability to transform unfavorable situations inchallenges.
606Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: resilience, optimism, burnout, hockey, athletes Spanish version of the Athlete Engagement Questionnaire: Psychometric properties María del Pilar Vílchez (Catholic University of Murcia (UCAM)), Constantino Arce (University of Santiago de Compostela), Cristina De Francisco (Catholic University of Murcia (UCAM)), Mar Graña (University of Santiago de Compostela) The Athlete Engagement Questionnaire (AEQ) was developed by Lonsdale, Hodge, and Jackson (2007) in order to measure engagement among athletes. It comprises 16 items distributed equitably among four subscales: confidence, dedication, vigor and enthusiasm. Confirmatory factor analyses (CFA) showed good fit indices, and one second study using an independent sample cross-validates the AEQ.
Correlations among the four dimensions were significant and ranged from .84 to .89. The purpose of this research was to adapt the AEQ into Spanish because in this context there is not appropriate instrument for measurement of athlete engagement. Firstly, the questionnaire was translated into Spanish (with verification by back-translation).
Then, after verifying that the content and writing of the items was properly understood by a focus group, the questionnaire was applied to a sample of 509 athletes of both sexes. A standardised protocol was carry out to, so that all participants received the same instructions. The data were submitted to a CFA, performed with AMOS software.
The four-factor model was specified, with four items per factor, using the maximum likelihood estimation method. All the estimated factor loadings were significant, such as estimated correlation coefficients among the four factors. The factor structure was replicated and reasonable overall fit of the model was obtained: χ295 =296.607; quotient between χ2 and the degrees of freedom was 3.12; GFI, CFI and NNFI reached values of 0.93, 0.95 and 0.93, respectively; and the values of RMSEA and SRMR were 0.06 and 0.05.
Corrected item-total correlations and internal consistency supported the composition of four items per theoretical dimension: αconfidence=.805; αdedication=.853; αvigor=.822 αenthusiasm=.852. Therefore, Spanish version of AEQ presents similar psychometric properties to the findings in original version. This version will allowed carry out research in Spanish context to identify personal and situational fact.
Keywords: AEQ, engagement, athletes, psychometrics properties Reduced Spanish version of participation motives questionnaire for exercise and sport: Preliminary psychometric properties Cristina De Francisco, María del Pilar Vílchez (Catholic University of Murcia), Constantino Arce (University of Santiago de Compostela) Many researches have studied why people exercise and practice regular physical activity. There is a scale widely used about motives of practice called Motives Questionnaire (PMQ) by Gill, Gross and Huddleston (1983). However, there is no psychometric support for some factors about due to a low internal consistency.
A Spanish version is currently available but it is necessary to look in depth at the psychometric properties because five of eight dimensions that emerged after exploratory analysis also didn’t get over minimum value proposed by Nunnally (1978). Moreover, it is importance to have reduced versions of the measurement instruments in sport context, which it should requires less time to complete due to conditions that are usually completed by athletes in training. The purpose of this research was to obtain an effective reduced Spanish version of the PMQ, with more reliable measurements.
So, initially a Spanish version of PMQ was applied to 515 Spanish athletes of different sport modalities. The data analysis was performed in two sequential stages. Firstly, an exploratory factor analyses of the 33 items of the PMQ was made with approximately half of the sample (n = 264) using the SPSS statistics program.
The second stage was aimed at confirming the previous model with confirmatory factor analyses performed with EQS software with the other half of the sample (n = 251), which provides fit indices for the model. The final model with 22 items (which represented the contents 607Posters Friday July 14th of the original scales) measures seven dimensions (Competition, Status, Teamwork, Energy release, Family/peers, Skill development and Health/fitness) and showed the following fit indices: χ2/df = 1.29; RMSEA= .034; NNFI= .950; and CFI= .959. The analysis of items and of internal consistency supported the composition of seven dimensions.
Cronbach’s Alpha were between .713 and .879. In conclusion, the reduced Spanish version of PMQ presents good values of validity and reliability. Keywords: participation, motives, reduced version, PMQ, psychometric properties A pilot study about compulsive exercise and risk of eating disorders in Spanish adolescents Cristina Cuesta-Zamora, Irene González-Martí, Luis Miguel García-López (Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha (UCLM)) Despite practising exercise has health benefits, sometimes it could be harmful for health.
In this sense, exercise might be a risk and an etiological factor in the development of an Eating Disorder (ED) when it is realised as a compulsive and rigid way in order to control body shape and weight, and to alleviate negative emotions. Even though the risk factor of compulsive exercise in ED, it has never been studied in Spanish adolescents. Therefore, this is a pilot study to evaluate the associations between compulsive exercise and risk of ED in Spanish adolescents.
The study sample consisted of 114 adolescents (59 boys and 55 girls) of Castilla-La Mancha, aged 11-17 years old (M = 14.38, SD = 1.07), completed the questionnaires of: Compulsive Exercise Test (CET), Drive for Thinness (DT), Body Dissatisfaction (BD) and Bulimia (B) subscales of the Eating Disorder Inventory-3 (EDI-3). The results showed that Compulsive exercise was significantly associated with DT (r = .47, p < .00) and with the total score of the EDI-3 (r = .31, p < .00). In addition, linear regression found that compulsive exercise accounted for 9% of the variance of the EDI-3 total scale.
Finally, compulsive exercise also accounted for 17% of variance of DT. This preliminary results are in line with the previous literature, suggesting that compulsive exercise may contribute to the development of ED in adolescents. For this reason, future research with varying samples (different ages and adolescents and adults diagnosed with ED, etcetera) is needed to clarify the relationship between compulsive exercise and ED in Spanish adolescents.
Keywords: eating disorders, drive for thinness, compulsive exercise, risk factor, adolescents Well-come back! A qualitative study of psychological readiness to return to competitive sport following injury in elite basketball players Cristiana Conti, Selenia Di Fronso, Laura Bortoli, Claudio Robazza, Maurizio Bertollo (University of Chieti- Pescara) Psychological readiness to return to sport following injury has been attracting increased attention during last years, likely because of the growing economic interest in elite and professional sport. Despite this augmented interest and its importance for athletes’ performance and well-being, a lack of conceptual clarity remains about the psychological features (Podlog, Wadey, & Hannon, 2015).
The purpose of this study was to examine the athlete’s perceptions and experiences of being physically and psychologically ready to return to sport following an injury. Ten elite level basketball players (age-range 22-33 years) participated in the study. The interviews focused on what is said (Podlog, 2015) about the period between the first competition after injury and the debilitative event.
All tape-recorded interviews were verbatim independently transcribed by two investigators who deductively and inductively analyzed the transcript (Patton, 2002). Meaningful sub-themes and higher-order themes were highlighted (Scanlan, Ravizza, & Stein, 1989). Extending previous investigation results (Podlog et al., 2015), our findings revealed the following general theme: confidence in returning to sport, motivation and volition (determined, brave, persistent), low level of fear, orientation of internal thought (i.e., focus on actual performance avoiding thoughts about injury), performance expectations, modification and improvement of body perception, optimal arousal level.
Examining the athletes’ psychological past can provide 608Posters Friday July 14th coaches and sport professionals with a better understanding of athlete’s experience of injury and the key factors for a proficient return to sport. The individual zones of optimal functioning and the related psychobiosocial states (Robazza et al., 2016) can be a useful framework in identifying those athletes who are ready to return to competition, and support the athletes and staff in the decision-making process. Keywords: psychological readiness, injury, psychobiosocial states Psychological intervention with neurofeedback support Claudia Rivas (Solcpad/AMPDAF) Today, different authors such as Alexandre García Más and Claudia Rivas talk about teamwork, group cohesion ,and more specifically the influence of cooperation on sports on performance results in any team sport.
Cooperation on sports, understood as the de cision of at least two people , act ing together to achieve a goal, comes up to make an effort in order to clarify the different interactions that are established between the players of a t eam in the competition, and the Decision - making process in which players choose to collaborate with their teammates in solving the different moves of the game (García - Mas, 2001). This investigation parts of the meaning of identifying the level of cooperation on sports in the categories of the basic forces of a fo otball club, overall and by factors; Later it makes an analysis of the global cooperation on sport s of the categories all together according to the age of the players and the time that they have been inside the club. The poster shows the punctual way that cooperation on sports and the factors it make s up.
It points out the methodology of research used and ends with schemes that exemplify the obtained results. Keywords: golf, applied, psychology, neurofeedback Burnout in professional soccer football referees Jazmin Rivera (Solcpad/AMPDAF), Elsa Chincoya (SOLCPAD) One of the most well-known and followed sports worldwide is soccer football, which has a number of people who are linked on and off the court, among them stand out the referees that in every game can not fail to carry out the party to which they are appointed. Burnout syndrome is a problem that can occur in professionals who work in personal contact with other people, either directly or indirectly, in the case of a soccer referee, they are more likely to suffer such syndrome, this is the case when they are affected by: negative interactions with peers, excessive pressure by athletes, pressure from the public and the media, an inadequate relationship with their leaders or when they perceive very little social support (family) on their performance.
With this in mind, the mental training area of the commission of referees of FEMEXFUT made three applications of the Maslach Burnout inventory to 50 Mexican referees of professional soccer, whose results obtained are shown taking into account the three variables that measure the inventory of Burnout, In the three applications of the reports presented in the variable of Emotional Exhaustion, low levels in a range of 70 to 90% are presented; In the variable Depersonalization they presented a low level in a range of 80 to 90%, whereas in the three applications of the personal accomplishment variable in the work, the percentages were high in a range of 70% to more, it should be mentioned that it is evident that they does not obtain Percentages at 100, in the three variable ranges from 7 to 24% of medium responses, which makes the burnout syndrome present and that is why it should be taken into account. Keywords: burnout, football soccer referees, peak performance, emotional exhaustion, depersonalization and realization at work 609Posters Friday July 14th Psychometric properties of the Spanish version of the Weight Pressures in Sport Clara Teixidor Batlle, Carles Ventura Vall-llovera, Ana Andrés Valle (National Institute of Physical Education (INEFC) - Barcelona) In the attempt to explore and assess pressures to meet sport-related physique ideals within the sport environment - such as from coaches, teammates, performance and uniforms- the Weight Pressures in Sports for Males (WPS-M; Galli et al. 2013) and Females (WPS-F; Reel et al.
2013) were developed. The aim of the present study was to validate both mentioned questionnaires into Spanish population. Participants were 538 college students from Sport and Exercise Science degree at five Catalan universities, 407 male [M=20.49 years; SD=2.727] and 131 female [M=19.66 years; SD=1.744].
WPS-M and WPS-F were back-translated to obtain a Spanish version of the questionnaires. The psychometric properties of both WPS-M and WPS-F Spanish versions were examined in terms of item-total correlation, Cronbach’s alpha, internal consistency, and exploratory factor analysis (EFA) using Oblimin rotation. Results showed that item-total correlation was adequate (≥.40) for measuring weight pressures in sport, and could be improved in items 10, 11, 12 from WPS- M (r=.234; r=.253; r=.171) and items 12, 13, 14 from WPS-F (r=.275; r=.240; r=.326).
EFA supported the original three and two factor-solution for the 12 WPS-M and 18 items WPS-F, respectively. Total percentage of variance explained in the WPS-M was 57.03% and 48.52% in the WPS-F. All item loadings were higher than .35 in both versions.
Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was greater than 0.7 in all WPS-F subscales (.753-.893), whereas ranged from .508 to .843 in the WPS-M. Internal consistency of whole scale was adequate for both male (.797) and female (.877) versions. The present study confirms the internal structure of the scales found in previous literature, but suggests the revision of several items.
However, the internal consistencies of the scales were adequate, which suggests that WPS-M and WPS-F are useful tools to specifically assess weight pressures in the sport setting. Keywords: eating disorders, sport weight pressures, Spanish validation, exploratory factor analysis, psychometrics, reliability Relationship between the Weight Pressures in Sport questionnaire (WPS-F & WPS-M) with SATAQ-4 and BSQ questionnaires Clara Teixidor Batlle, Ana Andrés Valle, Carles Ventura Vall-llovera (National Institute of Physical Education (INEFC) - Barcelona) With previously good psychometric properties confirmed of the Spanish version of Weight Pressures in Sport for Males (WPS-M) and Weight Pressures in Sports for Females (WPS-F) we have examined the convergent validity of both mentioned versions. Participants were 538 college students from Sport and Exercise Science degree at five Catalan universities, 407 male [M=20.49 years; SD=2.727] and 131 female [M=19.66 years; SD=1.744].
In order to analyse relationship between sport weight pressures, sociocultural influences and body dissatisfaction, WPS male and female versions (Galli et al.2013; Reel et al.2013), SATAQ4 (Llorente et al.,2015) and BSQ (Raich et al.,1996) questionnaires were applied. The entire self-report survey was completed online via SurveyMonkey. Results showed that in the case of females, pressures regarding appearance in sport is significantly correlated to all SATAQ subscales (ranged from .307 to .518;p<.0001), except between coach and media pressure.
The correlation between weight pressure in sport and body dissatisfaction in males’ case were similar with female results. However, in both versions coach pressure was not related to body concern subscale. The present study showed that WPS were strongly related to pressure from body-ideal internalization and body-weight and appearance concerns.
Positive relationship is suggested between sociocultural pressures and sport weight pressures. Keywords: eating disorders, sport weight pressures, correlation, convergent validity, Spanish validation 610Posters Friday July 14th Predicting fluid intake before exercise among athletes: aA theoretical integration perspective Chunxiao Li, Fenghua Sun (The Education University of Hong Kong), King Chung Derwin Chan (University of Hong Kong), Liancheng Zhang (Tianjin University of Sport), Xi Wang (The Education University of Hong Kong) Fluid intake before exercise is an important healthy behavior for maintaining athletes’ sports performance and even health. This two-wave prospective survey aims to test an integrated model (i.e., integrate psychological constructs derived from theories of self-determination and planned behavior) in understanding fluid intake prior to exercise among athletes.
University athletes (N = 148) from China completed a survey form consisting of measures from self-determination theory (i.e., autonomous and controlled motivation) and the theory of planned behavior (i.e., attitude, subjective norm, perceived behavioral control, and intention) at baseline, and one behavioral measure one month after the baseline. Path analysis showed positive effects of autonomous motivation on intentions via subjective norm and perceived behavioral control. Controlled motivation only positively predicted subjective norm.
Intention positively predicted fluid intake behavior before exercise. The integrated model is useful for understanding university athletes’ fluid intake behaviors before exercise. The research findings can help practitioners to prepare intervention programs to promote healthy fluid intake behaviors in university athletes.
Keywords: self-determination, planned behavior, intention, beverage consumption, sport Associations among Internet use, physical activity, and physical fitness of elementary school children Chung-Ju Huang, Su-Hui Yang (University of Taipei) Internet and computer use are increasingly common leisure-time sedentary behaviors, which have the potential to influence negatively on children health. This study investigated the reciprocal relationships among internet use, physical activity, and physical fitness of elementary school children during a period of 6 months. Five hundred and twelve students (276 boys, 236 girls, mean age 11.3±0.8 years) were recruited as participants from an elementary school located in an urban area.
All participants completed a set of questionnaires including compulsive internet use, frequency of internet use, and 7-day physical activity recall. Additionally, physical fitness and body mass index (BMI) 3 months prior to and after the questionnaire administration were collected. The analysis indicated that the BMI levels 3 months ago could positively predict the severity of compulsive internet use (β = .13, p < .05) and the frequency of internet use (β = .18, p < .05).
The frequency of internet use, in turn, could positively predict the BMI levels 3 months later (β = .14, p < .05). Further, it was interesting to observe a positive correlation between internet use frequency and physical activity. These findings suggest that the relationships between high leisure-time internet use and overweight in children are reciprocal.
It may be necessary to decrease time spent in leisure-time internet and computer use in order to reduce the prevalence of overweight and obesity among children. The frequency of internet use behaviors may not diminish the levels of physical activity if children can be highly active in their limited leisure time. Keywords: computer use, sedentary behavior, overweight Effects of acute aerobic and resistance exercises on the stroop test: An electrophysiological and biochemical study Chun-Chih Wang, Chien-Heng Chu, Yen-Shan Chang, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Studies have found the beneficial effects of acute exercise on cognition.
Nevertheless, meta-analytic studies have shown that the range of effects size, regarding the results of acute exercise on cognition, is wide and that some factors would possibly moderate the relationship. In addition, mechanisms underlying 611Posters Friday July 14th improvements in executive functions elicited through acute exercise have received only scant attention. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to explore the effects of acute aerobic and resistance exercise on the Stroop Test, and to further examine the roles of the N4 components of ERP and cortisol within the relationship between acute exercise and executive functions.
37 young adults were recruited and randomly assigned into aerobic exercise, resistance exercise, and reading control conditions where were counterbalanced. All participants performed a Stroop Test and simultaneously a measurement of their N4 components of ERP following the cessation of treatments. The salivary cortisol was collected before, after, and at 30 minutes after the treatments.
The findings showed that the shorter response times were found in the all Stroop conditions, after the exercise treatments, compared to the reading treatment. The benefit of response times was not significantly different for either of the exercise modalities. In addition, a larger N4 amplitude after acute aerobic exercise compared to the resistance and reading treatments was observed.
However, cortisol levels were not significantly changed after exercises, compared to the reading treatment. These findings suggested that the beneficial effects of the acute exercise on both basic information processes and inhibition were found, regardless of the exercise modalities. Notably, the increased N4 amplitude was only found following the acute aerobic exercise, implying that the improvement of the Stroop performance might have been influenced through better semantic integration relative to the aerobic exercise.
Keywords: acute aerobic exercise, acute resistance exercise, cortisol, executive function, Stoop Test Obesity and multiple aspects of cognitive functions in adolescents Chun Xie, Chenglin Zhou (Shanghai University of Sport), Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) This study examined the relationship between obesity and cognitive function in adolescents. A total of 63 adolescents were recruited and divided into either obese or normal weight groups. The Flanker task is a method to measure cognitive function, including congruent (i.e., →→→→→ or ←←←←←, 50% probability) and incongruent (i.e., →→←→→ or ←←→←←, 50% probability) stimulus conditions.
The task was to press either the right or left button as quickly and accurately as possible based on the direction in which the middle array is facing. The congruent and incongruent condition results were reflected by the response time and accuracy used to respectively assess the basic and high-order cognitive functions. Analysis was also employed to examine the correlation between BMI and two cognitive functions.
The outcomes showed that 1) the response time of the obesity group was significantly slower than the normal weight group in both congruent and incongruent stimulus conditions (ps < 0.01), 2) There were significant positive relationships between BMI and congruent response time (r = 0.45) as well as BMI and incongruent response time (r = 0.51) (ps < 0.01). This study indicated that obese adolescents performed worse than normal-weight adolescents in relation to the basic cognitive functions and the high-order cognitive functions, reflecting that a negative influence of obesity on cognitive functions in general. In addition, the level of obesity would negatively correlate with the results of these two cognitive functions.
Keywords: obesity adolescents,cognitive functions,cognitive control Pluralistic ignorance: the psychological explanation of academic underachievement among Taiwanese student-athletes Chu-Min Liao (National Taiwan Sport University, Taiwan), Shuo-Fen Fan (New Taipei Municipal Jia Lin Junior High School, Taiwan) Levine, Etchison, and Oppenheimer (2014) suggested that, in the USA, student–athletes’ underperformance in academics might partially due to pluralistic ignorance. Student–athletes mistakenly believed that other student–athletes disvalued academic achievement and undermined their own motivation in academic efforts. The purpose of the study was to test if this pluralistic ignorance was also a possible 612Posters Friday July 14th explanation for the academic underachievement of Taiwanese student-athletes.
Participants were college student-athletes from either sports departments (n=332; 223 males; 109 females; mean age=18.96) or general academic departments (n=203; 138 males; 65 females; mean age=20.29). A Chinese version of the questionnaire used in the work of Levine et al. was administrated to test the participants’ perceived value of academic achievement and their efforts (hour/week) putting into study and their perception of teammates and student-athletes as a whole in related matters.
In addition, 58 varsity team coaches’ perceived value of academic achievement for student-athletes and their belief of other coaches’ perceived value were also measured (38 males; 20 females; mean age=45.00). Mixed-design ANOVAs found that pluralistic ignorance did exist among student-athletes, especially for those from sports departments. Paired t-tests showed that coaches’ reported academic value for student-athletes was significantly higher than their belief of that of other coaches.
It appears that pluralistic ignorance is a plausible explanation for academic underachievement of Taiwanese student-athletes and the role of coaches in reinforcing/inhibiting this pluralistic ignorance is worth further attention. Keywords: pluralistic ignorance, student-athletes, academic achievement The influence of early life competitive sport involvement on later life experiences Christopher N. Sellars (University of Wolverhampton) Through participation in sport some people become to define themselves, at least in part, as ‘athletes’.
But what happens to their ‘athletic identity’ (Lantz & Schroeder, 1999, p.547) as they move through life and how does this changing athletic identity affect other areas of life experience? The research interest here is to what extent those who have significant involvement in competitive sport at a young age (adolescence and early adult life) maintain an athletic identity (Brewer, Van Raalte & Linder, 1993), albeit renegotiated, that may in turn shape various aspects of life and life’s decision-making in middle-age and beyond. Whilst the role of athletic identity on transitions in sport has been examined (e.g., Grove, Lavallee & Gordon, 1997), the life-long influence of prior competitive sport involvement in adolescence and young adulthood on later life behaviours is under-researched.
Therefore, through the lens of Identity Theory (Stryker & Serpe, 1982) and adopting a story analytic methodology (Smith & Sparkes, 2009), six purposefully selected over-45 former national- and international-level athletes’ life stories (narratives) illustrate the significance of early life sport involvement in framing identity and shaping life experience. Employing a structural analysis of diachronic data (the stories told), through a process that yields theoretical propositions and categories, the research yields a number of prominent themes concerning later life sport involvement, but also regarding areas such as education, careers, leisure and family time, places chosen to live, relationships, and planning for later adulthood and retirement. How this information contributes to better understanding of life-long habitual physical activity behaviours and to maintaining desirable mental health outcomes, via such self-concepts as self-esteem and self-confidence, will be highlighted, framed by identity and life transition theories.
Keywords: athletic identity, identity theory, life story, story analyst Diagnosis and modelling of basic motor competencies and their development Christian Herrmann (University of Basel), Christopher Heim, Fabienne Ennigkeit (University of Fankfurt), Harald Seelig (University of Basel) Basic motor competencies, understood as achievable levels of physical capability, ensure that children can actively participate in sports and exercise. The aim of this longitudinal study was to explore the development of basic motor competencies over one school year and to examine potential influence factors. Within the project “Schulkids in Bewegung” (SKIB), N=1031 first and second graders (54% boys, M=6.83 years, SD=0.44) were tested in the competence areas object-control and locomotion (Herrmann, Gerlach, & Seelig, 2015) in October 613Posters Friday July 14th 2014 (t1) and in June 2015 (t2) using the MOBAK test instrument (MOBAK = Motorische Basiskompetenzen; German for basic motor competencies).
Additionally endogenous (sex, BMI, age) and exogenous factors (SKIB- project, sports club participation) and the children’s leisure physical activity were measured using questionnaires to test potential influences on the changes in MOBAK. Basic motor competencies clearly improved over one school year. Structural equation models revealed that boys showed bigger development in object control, whereas the development in locomotion was stronger for girls.
Children with a high BMI showed less increase in competencies compared to children with a low BMI. Engagement in team sports positively influenced the development of object-control. Engagement in individual sport had a positive influence on the changes of locomotion.
The MOBAK test instrument showed good construct validity and measurement invariance and therefore enabled to adequately display changes in basic motor competencies. At the beginning of primary school, the development of motor competencies is strongly influenced by certain endogenous and exogenous factors. Keywords: motor development, motor skills, physical education Influential factors of individual career management of Chinese coaches Chonghui Zhang, Hong Hu (Chonghui Zhang) Individual career management is a hot topic of research in the field of organizational behavior.
A great number of researches on this topic have been conducted in western countries. However, it is questionable to apply those findings directly to China, especially for Chinese coaches, because of social-cultural differences. Based on former indigenous researches on career development of Chinese coaches with grounded theory, this study further investigates the influential factors of coach’s individual career development (CICM) with quantitative methods.
Study I utilizes factor analysis to conceptualize the coach professional environment (CPE) and CICM, test the reliability and validity of CPE, CICM and achievement (AM) and make sure that they are psychometrically acceptable. CPE refers to the general environment sports teams provided for the coaches to cultivate elite athletes. Three aspects are involved in CPE, namely team support environment, event management environment, and athlete professional environment.
CICM consists of three factors including caring information, professional exploration, and self-disclosure. Study II is a large-scale investigation with 328 Chinese national and provincial coaches (age: 37.44±8.867). Confirmatory factor analysis shows that CPE has significant positive effects on CICM (r=0.77, p<0.01) and coaches’ professional titles and AM have significant effects on CICM (p1<0.01; p2<0.01).
Hierarchical regression analysis indicates that team support environment and AM have significant interaction effects on CICM (p<0.01). Thus, combining the former indigenous researches and this research, it can be concluded that in Chinese cultural background, professional title, AM, CPE and interaction effect of AM and CPE have significant impacts on CICM. Keywords: individual career development, social-cultural differences, indigenous research How team sport athletes cope with shared stressors: A communal coping perspective Chloe Leprince (French Institute of Sport (INSEP), Paris, France), Fabienne D'Arripe Longueville (University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Laboratory LAMHESS, Nice, France), Julie Doron (French Institute of Sport (INSEP), Paris, France) Although sport psychology research has mainly focused on stress and coping as an intrapersonal process, stressful circumstances are often experienced in social groups and coping emerges as a combination of individual and group effort (Lyons et al., 1998; Tamminen & Gaudreau, 2014).
Based on the communal coping model proposed by Lyons et al., the present study aimed to address the lack of knowledge about stress and coping as an interpersonal process. Consequently, the nature of the communal coping strategies used by team sport athletes to deal with shared stressors during competitive encounter was explored. Individual semi- 614Posters Friday July 14th structured interviews were conducted with 10 team sport athletes (7 males, 3 females; Mage = 26.3 years, SDage = 7.67, range 15-38) who participated in different team sports (football, rugby, volleyball, ice hockey, basketball).
Data were analyzed using inductive analysis. The results revealed 143 meaning units related to shared stressors. Specifically, team sport athletes reported communal sources of stress appraised as “our” problem related to social pressure issues (35%, n = 50), relationship between teammates issues (32.8%, n = 47), performance issues (28.7%, n = 41), or logistical and organizational issues (3.5%, n = 5).
They revealed 129 meaning units related to communal coping. The identified communal coping strategies can be regrouped into four main communal coping dimensions namely: Problem-focused communal efforts (30%, n = 39), Relationship-focused coping (29%, n = 38), Communal management of emotions (22%, n = 28), and Communal goal withdrawal (19%, n = 24). The results provide empirical support to the communal coping model (Lyons et al., 1998) and extend understanding of coping processes as defined initially by the Cognitive-Motivational- Relational Theory of emotion (Lazarus, 1991, 1999, 2000).
They lead to understand how stressors are apprehended in team sports and how athletes can collaborate to deal with these shared stressors. Keywords: shared stressors, communal coping, team sports, interpersonal perspective Examining athletes’ superstitious in sports: A qualitative approach Ching-Wen Ko (Chinese culture university & St.john's university, Taiwan), Frank Jing-Horng Lu (Chinese Culture University, Taiwan), Shu-Ching Wu (Ling Tung University, Taiwan), Fu-Shu Hsu (Fu Jen Catholic University, Taiwan), Fu-Ching Hsu (Chung Yuan Christian University, Taiwan) Superstitions exist almost in every culture (Burger & Lynn, 2005). Athletes may engage in superstitious behavior as a coping/secondary control strategy in stressful situations (Bleak & Frederick, 1998; Ofori, Tod & Lavallee, 2016).
Although past research has investigated and discussed its contents of and influences on athletes (Sin Bal et al., 2014; Ofori, 2013; Wann et al., 2013), very few studies deeply examined its’ antecedents and consequences. The Purpose of this study was to explore the antecedents and consequences of superstitious behavior in competitive sports.Totally, 11 division-I athletes and five coaches were interviewed. All transcribed verbatim, combined with field observations notes and focus-group interviewed transcripts, were analyzed by grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1990).
There are two major resources---internal and external factors in formulating athletes’ superstition. The internal factors include religious belief, attributions, and sports skills while external factors include culture, games’ nature, and assigned task. The consequences of superstitions comprised two major dimension: positive and negative influences.
The positive aspect of superstition includes persistence, goal- setting, stress-relieving, and performance enhancement. The negative influences include three dimension: psychological barriers, negative thinking, and attribution bias. Sports superstitions can be an effective psychological strategy in reducing stress, enhancing confidence, performance, and persistence.
Future research may adopt different theories in examining how sports superstition influence athletes’ psychological responses. Keywords: sports superstitious, qualitative research, competitive sports, coping strategy The effects of an outdoor activity on the life skills of Japanese university students Chihiro Kemuriyama (Gifu Shotoku Gakuen University), Mitsuhiro Amazaki (Aichi University) Outdoor activities are effective for alleviating the stress response and improving mental health of university students (Gushiken et al., 2007; Nishida et al., 2000). Moreover, life skills which are the ability of adaptive action that enables us to deal effectively with daily living requirements and challenges of everyday life can be improved by outdoor activities (The Japanese ministry of education, 1996).
This study aims to investigate the effects of an outdoor activity on the life skills of Japanese university students. Forty-three Japanese university students who participated in outdoor activity for three days completed two questionnaires 615Posters Friday July 14th (a face sheet and a daily life-skills scale for college students) twice—pre test and post test. The results of paired samples t-tests showed that the scores in the post test were significantly higher than those in the pre test in “Leadership (t(42) = 2.358, p < .05),” “Planning (t(42) = 5.072, p < .001),” “Empathy (t(42) = 7.831, p < .001),” “Self-esteem (t(42) = 3.532, p < .01), and “Positive thinking (t(42) = 2.951, p < .01)”.
These results suggested that the outdoor activity improved the life skills of university students. In future research, a long-term outdoor activity should be considered. Keywords: outdoor activity, life skills, university students Relationships of fitness and obesity levels in influencing inhibitory control Chih-Han Wu, I-Lun Huang, Tai-Sheng Chen, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Cognitive function status is moderated by several factors.
The purpose of the study was to explore the relationship between fitness levels and obesity as potentially factors to influence cognitive performances in younger adults. Forty-one young college students were recruited and assigned to one of three groups: high fitness-obese group (i.e., maximal oxygen uptake, VO2max > 48.2 mL/kg/min; body mass index, BMI > 27 kg/m2), low fitness-obese group, and high fitness-normal weight group. The inhibition abilities of their respective cognitive functions were measured via a numerical Stroop test including congruent, neutral, and incongruent conditions.
The results showed that the high fitness-normal weight group exhibited shorter reaction times than the low fitness-obese group; and the high fitness-obese group performances were not significantly different compared the high fitness-normal group. These findings suggest that high fitness is associated with higher cognitive performances, regardless individual with obese and non-obese of weight status. Nevertheless, our relative small sample size and cross-sectional design would limit the interpretation.
Further research is encouraged to consider increasing sample size and applying intervention to explore the factors that moderate the status of cognitive function. Keywords: body mass index, fitness, cognitive function, inhibition Relationship between motor coordination and interference control ability in children with attention deficit /hyperactivity disorder Chi-Fang Lin, Chien-Lin Yu, Yu-Jung Tsai, Chung-Ju Huang, Tsung-Min Hung Previous studies have reported a relationship between fundamental motor ability and inhibition performance in children with attention deficit /hyperactivity (ADHD) disorder. However, these studies were limited by either a small sample size or lack of control for potential confounding factors, such as physical activity and fitness.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between motor skill and inhibition in children with ADHD children by controlling moderate-to-vigorous physical activity and fitness in a larger sample size. A total of 80 participants underwent a motor ability assessment measured by the Movement Assessment Battery for Children (MABC), a fitness test, physical activity measurement by accelerometer, and inhibitory ability measurement by the modified Eriksen’s flanker task. The results indicated that the higher MABC score was significantly associated with a shorter reaction time and a smaller RT/Acc, and the better Manual dexterity skill was significantly associated with a higher accuracy in both of the congruent and incongruent conditions.
These findings suggested that a better motor coordination, especially fine motor skill and balance, may be positively associated with interference ability in children with ADHD. Keywords: ADHD, motor skill, inhibition 616Posters Friday July 14th Effect of acute exercise mode on serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and task switching Chiao-Ling Hung (National Taiwan University, Taiwan), Chung-Ju Huang (University of Taipei, Taipei, Taiwan), Tsung-Min Hung (National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan) Previous studies have consistently revealed positive effect of acute exercise on cognition, executive function in particular. However, most of studies have focused on the aerobic and resistant forms of exercise.
To further our understanding on the relationship between acute exercise and cognition, it is necessary to investigate other forms of acute exercise. Previous studies have suggested that enriched environment can enhance the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which can have diverse functions in brain development and plasticity. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to compare the effect of open-skills exercise, a form of exercise that presume cognitive stimulating, with closed skill exercise on BDNF and task switching performance.
Twenty young adults were recruited and administered both closed (running) and open (badminton) skill exercise sessions in a counterbalanced order in separate days. The acute exercise consisted of 5 min of warming up followed by 30 minutes of running or badminton. The exercise intensity was set at 60% (±5) heart rate reserve (HRR) and HR was monitored by wireless heart rate monitor.
Blood draw and task- switching paradigm were performed before and after each exercise session. Task switching paradigms have been used extensively to examine the working memory, inhibition, and mental flexibility aspects of executive function. This task included two conditions; the pure condition required participants to perform the task on the same rule (e.g., AAAA or BBBB) whereas the mixed condition required participants to perform the task on two alternating rules (e.g., AABBAA…).
The results showed no differences on the serum BDNF and task-switching performance in pre-test. However, badminton exercise has resulted in significantly higher serum BDNF and marginally smaller global switching cost than that of running exercise. Although the BDNF measured by serum blood in this study is simply a proxy for the level of BDNF in the brain.
Keywords: switch cost, executive function What inhibits “loss of spirit?” A qualitative study of losing and not losing spirit in competition Chiaki Raima, Hiroshi Sekiya (Hiroshima University), Akane Ogawa (Nishi-nippon Junior College, Hirohsima University) Japanese athletes often use the phrase “I lost my spirit” when negatively evaluating their feeling and performance during competition. Avoiding loss of spirit (LOS) can help improve psychological condition and performance. Our purpose was (a) to clarify the elements and mechanisms of LOS and ways to inhibit LOS during competition, and (b) to identify the preventive factors for LOS.
We interviewed 18 athletes (F=7, M=11; mean age=21 years) and analyzed the interview transcripts by the following steps: (1) creating tags: we divided the text of each transcript into text segments containing information about LOS or ways to inhibit LOS, and (2) creating categories: we gathered tags with similar meanings and labeled the cluster of tags to briefly indicate the topic (Côté et al., 1993). Results revealed that the phenomenon of LOS had the following three phases: (1) cause of LOS (e.g., tide of the game, negative emotion), (2) condition of LOS (e.g., poor concentration, losing the will to fight, bad game situations), and (3) response after the game (e.g., undesirable result). The phenomenon of inhibiting LOS had the following five phases: (1) cause of nearly experiencing LOS (e.g., tide of the game, negative emotion), (2) condition nearly of experiencing LOS (e.g., decrease of concentration, losing the will to fight), (3) opportunity to escape from LOS (e.g., positive words and actions of others, heightened the fight), (4) condition after escaping from LOS (e.g., improvement of performance, arising of positive emotion), and (5) response after the game (e.g., evaluation of the game).
Furthermore, a comparison of these phenomena revealed that high motivation before the game, positive words and actions of others, heightened 617Posters Friday July 14th fight, reframing one’s thought, improving the game situations, preservation of stamina, and keeping the fight in a situation in which LOS is nearly experienced may inhibit LOS. Keywords: motivation, concentration, qualitative research Association between exercise modality with different physical and cognitive demands and executive function Chi Lin (Ta Hwa University of Science and Technology); Li-Yen Chang (National Taiwan Sport University); Yu- Min Ho (Hsiuping University of Science Technology); Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Previous studies have documented that a beneficial influence on cognitive functions may increase following the degree of cognitive demands. Additionally, recent literature had also indicated that exercise with different demands might affect cognitive functions.
The purpose of this study was to further this research by examining the relationship between exercise modality and two aspects of executive functions. Specifically, two types of exercise were compared: basketball (i.e., exercise involving both physical and cognitive demands) and billiards (i.e., exercise involving more cognitive demand, but low physical demand). Also the inhibition and planning aspects of executive functions were examined.
Thirty-nine young adults were classified into basketball (n = 13), billiards (n = 13), and control groups (n = 13). Each participant was instructed to complete two cognitive tasks, the Stroop Test and the Tower of London Task. The Stroop Test involved congruent and incongruent conditions, and the Tower of London Task involved moving performance.
Our results revealed that while there was no significant group difference under both conditions of the Stroop Test, the two exercise groups had better total move scores on the Tower of London Task, relative to the control group. These findings suggested that exercise, regardless exercise modality, may have a selective beneficial effect, based on the task characteristics, and that the exercise effects may be especially sensitive relative to the planning element of executive functions. Keywords: stroop test, tower of london task, basketball, billiard A student-athlete’s experience of life: An exploratory study from a meaning of life perspective Cheng-Hui Yang, Chu-Min Liao (National Taiwan Sport University) This study was part of an ongoing long-term research project aiming for describing the adaptation and psychological development of student-athletes based on the theoretical framework of meaning of life.
In this study, we interviewed a female senior college student-athlete who had been going through several major difficulties in her life as playing the role of both a student and an athlete. She chose to be a heptathlete when she was in junior high school in spite of her parents’ strong disapproval and was not fully supported by the family. As in her senior year, she was facing the upcoming career transition and unfortunately had a serious car accident recently which might end her career as a heptathlete.
We used a visual narrative method (Busanich, McGannon, & Schinke, 2016) in the interview by which the heptathlete was asked to create a visual image regarding the relationships of her school work, sports, and other activities with a circle which represented herself. The interview was then conducted and analyzed based on the concepts of meaning (Heintzelman & King, 2013；Mackenzie & Baumeister, 2014), the meaning of life (George & Park, 2016; Martela & Steger, 2016), and meaning-making model (Park, 2010). Results showed that the heptathlete was well adapted to the changes and conflicts in life, and the processes of adaptation was validly described by the theoretical framework of meaning of life.
Her narratives was in line with the three essential components of coherence, purpose, and significance in meaning of life, and the process of reducing the inconsistency between the global meaning and situational meaning in meaning –making. This study was exploratory in nature, but it provided a 618Posters Friday July 14th basic support for future investigations to the understanding of the adaptation and psychological development of student-athletes from a meaning of life perspective. Keywords: student-athlete, meaning, meaning in life, meaning-making model Difference of visuo-spatial working memory capacity in table tennis players with different levels of skill: an ERP study Chen Kuan-Fu (National Taiwan Normal University), Huang Chung-Ju (University of Taipei), Chen Tai-Ting, Chueh Ting-Yu, Hung Tsung-Min (National Taiwan Normal University) The main purpose of this study was to compare the differences in performance of visuospatial working memory task at the behavioral and neuroelectrical levels in table tennis players with different skill levels.
Seven expert, eight sub-expert table tennis players, and eight novices participated in this study. All participants were administered a 3s delayed and non-delayed visuospatial working memory task while their behavior and event- related potential (ERPs) were recorded. Results showed that both expert and sub-expert players had shorter reaction time and larger Fz-P3 amplitude in delayed and non-delayed tests than novices.
Additionally, experts exhibited larger Cz-P3 amplitude at delayed condition, compared to sub-experts and novices. These findings suggest that participation in table tennis is associated with better visuospatial working memory. Participants with higher skill levels may have an extra benefits in neural resource allocation during working memory tasks.
Keywords: ERPs, working memory, P300, athlete The acute effect of running on pupil size in middle-distance runners Masahiro Kokubu, Tatsuki Sogabe (University of Tsukuba) Pupil size is considered to reflect psychological and physiological states. Recent studies have shown increased parasympathetic activity in endurance-trained athletes assessed by pupillometry (Capão Filipe et al., 2003; Kaltsatou et al., 2011). Effects of cognitive demands in motor learning (White and French, 2016) and dynamic ergometer exercise (Hayashi et al., 2010; Ishigaki et al., 1991) on the pupil size of nonathletes have also been examined.
However, it is still unclear whether the change of pupil diameter reflects acute physical activity in athletes. Measuring pupil diameter in athletes is considered to be important for evaluating the psychological and physiological states during exercise. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the acute effect of running on pupil size in endurance-trained runners.
Ten male university middle-distance runners (age, 20.6 ± 1.2 years; VO2max, 65.0 ± 4.2 ml/kg/min; mean ± SD) participated in the present study. The participants underwent 3 min of treadmill running at 85% VO2max (15.8 ± 0.8 km/h) three times. Pupil diameter of the left and right eye was recorded with an eye-tracking system (EMR-9; NAC Image Technology Inc.) at a sampling frequency of 60 Hz and then calculated as the median value before running, during the first and second halves of the running period (90 sec, respectively), and recovery period.
Results showed that the pupil diameter during the first and second halves of running period was significantly larger than that before running (p < .01) and recovery period (p < .05). There was no significant difference in pupil diameter between the first and second halves. The change in pupil diameter was not different between the left and right eye.
The present results indicated that pupil diameter in both eyes acutely increases during running even for endurance-trained athletes. The monitoring of pupil size could be used as a marker of psychological and/or physiological demands in endurance exercise. Keywords: pupil diameter, endurance-trained athletes, eye 619Posters Friday July 14th Psychophysical stress indicators and burnout in sports trainers Elvia Alexandra Valadez Jiménez, Pedro Reynaga Estrada (Universidad de Guadalajara), Ma.
de los Ángeles Vacio Muro (Universidad Autónoma de Aguascalientes), Isaac Uribe Alvarado (Universidad de Colima), Juan Carlos Arturo González (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León) Sports coaches have to constantly deal with stressors as part of the activities they must perform. When these stressors exceed their adaptive resources and stress coping strategies are inadequate they can develop various conditions associated with chronic stress such as Burnout syndrome. The study of this problem arising in the coach acquires a double dimension, due to the consequences that have on the biopsychosocial health and the negative effect that the trainer who presents these characteristics has for the athletes, being determinant in the permanence or abandonment in the sport in these last.
To measure the effect of an intervention program on psychophysical levels of stress and Burnout in the sports coach of the state of Jalisco. A quasi-experimental design will be used, with a pre-test, post-test and re-test application in two parallel groups: experimental group, which will receive the intervention; and a waiting control group to which a neutral stimulus will be applied during the duration of the intervention. Participants will be sports coaches that belong to the State Council for Sports Development (CODE) of the State of Jalisco, selected through non-probabilistic sampling.
An adapted version will be applied by the trainer of the Maslach Burnout Inventory, the Brief COPE- 28 to identify the coping styles and the psychophysical indicators will be taken by means of a Psicotronic EDG- 1500 Electrothermodermometer that records the peripheral temperature and the conductance of the skin. Keywords: psychophysical stress indicators, burnout, sport trainers Pre-performance routines of elite competitive Brazilian volleyball athletes: an exploratory study Alexandro Andrade, Danilo Coimbra, Pedro Casagrande, Guilherme Bevilacqua, Alexandre Nascimento, Fábio Dominski, Fabiano Pereira, Rodrigo Batalha, Guilherme Vilarino, Miguel Flores, Giovanna Vietta, Ricardo Steffens (UDESC) Pre-Performance Routines (PPR) are cognitive and behavioural strategies which an athlete engages before training or competition to improve his physical, technical or psychological performance (Cotterril, 2010). Some routines such as listening to music, use of motivational keywords and visualisation techniques are applied in PPR increasing concentration and decreased negative thoughts (Cotterril, 2008).
In the recent years, Brazilian volleyball has achieved success in international competitions, and the National Super League of Volleyball it is considered one of the most competitive in the world. However, to date, no studies have been found investigating PPR in Brazilian volleyball players. Verify if competitive Brazilian volleyball athletes are using PPR and which are the most applied routines.
This is a descriptive and exploratory study. The sample consisted of 31 competitive elite volleyball athletes (mean age of 27 ± 6 years and time of experience in volleyball of 13 ± 2 years). They are athletes of three teams that participate of National Super League of Volleyball.
It was used the Questionnaire Characterization of High-Performance Athletes - Volleyball (QCAAR-VB). Through the instrument it was used the item: Do you use any strategy or routine before training or competitions? If so, which one?
The research was conducted through an online research portal, which guarantees the confidentiality of the responses. The data (mean, standard deviation and percentage) was analysed in Excel. Of the 31 athletes investigated, six reported that are using some type of PPR.
The most frequently cited routines were listening to music and use of mental visualisation. In our study, few elite competitive Brazilian volleyball athletes use PPR. These results are worrying, considering that at this level of competition, neglecting psychological techniques can reduce performance and may influence on victory or defeat.
Keywords: team sport, mental practice, pre-task, sport psychology 620Posters Friday July 14th Students’ perceptions of their self-confidence in Physical Education lessons trough the practice of sports according to the gender and formal practice experience Cristiana Bessa (FADEUP) Physical Education (PE), not only gather the conditions for the development of physical literacy and the adoption of healthy lifestyles, but also it is recognized its impact on students’ personal and social development (Hellison, 1973; Taggart, 1988; Mesquita, 2012). Particularly, the practice of SPORTS (team and individual sports) in PE promote positive and successful experiences increasing the self-confidence (Hall & Kerr, 1997; Magyar & Feltz, 2003; Hastie & Mesquita, 2017). By other hand, self-confidence increase the commitment with the sport activity and show a great influence on sports success, and amount of effort to be spent (Loerh, 1986, Callow & Lardy, 2001, Robazza & Bortoli, 2007).
The purpose of this study was to analyze the students’ perceptions of their self-confidence in PE lessons trough the practice of sports according to the gender and formal practice experience. The sample consisted of 450 Portuguese high-school PE students (206 male and 224 female, aged from 15 to 18 years old), who completed the self-confidence items of the Portuguese version (Vasconcelos-Raposo, 1995) of the CSAI-2 (Martens, Burton, Vealey, Bump & Smith, 1990). The main results revealed that male students presented higher values of self-confidence when compared to female students and students with formal practice when compared with students who do not have any type of formal practice in a club.
This study highlighted that gender and the type of sporting practice experience seem to influence the self-confidence levels of students in the PE lessons within the team and individual sports activities. Further studies are suggested to be applied using a deeper approach from qualitative analysis is order to obtain a clearer understanding about the reasons of this results. Keywords: self-confidence, Physical Education, personal and social development Effectiveness of authentic leadership in the context of sport: athletes’ commitment and enjoyment and the mediating role of autonomy and trust Comille Bandura (University of Birmingham) Researchers have shown interest in studying leadership in sport.
However, there is scant research on the concept of Authentic leadership (AL). AL is a value-based leadership approach developed in the organisational context which aims to reduce unethical behaviour. Research in organisational, medical and educational setting has demonstrated that AL is associated with positive follower outcomes such as satisfaction, commitment, and trust.
In this study, we examined whether athletes’ perceptions of coach AL were associated with their commitment and enjoyment and whether trust in coach and perceived autonomy mediated these relationships. Participants were 435 (female = 211) athletes aged 18-44 years (Mage = 19.94, SD = 2.08)from team (e.g., football, hockey; n = 338) and individual sports (e.g., boxing, swimming; n = 97) who completed questionnaires about perceived AL of their coach, perceived autonomy and trust in their coach, and their enjoyment and commitment. Structural equation modelling (S-Bχ2 (727) =1240.00, p < .001; CFI = .93; SRMR = .07; RMSEA = .04 (CI = .03–.04),revealed at athletes’ perceptions of their coach AL were positively related to their enjoyment and commitment and these relationships were mediated by perceived autonomy and trust.Coach AL explained 56% of the variance in trust and 14% in autonomy, and in turn, AL, autonomy and trust explained 23% of the variance in commitment, and 30% of the variance in enjoyment.
The findings suggest that authentic leadership in coaches may facilitate satisfaction and commitment of athletes, and this may occur via athletes’ perceptions of autonomy and trust. Keywords: coaching effectiveness, integrity, positive athletic development 621Posters Friday July 14th Winning attitude as a state competitive anxiety predictor Christos Katsikas, Maria Psychountaki (University of Athens) Winning attitude is the translation into training or competition of athletes’ positive thoughts and feelings. The present study examined the link between athletes’ winning attitude and state competitive anxiety.
Since state competitive anxiety often affects athletes’ performance, it is important to explore its relationship with athletes' attitude. 131 soccer and table tennis athletes completed the trait anxiety, the winning attitude (self- concept, motivation & mental toughness) and the CSAI-2 (cognitive and somatic anxiety and state confidence) questionnaires. The trait anxiety and winning attitude questionnaires were administered during training sessions, while, the state competitive anxiety ones were given 30 minutes before a game.
Results revealed significant differences between athletes’ competitive levels (amateur and professional) in their state confidence (t=6.36, p<.001) and winning attitude factors [winning attitude total score (t= 4.64, p<.001), self concept (t=6.42, p<.001), motivation (t=2.78, p<.01), and mental toughness (t=2.71, p<.01)]. Three separate regression analyses showed that: (a) Cognitive state anxiety can be predicted by trait anxiety and winning attitude, F(4,108)= 9.56, p<.001 (adj. R2= .23).
Winning attitude factors that were significant predictors were motivation (β= .23) and mental toughness (β=-.24), (b) Somatic state anxiety can be predicted [F(4,110)= 7.24, p<.001 (adj. R2 =.18)] by trait anxiety (β= .27) and motivation (β= .30), and (c) State competitive confidence [F(4,109)= 24.81, p<.001, adj. R2= .46] was mostly predicted by self-concept (β= .54).
Both trait anxiety and winning attitude contribute to athletes’ state competitive anxiety. Motivation and mental toughness can affect both cognitive and somatic state competitive anxiety, while, self-concept determines athletes' state competitive self-confidence. A developed winning attitude dimension can facilitate control and better demonstration of competitive condition.
Keywords: competitive anxiety, winning attitude The influence of cardiovascular fitness, and obesity, on executive function in a Stop-Signal Task: An electrophysiological study Chein-Heng Chu, Jen-Hao Liu, Chih-Han Wu, Chun-Chih Wang, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Prior research has suggested that cardiovascular fitness (CF) and obesity have significant positive and negative impacts on executive function (EF), respectively. Nevertheless, the interaction of these two combined factors on EF is less well understood. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of the CF of young adults with or without obese conditions, on the inhibitory aspect of EF, regarding both behavioral and electrophysiological activities.
96 young adults, aged 18-25, were recruited. Based on their CF and body mass index (BMI) values, they were assigned into the following four groups: high CF in normal BMI range (NH), low CF in normal BMI range (NL), high CF in obesity range (OH), and low CF in obese range (OL). The performance of the Stop-Signal Task (SST) was utilized as the index of inhibition, and the N2 and P3 components of event-related potentials were analyzed offline.
The higher CF participants (NH and OH groups) demonstrated superior behavioral performances compared to their lower CF counterparts (NL and OL), as reflected by shorter reaction times (RT) and higher accuracy. Additionally, a shorter stop-signal ST (SSRT) associated with the higher CF participants was observed. Furthermore, larger P3 amplitude and shorter N2 latency were observed among the participants with higher CF, relative to the lower CF groups.
Collectively, participants with a higher CF are associated with superior ability to allocate larger amounts of attentional resources, as well as faster evaluation speed toward the stop-signal, and these results might consequently be attributed to their better inhibitory performance. The present study provided first-hand evidence of the importance of CF on the inhibitory aspect of EF, and the detrimental effects of obesity that might be overcome by an improvement of CF. 622Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: obesity, cardiovascular fitness, executive function, stop-signal task, SSRT Posters Session 7.
(14.30-15:30) The revision and factorial structure validation of the sport psychological capital scale Chen Chien-Wei Based on Luthans and Youssef (2004)’s positive psychological capital, self-efficacy, hope, optimism and resilience play important roles in organization behavior. Studies have indicated that these factors influence athletes’ performances respectively in the sport field. However, few sport psychologists combine these four concepts as psychological capital to investigate the influence towards other variables.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to develop and validate the sport psychological capital scale by testing its factor structure, reliability and validity. In study 1, participants conducted in exploratory factor analysis (EFA) were 306 college students (159 males, 147 females) with different sport type with average age 21.18 years (SD = 2.29), average training time 4.07 years (SD = 2.90). Principle component analysis and oblique rotation were conducted in study 1(eigenvalue more than 1), delete the items that factor loading is less than .40 sequentially or when cross-loading has occurred.
In this criteria, four items were deleted, 4 expected dimensions with 23 items were in the final version of the questionnaire. Coefficient of internal consistency Cronbach’s α of four factors were .88 (hope), .92 (self-efficacy), .92 (resilience) and .90 (optimism), explained variance were 70.7%. In study 2, confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) were conducted, a sample of 300 collegiate tennis players (115 males, 185 females) recruited from different colleges with average age 20.72 years (SD = 2.01)，average training time 3.37 years (SD = 2.13).
Model fit summary: CMIN/DF=3.71, GFI=.89, SRMR=.05, AGFI=.86, RMSEA=.067, NFI=.92, RFI=.91, IFI=.94, TLI=.93, CFI=.94, PGFI=.70, PNFI=.80, PCFI=.81, the model provided acceptable fit to the data. The sport psychological capital scale demonstrated good reliability and validity through EFA and CFA which can be directly applied to all sport fields, coaches will then use this scale to understand the degree of sport psychological capital. Keywords: self-efficacy, hope, optimism, resilience The prediction to sport performance and self-handicapping of collegiate tennis players' sport psychological capital and coach-athlete relationship Chen Chien-Wei According to Luthans and Youssef (2004)’s positive psychological capital, sport psychological capital scale which contains four constructs demonstrates good reliability and validity through EFA and CFA, and can be directly applied to all sport fields.
The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationships of sport psychological capital, coach-athlete relationship, sport performance and self-handicapping among college tennis players. In addition, it also examines the causal model. In this model, sport psychological capital not only can directly predict self-handicapping and sport performance, but also can predict them through coach-athlete relationship.A sample of 606 division1 and division2 collegiate tennis players (274 males, 332 females) with average age 20.95 years, average training time 3.72 years, completed questionnaires prior to one hour of their matches to measure their sport psychological capital, coach-athlete relationship and self-handicapping.
Also measure the sport performance evaluated by the players after one hour of their matches. Sport psychological capital was significantly positive related with coach-athlete relationship and sport performance, but negative related with self-handicapping. Represented that the players have higher sport psychological capital, prone to have better coach-athlete relationship, sport performance and less self-handicapping.
Modified causal model demonstrated acceptable fit index. Sport performance and self-handicapping was predicted by sport 623Posters Friday July 14th psychological capital through coach-athlete relationship as a mediator. Conclusion: The results generally matched the hypothesis, sport performance and self-handicapping was predicted by sport psychological capital through coach-athlete relationship as a mediator.
Practical implications and directions for future research were also recommended. Keywords: self efficacy, hope, optimism, resilience The influence of cardiovascular fitness, and obesity, on executive function in a Stop-Signal Task: An electrophysiological study Chein-Heng Chu, Jen-Hao Liu, Chih-Han Wu, Chun-Chih Wang, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Prior research has suggested that cardiovascular fitness (CF) and obesity have significant positive and negative impacts on executive function (EF), respectively. Nevertheless, the interaction of these two combined factors on EF is less well understood.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of the CF of young adults with or without obese conditions, on the inhibitory aspect of EF, regarding both behavioral and electrophysiological activities. 96 young adults, aged 18-25, were recruited. Based on their CF and body mass index (BMI) values, they were assigned into the following four groups: high CF in normal BMI range (NH), low CF in normal BMI range (NL), high CF in obesity range (OH), and low CF in obese range (OL).
The performance of the Stop-Signal Task (SST) was utilized as the index of inhibition, and the N2 and P3 components of event-related potentials were analyzed offline. The higher CF participants (NH and OH groups) demonstrated superior behavioral performances compared to their lower CF counterparts (NL and OL), as reflected by shorter reaction times (RT) and higher accuracy. Additionally, a shorter stop-signal ST (SSRT) associated with the higher CF participants was observed.
Furthermore, larger P3 amplitude and shorter N2 latency were observed among the participants with higher CF, relative to the lower CF groups. Collectively, participants with a higher CF are associated with superior ability to allocate larger amounts of attentional resources, as well as faster evaluation speed toward the stop-signal, and these results might consequently be attributed to their better inhibitory performance. The present study provided first-hand evidence of the importance of CF on the inhibitory aspect of EF, and the detrimental effects of obesity that might be overcome by an improvement of CF.
Keywords: obesity, cardiovascular fitness, executive function, stop-signal task, SSRT Where are football players paying attention to when viewing football fields: Evidence from eye movements Chang Huang (Beijing Sport University), Zipeng Yang (University of York), Jie Li (Beijing Sport University) In football games, it is necessary for players to search the fields rapidly to find the key information for their ongoing actions. Here, using eye tracking technique, we studied how football players distribute attention when viewing scenes of football games for decision making. Twenty football players, who were certified as second or higher level players in China, and 20 non-players participated in the experiment (15 valid data in each group).
Participants were required to view football scenes as an offensive or a defensive player, and judge to which direction the player holding the ball would pass. Each picture was divided into several areas of interests (AOI), including the ball, the player who was holding the ball, the other offensive players, the defensive players, the spaces unavailable for passing (the spaces between the player holding the ball and the defensive player right in front of him) and available for passing. The hypothesis was that the experts could quickly discriminating the useful and useless areas, so that they would not spend much time looking at the spaces unavailable for passing when they were attacking.
Repeated measures ANOVAs were performed on the percentage of viewing time in each type of AOIs, with the type of participants (player, non-player) as the 624Posters Friday July 14th between-subject variable and the role of the viewer (offensive, defensive) as the within-subject variable. The results revealed a significant interaction on the percentage of viewing time in the spaces that were unavailable for passing, , which was due to that, when viewing as an offensive player, the players spent less percentage of time than the non-players fixating the spaces unavailable for passing. The results indicate that the experts could quickly discriminating informative and uninformative areas, and spend less time paying attention to less useful information for the action at the moment, while the amateurs would continuously waste attention and time on useless information.
Keywords: football players, eye movements, AOIs, attention distribution Association of 2D: 4D digit ratio with frailty and MMSE in community-dwelling older adultsand Human Development Celina Gonçalves (Sport Sciences Departament - Polytechnic Institute of Bragança, Portugal), Nuno Rocha (Laboratório de Reabilitação Psicossocial da Escola Superior de Saúde do Instituto Politécnico do Porto e Faculdade de Psicologia e Ciências da Educação da Universidade do Porto, Portugal) The 2D:4D ratio is an indicator of prenatal testosterone exposure (Fink, Manning, & Neave, 2006) and it is a fairly stable one (Anders, 2007). While there are some studies about the role of testosterone on frailty (Srinivas-Shankar & Wu, 2009) and cognitive decline (Moffat, 2005) in older adults, very few analyze the impact of prenatal testosterone exposure (Halil et al., 2013). Our aim was to understand the relation between 2D:4D ratio, frailty and cognitive decline in community-dwelling elderly people.
175 community-dwelling elderly people were recruited. We included the following instruments: Tilburg Frailty Indicator; Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe; Mini-Mental State Examination; scanner assessment of 2D and 4D fingers lengths of each hand; Barthel Index; and Lawton and Brody scale. Statistical analyses were conducted using software SPSS Statistics (v.23.0, SPSS Inc, IL) and were based on Pearson correlations and regressions.
We did not find any correlations between 2D:4D ratio and frailty measures, but we found a significant correlation between 2D:4D ratio and MMSE scores in the women sample. It is not possible to ascertain any contribution of prenatal exposure to androgens to the frailty status of community-dwelling elderly people, but we found that reduced prenatal exposure to testosterone in women may contribute to prevent cognitive decline in elderly women. Keywords: testosterone, cognitive decline; elderly people, frailty Habitual physical activity and social support in adolescents Celina Gonçalves (Sport Sciences Departament - Polytechnic Institute of Bragança), Vítor Pires Lopes (Sport Sciences Departament - Politechnic Institute of Bragança; Research Center in Sports Sciences, Health Sciences and Human Development (CIDESD), Portugal) The support of parents and friends seems central to the involvement of young people in physical activity (PA) (Atkins et al., 2015).
The purpose of this study was to analyze the importance of social support on PA levels in adolescents. 864 adolescents of both sexes were included. Participants were divided into two groups, Group 1: 12-15 years (Girls n=225; Boys n=202) and Group 2: 16-18 years (Girls n=226; Boys n=209).
To determine PA and sedentary behaviour (SB), the short version of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) was used; the specific types of PA assessed were walking (W), moderate (MPA), vigorous (VPA) and total score (TPA); a question about sitting time was included to determine SB. Perception of social support for PA was assessed with an adaptation of the Friend Support Scale for Portuguese language (Jago, Page, & Cooper, 2012). Statistical analyses were conducted using software SPSS Statistics (v.23.0) and were based on Spearman correlations.
In group 1, the girls showed a significant correlation between TPA and the friends in general, best friend and parents support. In boys there was only significant correlation between MPA and best friend 625Posters Friday July 14th support. In group 2 the girls VPA shows significant association with friends in general and the best friend support.
Also in girls the TPA was associated with the support of friends in general. In boys, the VPA and TPA are associated with friends support in general. SB doesn´t show association with any of the social support studied.
Consistent with the literature, social support from parents, peers, and best friends plays a key role in PA levels in adolescents. However, parents, friends and best friends seems to play different roles in PA social support. Keywords: parents, friends, best friend, sport Expert-novices differences in decision-making skill in soccer referees Cecilia Duarte Erales, Rossana Cuevas Ferrera (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, México.), Duarte Araújo (CIPER, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal) The referee is always making decisions and has to take them with a minimum of time (Murguía Cánovas, 2010; Díaz Pérez, 1990; García-Aranda Encinar, 2011).
The aim of this study was to compare expert with novice referees´ decision-making skill, according to the competences described in the Naturalistic Decision Making approach (Klein, 1997). The sample consisted of 35 soccer referees with experience between 2 months and 30 years. The diagnosis was made with interviews, video recording and an adapted version of the Decision Making Questionnaire for Trainers (Guia & Araújo, 2009).
The results show that the most used competence by all these referees is the Cognitive Adaptability to the Context and the less used is the Strategies to Manage the Uncertainty of the Context. Also, expert referees seem to use more the competence of Evaluation of the Situation; nevertheless, the competence that seem to be the less used for the expert referees is the Realization of Mental Simulations to Choose a Course of Action. The referees affirm that the context and the experience in similar situations helps them to develop new abilities, confirming findings from other studies (Sánchez López, Fernández, Silva Pereyra, Martínez Mesa, Moreno Aguirre 2014; Araújo, Davids $ Serpa, 2005; Carvalho, et al., 2011; Kanheman & Klein, 2009).
Keywords: referee, decision making, competences Does athletes’ perception of leadership differ according to goal achievement and sport success? A. Rui Gomes (University of Minho, School of Psychology, Portugal), Catarina Morais (University of Kent, School of Psychology, United Kigdom) Coaches influence athletes’ well-being by the way they evaluate and respond to sports activity.
Previous research has established that transformational leadership produces better results in team performance than other forms of leadership, like transactional (e.g. Arthur et al, 2011). However, there is less evidence regarding how athletes’ perceptions of leadership differ according to their perception of goal achievement at the individual and team levels and according to their sports performance.
Data was collected for 180 male junior soccer players aged between 16-18 years, competing in 1st/2nd national divisions, at the beginning (T1) and end (T2) of the sports season. Three leadership areas (transformational, transactional, and decision making), goal achievement in sport, and team performance were evaluated, using the adapted Portuguese versions of the TTQ, MSLS, and PGI scales (Beauchamp et al, 2010; Gomes & Resende, 2014; Mata & Gomes, 2013). A Group (High vs Low) x Time (T1 vs T2) mixed ANOVA was conducted using SPSS.
Results showed that athletes with (a) a higher perception of individual goal achievement evaluated their coaches more positively; (b) a higher perception of team goal achievement started the season with a less positive evaluation of their coaches but ended the season with a more positive evaluation; and (c) higher sport performance evaluated their coaches less positively in two domains of transformational leadership but ended the season by attributing less negative feedback and passive management to their coaches. In sum, this study suggests that coaches are 626Posters Friday July 14th evaluated differently by athletes who have higher and lower goal achievement at the individual and team levels and by athletes who have better and worse sport’s performance. These differences in the evaluation of coaches occurred at the three levels of leadership, suggesting that coaches can augment their efficacy by adopting positive behaviors in these domains.
Keywords: leadership, goal achievement, team performance The impact of mental routines on performance enhancement of young tennis athletes Catarina Morais (University of Kent, School of Psychology. United Kingdom), A. Rui Gomes (University of Minho, School of Psychology.
Portugal) Pre-service mental preparation routine is a common performance enhancement and coping strategy used by tennis players (cf.Gould, 2001).Mental routines include, for example, relaxation, imagery, and self-talk strategies. The present study aimed to test the efficacy of mental routines on performance of young tennis athletes.A cognitive-behavioral intervention was implemented aiming to help athletes’ to develop a systematic behavioral and cognitive preparation prior to serve.The cognitive component of the routine was introduced at the education phase, in which athletes were instructed and taught to analyze the game, decide the type of serve they wanted to perform and commit with that decision, and to have a positive self-talk before the point. The behavioral component consisted on teaching athletes how to assess good posture, positive body language, and physical regulation (through breathing exercises).During training sessions, and when necessary, corrections on athletes’ posture, body language, and physical regulation were made in order to allow them to consistently perform the pre-serve routine.Their service games’ efficacy (percentage of service games won) and mental toughness (an evaluation of mental routine, error management and positive self-talk) were measured before and after the intervention.Their efficacy on service games when they perform (vs.
when they do not) the mental routines was also compared. Data was collected before and after the intervention, during one year. 84 service games from 10 different athletes (aged between 10 and 15-years old) were analysed using mixed ANOVA, regression and mediation analyses (Process Hayes, 2008).The results revealed:(1)a positive impact of the intervention programme on performance efficacy;(2)athletes win more service games when they perform the mental routines;and(3)this relationship is mediated by mental toughness.In conclusion, the implementation of mental routines improved athletes’efficacy in their service games.
Keywords: mental routine, mental toughness, psychological intervention, performance enhancement Anger management and perfectionism in youth tennis players of a high performance sport center Carlos Arnoldo Ceballos Aguayo, Diana Lorena Flores Escalante, Paulina Campos Romero (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán), Juan González Hernández (Universidad de Murcia) The present document is a preliminary study that examine the control and expression of anger and the perfectionism in young mexican tennis players from the high performance sport center “Real Credit Tennis Center”. Competition sports are considered a field where variables such as perfectionism are present, either because of the high demand of the sport or because of the goals and personality of each individual (Dunn, Babiak, Causgrove Dunn y Syrotuik, 2002). Within sports, perfectionism can be associated with the anger expression (Hewitt et.
al., 1991). Participants were six tennis players with ages between 14 and 16 years (M=14.44 years and a SD=1.04), the employed instruments were the State- Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI- NA, Del Barrio, Spielberger & Aluja, 2005) and the Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (MPS-F, Franco, Mancilla-Díaz, Álvarez, Vázquez & López, 2010). It was observed that the participants obtained punctuations outside the expected ranges for their age in the subscales of external expression, external control, internal control and total control, obtaining results below the 25th percentile and above the 75th 627Posters Friday July 14th percentile, which may indicate poor management of control and expression of anger in accordance with the autors Del Barrio, Spielberger & Aluja (2005).
Likewise, referring the perfectionism variable (Franco, Mancilla- Díaz, Álvarez, Vázquez & López, 2010) it was found that the tennis players overvalue order and organization and their personal standards are elevated, both maladaptative behaviors that can make them judge their achievements in an inadequate way and experiment uncertainty about their performance (Frost, Marten, Lahart y Rosenblate, 1990; Purdon, Antony & Swinson, 1999). Therefore, it is considerate necessary to strengthen young athletes in anger management and in the decrease of maladaptive behavior of perfectionism, in order to help them to achieve an optimal emotional state and improve their sports performance. Keywords: anger expression, anger control,athletic performance, perfectionism Portuguese badminton on the way to the olympic games Rio 2016, a holistic aproach Carla Martins (ISMAT), Pedro Martins, José Guilherme (ISMAT), Rui Rego (Universidade do Algarve), António Paula Brito (FMH-UTL) We aimed to qualify a badminton player for the Rio2016 Olympics.
From a case study, we have applied a holistic approach that crosses sport psychology, neuro-linguistic programming, and sport coaching, consisting of 4 stages. The player is 24 years old; has 18 years of a sports career. 2012, participates in the London Olympics.
May 2013 he is injured. By October 2014, he dropped 1598 positions to 1650 of the World Ranking (WR). Started university at age 22.
From a SWOT analysis at the 1st stage we defined the present state. Strengths: experience and competitive level; athletes’ motivation; family support and friends network; municipality support. Weaknesses: unmotivated coach; absence of opponents, multidisciplinary team and medical support; he was absolutely alone in international competitions, dealing with logistics and competition issues; high qualification costs.
Opportunities: mental coach presence; Olympic solidarity bursary; support from colleagues and University; financial awards obtained. Threats: qualifying; injuries; difficulties in the clubs organization; overlapping his studies with the qualification; 27 international matches carried out in 15 months; great emotional challenge; food differences in countries; Jet leg; Zika virus; impossibility for the mental coach to develop a more systematic work. Stage 2, defined the desired state, qualification for the Olympics2016.
Stage 3, defined a plan of action: formulated objectives; focused on resources under the athlete's control; private doctor; he planned his training; articulated with his coach and club; how to communicate; raised sponsorships; anticipated logistical contingencies in competitions; managed university and qualification for the Olympics demandings. Stage 4, evaluation, present in all stages. In 17 months he climbs 1585 positions in the WR, obtaining 15 medals.
May 2016, he qualified in position 34 for the Olympics. where he played 2 games and lost, although at certain times he was in advantage. Keywords: case study, holistic aproach, neuro-linguistic programming, sport coaching, resilience The resumption of a Portuguese Olympic dream Carla Martins (ISMAT), Pedro Martins, José Guilherme (ISMAT), Rui Rego (Universidade do Algarve), António Paula Brito (FMH-UTL-) From October 2014, a case study was developed with a 24 year-old injured badminton player from Algarve who participated in London 2012 Olympic Games.
He was 45 times national champion and 19 times international medallist and was in position 1650 of the World Ranking. With a career of 19 years and after 17 months out of the international circuit, we aimed to prepare him to resume and qualify for the 2016 Olympic Games. Based on sports psychology, neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) and sports coaching a holistic approach was developed.
After an initial SWOT analysis, it was decided to participate in the Moroccan International Tournament. The athlete was prepared in one month. Performed a total of 8 sessions.
2 linked to 628Posters Friday July 14th the training and educational phase of the Psychological Training Skills (PTS), in which we stablish two goals, learning NLP tools and achieve the 1st place. 1 session, so that the mental coach (MC) could see the athlete and club during training. 3 sessions, to operationalize the practice and achievement phases of PTS.
1 more session to accompany the athlete during his trip, this communication was mediated by Viber1. During the last session we did the PTS evaluation phase. Focusing on enhancing the resources, discipline and autonomy, that were under his control, was decisive - “having to go and give my best, without having to think about things that wouldn’t depend on me and also not having the pressure of victory, made me feel lighter".
During face-to-face sessions, the MC calibrated the athlete and systematically evaluated the congruence between verbal, para- verbal and non-verbal communication. The learning process of NLP tools were measured by the observation and calibration of micro behaviours of the athlete and by the content analysis of his self-assessment and internal dialogues. The athlete came first and the Olympic dream was catapulted into another dimension!
1Viber: mobile phone application used for communications. Keywords: case study, neuro-linguistic programming, sport coaching Is there variation in burnout levels in soccer athletes during a season? Camila Cristina Fonseca Bicalho (Universidade do Estado de Minas Gerais), Cristiane Bhering Moretzsohn da Silva (Colégio Padre Eustáquio), Varley Teoldo da Costa (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais) Burnout is a syndrome capable of affecting young soccer players’ during different moments of a season (Adie, Duda, & Ntoumanis, 2012).
Little is known about the variability of burnout levels in young soccer players those are close to reaching professionalism. The aim of this study was to verify the variability of burnout levels in U-20 Brazilian soccer athletes during three distinct periods of the season. A total of fifty-three U- 20 soccer athletes were evaluated (M age=19.20 years, SD=0.96).
The Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ), Brazilian version, was used to evaluate symptoms of sport devaluation (SPD), emotional/physical exhaustion (EPE), reduced sense of accomplishment (RSA) and burnout total score (BT). ABQ has been applied once in each period of season: return from vacation, training and competition. The statistic procedures adopted were: Mean (M) and standard deviation (SD) the Kolmogorov- Smirnov.
As the normality test was not confirmed we used the Friedman test (p<0.05). The burnout values for each period of season were found: Vacation SPD (M=1.34, SD=0.31), EPE (M=1.79, SD=0.60), RSA (M=1.97, SD=0.63), BT (M=1.70, SD=0.39); Training SPD (M=1.47, SD=0.39), EPE (M=1.86, SD=0.51), RSA (M=1.87, SD=0.55), BT (M=1.75, SD=0.33); Competition SPD (M=1.43, SD=0.39), EPE (M=1.92, SD=0.66), RSA (M=1.97, SD=0.61), BT(M=1.77, SD=0.41). The variability of BT indicators during the three periods of a season were not observed.
Only the SPD dimension was presented significant differences during the periods of training-vacation (p<.01) and competition-vacation (p<.01), however there were no difference between training and competition (p=.58). It is concluded that for this sample, burnout did not present variability along the season, demonstrating a certain behavioural stability in the perception of athletes. However, the levels of the SPD dimension varied in the period of vacation /training and vacation /competition.
Keywords: burnout, soccer, athletes, longitudinal study Youth academy athletes’ parents’ participation on sports practice Camila Castro Barros Valicente, Marisa Lucia de Mello Santiago, Maria Regina Capanema Bahia, Murillo José Lemos Nogueira (Minas Tênis Clube) Sport is a phenomenon in the actual social model, which includes institutions like family, school and the sportive club. This connection is close and is associated to the development of the athlete's value, and the parents influence is a determining factor, validating the study of Bloom, 1985, Stambulova, 1994, Coté, 1999. The chance of success is bigger when the right support is given since the childhood and during the first years of 629Posters Friday July 14th practice.
The goal of the study was identify what role have the parents of a competitive Brazilian club regarding to the types of influence during the development of their careers. A qualitative research was made, in wich the athletes answered surveys, classifying the kinds of help they received from their parents. The sample had 560 children and teenagers, which 324 were between 11 and 14 years old, and 242 aging between 15 and 19 years.
The sports were: swimming, futsal, judo, tennis, basketball, volleyball, and gymnastics. Parents were classified by their athlete children as supporters, demanding, presents and absent, as well as how much they give technical tips for their kids. Results show 51.12% are supporter parents, 39.32% are present, 10.60% are demanding and 3.35% are absent.
Regarding the technical tips frequency, there were changes between the 11 to 14 years old athletes and the 15 to 19 years old group: in the younger group the technical tip frequency was classified as sometimes (45.37%), always (22.84%), often (20.99%) and never (10.80%), while in the older athlete group there was a significant increase in never (28.51%), complementing with sometimes (40.91%), often (14.46%) and always (16.12%). This survey data showed parents are present and supportive. However, 11 to 14 years old athletes’ parents give more technical tips than the 15 to 19 years old.
These results evidence the older the athlete is the less their parents give technical tips, although they continue present and supportive. Keywords: athletes, parents, participation Impact of passion on the hope perception among Brazilian athletes Caio Rosas Moreira, Nayara Malheiros Caruzzo, Selso Ananias, Patrícia Carolina Borsato Passos (State University of Maringá) Sports passion is a feeling that can affect athletes' behavior, as well as the internalization process of sport in their lives. This study derived from the Dualistic Model of Passion (Vallerand, 2015) and the Hope Theory (Snyder, 2000).
Hope Theory addresses the dedication intensity to activity dimensions, implying on athletes and their capacity to formulate pathways to reach goals. This study investigated the impact of sports passion on hope perception among Brazilian athletes. The subjects were 590 male (51.2%) and female (48.8%) high performance athletes (22.87±5.45 years), from team (n=467) and individual sports (n=123).
Data collection was conducted through Passion Scale and Dispositional Hope Scale and was analyzed using Mann-Whitney test, Spearman's coefficient and multiple regressions. Results showed that team sports athletes had greater harmonious and obsessive passion, when compared with individual sports (p <0.01); harmonious passion and passion criterion were correlated with all hope dimensions (agency, pathways and global hope) (p<0.05), graded as moderated among individual sports athletes and low to moderated for team sports athletes (p<0.05). Regressions demonstrated that in both groups only the harmonious passion had positive and significant impact on hope, explaining 14% of agency and pathways variability, and 18% of global hope in team sports.
For individual sports athletes the harmonious passion impacted 25% of the agency and 22% of the global hope (p<0.05). It was concluded that passion and hope are correlated constructs, demonstrating that athletes who autonomously internalize sport practice in their identity have greater possibility of increasing their levels of hope. Keywords: passion, hope, sport Perfectionism and satisfaction of basic psychological needs: a study in the Brazilian futsal context Caio Rosas Moreira (State University of Maringá), José Roberto Andrade do Nascimento Junior (Federal University of Vale do São Francisco) Perfectionism is a personality trait that presents both adaptive and maladaptive functions for sports performance, being able to be highlighted as a facilitator psychological element for better results and as a 630Posters Friday July 14th feature of Olympic champions.
In this sense, the basic psychological needs (BPN) satisfaction emerges as a potential factor to be studied, once this psychological attribute is related to dedication, trust and commitment of the athletes in the sport. Thereby, understanding how perfectionistic traits directly affect BPN is of utmost importance for the pursuit of maximum sports performance. This study investigated perfectionism traits and BPN satisfaction in the Brazilian futsal context.
The subjects were 301 athletes (25.48 ± 4.90 years old), starters (n=156) and reserves (n=145), participants of the Brazilian League 2013. The instruments were the Sport Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale-2 and the Basic Needs Satisfaction in Sport Scale. Data analyses were conducted through Spearman's Correlation and Multiple Regression.
Results showed that "Personal patterns/organization" was positively associated with BPN in both groups, while "Perceived parental pressure" and "Doubts in action" were negatively associated with BPN (p <0.05). In the regression, "Personal standards/organization" had a positive effect on BPN in all groups. It should be noted that among titular athletes the impact was on the "Relatedness" (β=0.17), while for reserves on "Competence" (β=0.17) (p<0.05).
"Doubts in action" had a negative impact in both groups, being that for the starters it impacted athletes’ "Autonomy" (β=-0.22), while for the reserves the effect was on "Autonomy" (β=-0.21) and "Competence" (β=- 0.16) (p<0.05). It was concluded that while the perfectionistic strivings favour athletes’ BPN satisfaction, perfectionistic concerns weaken these needs satisfaction, regardless of players’ position. Keywords: perfectionism, basic needs, sport, futsal Talent development and athletes’ fulfillment in nigerian secondary school sports competition Blessing Oluwatunbi (Sport Psychology Association of Nigeria), Grace Otinwa (Nigeria Association for Sport Science and Medicine), Olanrewaju Ipinmoroti (Sport Psychology Association of Nigeria), Adeolu Adesokan The purpose of this study was to examine the influence of school sports competition on talent development and athletes’ fulfillment (satisfaction) in Nigerian secondary schools.
Three hypotheses were formulated: regular school sport activities, school inter-house sports competition and participation in school sports will have no significant influence on talent development (TD) and athletes’ fulfillment (AF) in Nigerian secondary schools. Descriptive survey research method was employed. 200 athletes and 20 sport masters / mistresses, selected randomly from 4 secondary schools in Ikeja Local Government Education Area of Lagos State, Nigeria were used in the study.
The instrument used for data collection were self-structured, validated, 2 point scale questionnaires with a reliability coefficient of 0.83 named, “School Sports Influence on Talent Development and Athletes’ Fulfillment Questionnaire-I & II” (SSITDAFQ-I for athletes & II for sports masters/mistresses). Athletes’ performance improvement and performance satisfaction were used to measure TD and AF variables respectively. SSITDAFQ-I&II were developed by the researchers and administered on selected respondents.
The data collected was used to develop a frequency distribution table for analysis. The descriptive statistics of frequency counts and percentages were used in presenting the data collected, while inferential statistics of t-test was used to test all hypotheses at a 0.05 level of significance. The hypotheses were tested and all rejected.
The findings from the study indicated that regular school sport activities, school inter-house sports competition and participation in school sports all had significant influence on TD and AF. In addition, reward, win or loss and coaching strategies had further impact on AF. It was recommended that in sports competition, athletes should be rewarded right from participation level whether they won or lost.
Keywords: school sports competition, fulfillment, athletes, talent development 631Posters Friday July 14th Assessment of the predisposing factors to self-efficacy among university athletes in South- West, Nigeria Celina Adewunmi (Sport Psychology Association of Nigeria), Blessing Oluwatunbi (Sport Psychology Association of Nigeria), Olanrewaju Ipinmoroti (Sport Psychology Association of Nigeria), Abiodun Moronfolu (Nigeria Association for Physical, Health Education, Recreation, Sports and Dance) The purpose of this study was to assess the predisposing factors to self-efficacy among university athletes in south-west Nigeria. Descriptive survey research method was employed. A total of 500 athletes, selected randomly from 5 universities in South-West geopolitical zone of Nigeria were used in the study.
The instrument used to collect data for the study was a self-structured questionnaire named “Self-Efficacy Factors Assessment Questionnaire (SEFAQ)”. This was developed by the researcher and validated by three experts in sports psychology. The test-retest method was used in establishing the reliability of the instrument (r=0.73).
A total of 500 copies of the validated instrument were administered on selected respondents using the spot method. The data collected was used to develop a frequency distribution table for analysis. The descriptive statistics of frequency counts and percentages was used in presenting the data collected, while inferential statistics of t- test was used to test all hypotheses at a 0.05 level of significance.
Three (3) research hypotheses were formulated and tested. The findings from the study indicated that level of preparation, coaching strategies and quality of opposition all had significant influence on self-efficacy among university athletes in South-West Nigeria. It was however recommended from the study that athletes in universities all over the country should be better prepared before any competition in other to make them exhibit high level of self-efficacy.
Keywords: assessment, self efficacy, predisposing factors, athletes The influence of college students' physical exercise on core self-evaluation: The mediating role of physical self-esteem Bin Xie, Jia Lin Guo (xi'an Physical Education University) The purpose of this study is to determine whether physical self-esteem is an intermediary variable when physical exercise affects the core self-evaluation, by analyzing the relationship of these variables, then to provide theoretical foundation for the practice of improving psychological health of undergraduate through physical exercise intervention. Randomly selected 360 college students from the three universities to fill in questionnaire on Physical Exercise Grade Questionnaire, Core self-evaluation Scale and Physical Self-esteem Scale, 307 valid questionnaires were collected。Correlation Analysis, Independent Simple T test and Regression Analysis were used to process data，the results indicates：that the score of physical self – worth, subjective physical attraction and physical self-esteem for college students with high intensity exercise are significantly higher than the score for the college students with low exercise intensity；the score of subjective physical attraction and physical self-esteem for college students with weekly exercise frequency greater than or equal to three times are significantly higher than the score for non-exercise group and participation group；Physical exercise intensity does not affect core self-evaluation scores，While the frequency of exercise affects the core self-evaluation，The higher frequency of exercise is, the higher core on core self-evaluation is. In the test of intermediary effect on physical self-esteem，the total effect of physical exercise on core self-evaluation is 0.157 (P <0.01)， which indicated that physical self-esteem only played part mediating role in exercise influencing core self-evaluation, and intermediary role is mainly reflected in sense of physical self-value, subjective physical attraction and physical self-esteem total score.
Keywords: physical exercise, physical self-esteem, core self-evaluation, mediating role 632Posters Friday July 14th Coach-athlete relationship and athletes’ performance satisfaction: The mediating effects of hope and athlete engagement Bin Wang In competitive sports, coaches and athletes were indispensable participants, whose relationship was also the most pivotal relationship. Coach-athlete relationship (CAR) was defined as a situation in which coaches’ and athletes’ emotions, thoughts, and behaviors were mutually and causally interconnected. Although previous study had investigated the relationship between CAR and athletes’ performance satisfaction, we didn’t know the mechanism between them.
Based on 3+1Cs model of CAR, this study aimed to investigate how CAR influenced performance satisfaction among athletes, and the mediating role of hope and athlete engagement in the relationship between CAR and athletes’ performance satisfaction. Data for the present study were collected from 483 Chinese athletes, who completed the Coach-Athlete Relationship Questionnaire, the Trait Hope Scale, the Athlete Engagement Questionnaire, the Athlete Satisfaction Questionnaire. The results showed that CAR was positively correlated with hope(r=0.33, p <0.01), athlete engagement(r=0.41, p<0.01), and performance satisfaction(r=0.36, p<0.01).
Furthermore, CAR could positively predict performance satisfaction through (a) direct effect (β=0.18, p<0.01), (b) the mediation effect of hope (β=0.17, p<0.01), (c) the mediation effect of athlete engagement (β=0.04, p<0.01), and (d) the serial multiple mediation effects of hope and athlete engagement(β=0.05, p<0.01). The results suggested that through improving the quality of CAR, the level of hope and engagement among athletes could be increased, and then their performance satisfaction could be enhanced. Keywords: coach-athlete relationship,athletes’ performance satisfaction,hope,athlete engagement Effects of two different protocols of weight training in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Bianca Andrade de Sousa, Salma Soleman Hernandez, Rudney da Silva (Santa Catarina State University) According to a report by Alzheimer's Disease International (2015), dementia affects approximately 50 million people worldwide and almost 10 million new cases are identified per year, and studies are being carried out aiming to find more effective strategies for prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
In this context, physical exercise has been pointed out as an important non-pharmacological intervention tool, especially weight training (WT). However, despite the benefits of WT for health, there are still many gaps. Thus, this study aimed to compare the effects of two different WT protocols in individuals with AD.
Therefore, 16 patients with mild and moderate levels of AD participated in the study. Socio-demographic, clinical and stage of AD data was collected (Clinical Dementia Rating Scale - CDR) as well as cognitive data (Montréal Cognitive Assessment – MoCA; Verbal Fluency Test - VF). Experimental interventions lasted 14 weeks, and in this context the experimental group with mild intensity (G20RM;n=10) trained three times a week and the moderate intensity group (G12RM;n=6) trained twice a week.
The data was analysed through descriptive and inferential statistical using the Mann Whitney U-Test for comparison between groups before and after the experiment and the Wilcoxon test for intra-group comparison, with a significance level of 5% for all analysis. The results don’t show significant differences between the groups for the socio-demographic characteristics (age, schooling and time of illness), neither between the groups before (MoCA:12.8±4.2 and 11.0±2.8pts, VF:6.0±3.6 and 7.2±3.6pts) and after (MoCA:11.6±5.0 and 11.3±2.0pts, VF:5.7±4.0 and 6.5±3.3pts) the experimental protocol nor the intragroup comparisons. However, the means obtained before and after the protocol indicated maintenance of the cognitive functions in both groups, concluding that the practice of WT can be assumed for cognitive stimulation of patients with AD.
Keywords: alzheimer disease, elderly, weight training 633Posters Friday July 14th Coaches of masters athletes: Beliefs and perceptions of their influence on athletes Bettina Callary (Cape Breton University), Bradley W. Young (University of Ottawa) Adults represent a fast growing sport cohort, but little is known about tailoring sport programming to their needs. Masters Athletes (MAs; typically 35+ years who regularly train) who have coaches have described diverse benefits to being coached, including sport specific (e.g., skill improvement, self-efficacy, heightened sport interest, self-determination) and non-sport benefits (e.g., improvements in health and personal development; Callary et al., 2015; Medic et al., 2012).
Since coach perceptions may influence the ways they coach MAs, the purpose of the study was to explore how coaches perceive their MAs’ motives and accommodate their interests, and how coaches perceive their influence on MAs. Data were collected via in- depth interviews with 11 coaches (four female, seven male; ages 36-66) of Masters swimmers, who ranged in coaching experience from three to 20 years. Following thematic analyses (Braun & Clark, 2006), results indicated that coaches perceived MAs had specific motives for being coached (e.g., technical improvement, structure, and management through researched and planned practices; sense of belonging through coaches creating social support; and safety, health, and fitness related motives).
Their reasons for coaching corresponded with athletes’ motives (e.g., sharing sport expertise; social affiliation and feeling one’s contribution is valued; and self-improvement related to health and fitness). Further, coaches felt they possessed personal characteristics that their MAs liked. While the coaches believed they influenced MAs’ sport performance, skill improvement, and motivation, they generally noted they did not influence development beyond sport.
The results are discussed in relation to MAs’ preferences and needs from coaches and the heterogeneity of adult groups, while considering how ageism in sport might influence coaches’ perceptions. Implications for coach education: The importance of coaches understanding how to effectively work with adults. Keywords: coaching, masters athletes, influence, ageism, perception, adults Evaluation of an exercise programme to improve quality of life recovery as a rehabilitation strategy in cancer process Bernat-Carles Serdà (Universitat de Girona (UdG)), Montserrat Grau (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB)), Míriam Barra (Escola Universitària de la Salut i l'Esport (EUSES)), Arantza del Valle (Universitat de Girona (UdG)) QoL is multidimensional, dynamic and modular in its paradigm.
The challenge in the interpretation of QoL data in clinical research is that QoL is influenced by psychological phenomena such as adaptation to illness. The effect of the changeable nature of QoL is the resulting shift in the patient’s assessment. QoL shift for a number of reasons: measurement intervals no longer have the same psychological anchors (recalibration), the importance attributed to different domains changes over time (reprioritization), and the definition of QoL differs throughout the disease continuum (reconceptualization).
This research aims to obtain a valid and sensitive assessment of QoL change over the disease, and to evaluate a rehabilitation programme to invert the observed decreasing of QoL when patients return to daily living activities. The method was a sequential triangulation between quantitative and qualitative methods. 66 men were included in the sample.
QoL was assessed in 4 periods: P1 at diagnosis moment, P2 a post-test on discharge moment, P3 a then-test measurement two weeks after discharge (retrospective evaluation). After returning home patients were randomized in experimental and control group. Experimental group assisted to a rehabilitation program during 24 weeks.
P4 includes QoL assessment after this period for both Control (P4c) and Experimental Group (P4e). Results show that from baseline to post-test, QoL significantly decreased. The recalibration then-test confirmed a low QoL in all periods evaluated.
Experimental and control group proves the positive effect of the Rehabilitation Program on QoL. Understanding the dynamic of QoL over time will help to adapt rehabilitation programs improving its sensitivity and efficacy, and would give professionals an accurate perception of 634Posters Friday July 14th treatment and side-effects impact in patients’ QoL. Results underline the importance of a health professional change towards a watchful waiting on QoL until its recovery in the daily living Keywords: quality of life, prostate cancer, response shift, rehabilitation A nutritional program for physical education instructors to improve their competences as agents of change Beatriz Galilea Ballarini (Consell Català de l'Esport.
Generalitat de Cataluña), Catarina Sousa, Marta Carrasco (Instituto de Educación Física. INEFC), Antonia Zamora (Consell Català de l'Esport. Generalitat de Cataluña) The present work aims to design, implement and evaluate a nutritional training program for physical education instructors.
Studies show the need to include sports agents in nutritional training and not just the athletes. Twenty physical education instructors between 18 and 25 years old participated in this program. At the beginning and at the end of the study, participants completed a 24-hour dietary record for 3 days ( Mataix,2002) and also their basic knowledge of a balanced diet( Zawilla2003), their attitudes and resources in relation to deficient nutrition cases were assessed through case studies.
The training program consisted of a total of 4 workshops lasting approximately 2 hours each. The workshops were included in the ongoing training program of the physical education instructors. A mean comparison before and after the program for the knowledge questionnaire and qualitative comparison of the 24-h dietary registered were applied for data analysis.
Results show that participants improve their knowledge at the end of the study, that they identify and manage adequately cases of unhealthy nutrition and also improve their daily dietary habits. We can conclude that the specific training program improves the knowledge and skills of the instructors as agents of change. The program helps to prevent and solve risk behavior of eating disorders in the field of physical activity.
Future investigations should see the benefits of a similar training program for caches especially in sport with weigth requeriments. Keywords: physical education instructors,healthy behaviors; nutritional training, coach The moral disengagement in doping scale (MDDS): Validity and reliability of the Turkish version Bahri Gürpinar, Mert Nalbant (Akdeniz University, Faculty of Sport Sciences), Maria Kavussanu (University of Birmingham, School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences) The purpose of this study was to test the factorial validity and reliability of the Turkish Version of the Moral Disengagement in Doping Scale (MDDS) developed by Kavussanu et.al, (2016). The Turkish version was translated from English with the back-translation method.
The scale consists of one factor and 6 items that measure the six mechanisms of moral disengagement proposed by Bandura (1991). The questionnaire was administered to 264 (110 female 154 male) athletes from 32 different types of sports. The athletes were aged between 17-31 years old.
The mean age was 19.25±1.96. The mean sport experience was 4.85±3.15. Data were collected from the athletes who entered the school of physical education and sport entrance exams and 47 of them were national athletes from different sport branches.
The scale showed good internal consistency with Cronbach’s Alpha Coefficient of .78. For linguistic equivalence, both versions were completed by 26 people who spoke both English and Turkish (rs = .86). The Kaiser-Meier-Olkin (KMO) test used in order to assess the appropriateness of the sample size for the factor analysis.
The Bartlett test was used to determine whether the data were normally distributed. The KMO value have been found 0.83 and Bartlett test was significant (Chi- square: 366.506, df: 15, p: 0.000). The factorial validity of The MDDS was examined using confirmatory factor analysis.
With analysis made with LISREL, fit indices shows good or excellent fit (x2/df=2.41; RMSEA=0.073; GFI=0.97; AGFI=0.094; SRMR=0.038; CFI=0.98; NNFI=0.097). After the modification were made between the items 1 and 2, fit indices showed excellent fit (x2/df=1.44; RMSEA=0.041; GFI=0.99; AGFI=0.096; SRMR=0.027; 635Posters Friday July 14th CFI=1.00; NNFI=0.099). The overall results indicate that the MDDS is a reliable and valid instrument that can be used to assess the Turkish student athletes’ moral disengagement mechanisms in relation to doping.
Keywords: moral disengagement in doping, validity, reliability Value systems of Turkish youth athletes Bahri Gürpinar, Serkan Toprak (Akdeniz University, Institute of Social Sciences), Merve Ayvalli (Akdeniz University), Jean Whitehead (University of Brighton) The aims of this study were to test the validity and reliability of a Turkish version of the Youth Sport Values Questionnaire (YSVQ: Lee, Whitehead and Balchin, 2000) and to reveal the value system of young Turkish athletes. The questionnaire consists of 18 items. These have high ecological validity because they were obtained directly from young competitors.
Each item is a proxy for a different value and they are considered to represent a comprehensive set. The response format is a rating scale of the importance of the values to participants. Group scores for each value can be ranked in order of importance, and this hierarchy represents the value system of the group.
The Turkish version was developed using the back-translation method. The appropriateness of the items in Turkey and the content validity of the questionnaire was provided by expert opinions. The questionnaire was administered to 304 athletes (105 girls 199 boys) from 6 different sports who were members of sports clubs in the province of Denizli.
The students were aged between 11-18 (mean 14.06±1.92). The mean sport experience was 4.27±2.36 years. Results showed high test-retest reliability over 15 days (rs = .91) and high linguistic equivalence in participants who answered both English and Turkish versions (rs = .87).
In the hierarchy of Turkish values the top 3 were contract maintenance (4.28±1.03), personal achievement (4.27±1.08) and being fair (4.20±1.18). The bottom 3 were enjoyment (3.35±1.74), tolerance (2.88±1.74) and winning (2.23±1.99). Correlation between the Turkish and UK mean value scores was calculated.
Overall the Turkish value system had a medium correlation with the UK system (rs = .48). Enjoyment ranked much lower than in other nations and this reflects the impact of the Turkish military and political situation. The overall results indicate that the YSVQ is a reliable and valid instrument that can be used to assess the Turkish student athletes’ value systems.
Keywords: values, value systems, validity, reliability, Turkey Auto-efficacy, situational and external factors in amateur, beginner and competitive Mexican runners Diana Vázquez, Erika Alejandra Lorenzo Contreras (UNAM) Within the world of sports multiple factors are involved, hence the complexity to achieve maximum sports performance. Athletes with high levels of self-efficacy are proactive to regulate their cognitions, motivations and emotions, which grants them an advantage to meet the challenges presented to them (Gutiérrez & Ureña, 2013); however, they must be prepared for any situation or demand. The purpose of this research was to determine if there are statistically significant differences among runners in self-efficacy, situational (uncertainty management and importance given to competition) and external factors.
Three groups were assessed: amateur runners (N=40), beginner runners (N=40) and competitive runners (N=40), ages 15 to 33 (X= 20.43, S.D.=3.62), using the Situational and External Factors for Athletes Scale (EFSED, Vázquez & Silva, 2015) and the Perceived General Self-Efficacy Scale (Acosta, Padilla, Sánchez & Guevara, 2003). A one-way ANOVA was performed, revealing statistically non-significant differences in self-efficacy and external factors among the three groups of runners. To assess situational factors (uncertainty management and importance given to competition), a Student’s t-test was carried out to compare beginner and competitive runners.
Results showed statistically significant differences between the two groups: competitive (and more experienced) runners are more capable of managing uncertainty during a competition than beginners. These findings highlight the importance of 636Posters Friday July 14th helping athletes to focus their attention on situations they can control as well as being prepared for any situation presented to them, therefore providing valuable information for the design of better intervention strategies for athletes. Keywords: sports, athletes, auto-efficacy, uncertainty, runners Eye quietness and quiet eye in expert and novice golf performance: an electrooculographic analysis Germano Gallicchio (School of Sport, Exercise & Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham), Andrew Cooke (School of Sport, Health & Exercise Sciences, Bangor University), Christopher Ring (School of Sport, Exercise & Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham) Quiet eye (QE) is the final ocular fixation on the target of an action (e.g., the ball in golf putting).
Camera- based eye-tracking studies have consistently found longer QE durations in experts than novices; however, mechanisms underlying QE are not known. To offer a new perspective we examined the feasibility of measuring the QE using electrooculography (EOG) and developed an index to assess ocular activity across time: eye quietness (EQ). Ten expert and ten novice golfers putted 60 balls to a 2.4 m distant hole.
Horizontal EOG (2 ms resolution) was recorded from two electrodes placed on the outer sides of the eyes. QE duration was measured using a EOG voltage threshold and comprised the sum of the pre-movement and post-movement initiation components. EQ was computed as the standard deviation of the EOG in 0.5 s bins from –4 to +2 s, relative to backswing initiation: lower values indicate less movement of the eyes, hence greater quietness.
Finally, we measured club-ball address and swing durations. T-tests showed that total QE did not differ between groups (p = .31); however, experts had marginally shorter pre-movement QE (p = .08) and longer post-movement QE (p < .001) than novices. A group × time ANOVA revealed that experts had less EQ before backswing initiation and greater EQ after backswing initiation (p = .002).
QE durations were inversely correlated with EQ from –1.5 to 1 s (rs = –.48 - –.90, ps = .03 - .001). Experts had longer swing durations than novices (p = .01) and, importantly, swing durations correlated positively with post-movement QE (r = .52, p = .02) and negatively with EQ from 0.5 to 1 s (r = –.63, p = .003). This study demonstrates the feasibility of measuring ocular activity using EOG and validates EQ as an index of ocular activity.
Its findings challenge the dominant perspective on QE and provide new evidence that expert-novice differences in ocular activity may reflect differences in the kinematics of how experts and novices execute skills. Keywords: electrooculography, eye quietness, golf putting, kinematics, psychophysiology, quiet eye Strategies used during mental rotation of hand images depend on imagery difficulty Aya Takayama (Hiroshima University) In a common mental rotation task, pictures of the right or left hand are presented at different angles of rotation. Subjects are required to judge the laterality (right or left) of hands as quickly and accurately as possible.
To make the correct judgment, subjects implicitly imagine moving their own hand from its orientation into the orientation of the stimulus. In the present study, we investigated whether the brain detects a match in shape between an imagined hand and a visually presented hand or detects a mismatch in shape between the two during the task. To address the question, we used a divided visual-field paradigm.
In the paradigm, when a visual stimulus was presented in the right and left visual field, the stimulus was therefore initially projected to the left and right cerebral hemisphere, respectively. Subjects were asked to judge as quickly and accurately as possible the laterality of pictures of the hands with different angles of rotation that were presented in the right or left visual field. We measured the response time required for judgments.
When the hands were presented with high imagery difficulty (the fingers of the hand were pointing downward), projecting mismatched hand stimuli to each hemisphere decreased response times. In contrast, when the hands appeared with low imagery 637Posters Friday July 14th difficulty (fingers of the hand were pointing upward), projecting matched hand stimuli to each hemisphere reduced response times. We conclude that the brain uses different strategies for judging the laterality of the hand depending on the degree of difficulty of implicit imagery.
Keywords: mental rotation, motor imagery, visual field Careers and employability of graduates of the European Master in Sport & Exercise Psychology from 2009 to 2016 Athanasios Papaioannou, Krommidas Charalampos (University of Thessaly), Elbe Anne-Marie (University of Copenhagen), Lintunen Taru (University of Jyvaskyla), Apitzsch Erwin (Lund University), Alfermann Dorothee (University of Leipzig), Boen Filip (University of Leuven), Gernigon Cristophe (University of Montpellier), Hutter Vana (Vu University Amsterdam), Johnson Urban (Halmstad University), Torregrosa Miquel (Autonomous University of Barcelona), Serpa Sidonio (University of Lisbon) This is an update of the careers and employability survey of students of the European Master’s in Sport and Exercise Psychology (Lintunen, Elbe, Apitzsch et al., 2009). From 2009 until 2016 two European consortia of universities provided Master’s level studies in sport and exercise psychology within a truly European and multicultural environment. (1) The Erasmus Mundus European Master in Sport and Exercise Psychology (EMSEP), a consortium of 4 European universities comprising Jyvaskyla (coordinator), Leipzig, Lund and Thessaly.
This was a 2-year program entirely focused on Sport and Exercise Psychology, with a yearly intake of 20-25 international students who registered across three host universities (JYV., LUND, THES.). In Semester 2 all students were moving to Leipzig where more than 10 invited international lecturers provided courses every year. The program included sport and exercise psychology courses and seminars in semesters 1, 2 and 3, practicum in semester 3 and research thesis in semester 4.
(2) The Intensive Course (IC) of the European Masters in Sport and Exercise Psychology is a yearly Course of a consortium of 13 European universities that provide lecturers and students who move to a host university that organizes an IC with a duration between 6 to 20 days. Since 2009, more than 236 postgraduate students from all continents took part in the 8 IC workshops that were organized in Montpellier, Lueven, Copenhagen, Amsterdam, Lund, Rome and Thessaly (2016 & 2017) respectively. In this paper we provide the findings of a survey delivered to more than 300 graduates from these two programs.
Keywords: trainning, professional development, international, sport psychology, careers Mental toughness and emotional intelligence of professional basketball players in terms of different variables Atakan Yazici, Mehmet Güçlü (Gazi University, Sport Science Faculty) The purpose of this study was to investigate the relation between mental toughness and emotional intelligence of professional basketball players playing in Turkish leagues and to examine mental toughness(MT)and emotional intelligence(EI) in terms of different demographic variables.Target population of the study consists of the professional athletes playing in leagues related to Turkish Basketball Federation (TBF).The research sample comprises 63 women,135 men,totally 198 pro-basketball players from 17 teams.In addition,156 participants are Turkish citizen and 42 participants are citizen of the USA.“Sports MT Questionnaire (SMTQ)”developed by Scheard et al (2009),and as well as“EI Scale for use in Sport (EISS)”developed by Lane et al (2009) collecting data used during the research. The One-Way ANOVA test was utilized in order to examine the influence of independent variables(gender,citizenship,marital status,league category,team’s ranking)on dependent variables. The relation between EI and MT was analyzed through Pearson Product-Moment Correlation Coefficient technic.The complete analysis applied in IBM SPSS 21 software provided a significance level of the data as p <0.05.According to the results,significant differences 638Posters Friday July 14th between EI and MT were observed in terms of such variables as gender,citizenship,marital status,league category,teams success ranking.In addition,a linear pospositive correlation was found while examining the relationship between the EI and MT subscales,EI social skills subscales and the MT assessment subscales.
As a result of research, in terms of citizenship variables Turkish athletes proved to have a higher level of social skills subscale,while american players have better appraisal of others emotions.In addition,in terms of constancy and control subscales American citizens showed higher mean. The results also showed that the increase in MT constancy subscale score causes the increase in EI social skills subscale. Keywords: mental toughness, emotional intelligence, basketball, citizenship Emotional intelligence and sport-oriented attitudes of young athletes and non-athletes Atakan Yazici, Ilkay Ulutas (Gazi University, Faculty of Education) The purpose of this study was to investigate the relation between emotional intelligence and Sport- Oriented Attitudes of Young Athletes and non-Athletes.
Also study examine emotional intelligence and sport- oriented attitude in terms of different demographic variables.The interest of young people in sports has been increasing steadily. Children younger than 12 years of age may train more than 15 hours a week to specialize in sports (Sabato, Walch & Caine, 2016). Although, sport is physically and mentally supportive for adolescents, factors such as intense workout, competition, win-win pressure may be increase the stress levels of adolescents who start the sports at early ages.
Some adolescents cannot cope with these pressures, and even choose to quit sports (Sabato, Walch & Caine, 2016; Alvarez, Balaguer, Castillo & Duda, 2012). Target population of the study consists of the 137(39.7%) active athletes from different sports and 208(60.3%) non athletes participated in this study . The research sample comprises 133 women ( age=16.04±1.31), 212 men ( age=16.47±1.15), totally 245 high school students participated.
Participants filled out Trait Emotional Questionnaire (TEIQue-ASF) and “Sport-Oriented Attitude Scale” (S-OAS). Data were analyzed according to some variables such as gender, age, professional experience. The complete analysis applied in IBM SPSS 21 software provided a significance level of the data as p <0.05.
The results show that when the ages were older interest in sports and desire for exercises of the adolescent were increased. Emotional intelligence averages are not affected by factors such as age, sports experience. However, it has been found that there is a positive relationship between emotional intelligence and desire for exercises and negative relationship with living with sport.
The results were discussed in the light of its implications for the supporting emotional intelligence and maintenance of sport involvement among young athletes. Keywords: emotional intelligence, sport-oriented attitude, young athletes, sport psychology, sport science “Organizing for Excellence”: stress-recovery states in the Danish national orienteering team during a training camp and the 2015 World Championship Astrid Becker-Larsen (Institute of Sport Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark), Natalia Stambulova (School of Health and Welfare, Halmstad University, Sweden), Kristoffer Henriksen (Institute of Sport Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark) Elite level athletes are under considerable pressure to perform, why energy management is a natural part of the life of elite athletes. Energy management is particularly important during periods of high demand on their resources, such as during training camps and competitions, which are often intense and do not allow sufficient time for recovery.
Research on recovery has mainly focused on individual physical and physiological strategies. In the 2015 World Championship, the Danish national orienteering team was the best nation, winning four gold medals. In the present study we examined: (a) the stress-recovery states of the Danish orienteers during a three-week preparatory training camp and the following 2015 World Championship, and (b) their perceived sources of stress and recovery during the two events.
The study was designed as mixed-method 639Posters Friday July 14th with the RESTQ-sport questionnaire, semi-structured interviews, and a coach’s journal as the data sources used longitudinally during the camp and the championship. Results revealed: (a) well-balanced stress-recovery states among all athletes during the entire period; and (b) perceived sources of stress and recovery classified into organizational, social, personal, and athletic. The athletes themselves stated that their well-balanced stress-recovery states positively affected their learning, well-being, and performance.
The organizational strategies played a key role in reducing athletes’ unnecessary stress and in facilitating individual recovery. We suggest that “organizing for excellence”, keeping in mind athletes' energy management, is a special task for coaches and managers when preparing for camps and competitions. Keywords: elite sport, sport psychology, stress, recovery Amount of hard continuous long runs during first ten years of training of elite long distance Kenyan and Spanish runners Arturo Casado (Isabel I University), Luis Miguel Ruiz (Politecnica Madrid University) Amount of Deliberate Practice has been proposed as performance indicator in different ambits.
Kenyan running excellence has been studied from different perspectives: physiology, biomechanics, psychology and others. As part of Deliberate Practice background, this study compares the amount of a training activity (hard long tempo runs) of elite Kenyan and Spanish long distance runners. 20 male long distance Kenyan world level runners and 18 male Spanish long distance international level runners were studied.
Personal conversations with athletes and coaches and their training logs were used in order to get data about their training in their ten first years of systematic training. Amount of different types of training was calculated in a training week which was located ten weeks before the main goal of the season (gold label marathon, Olympics, world, European championships...) every two years in the ten-year period. Tempo run is considered a training activity of more than 14 continuous kilometres run at a high pace.
ANOVA´s and ANCOVA´s analysis were used to find out significant differences between groups. Results showed that Kenyan runners ran significantly more kilometres of tempo run than Spanish runners during their ten first years of systematic training (p = 0,00). 20 Kenyan runners ran in their first 4 years of systematic training a mean of 10845 kilometres (TD = 3668) and 18 Spanish runners ran a mean of 2071 kilometres (TD = 1854).
In their 10 first years of systematic training, 5 Kenyan runners ran a mean of 23771 kilometres (TD = 6396) and 16 Spanish runners ran a mean of 7081 kilometres (TD = 5302). Therefore, hard tempo run might be seriously considered to be implemented as a key training type for long distance runners. This data suggests that long continuous hard (tempo) runs is a main characteristic of Kenyan long distance runners which might benefit their superior performance.
Keywords: kenyan runners, long distance, training, tempo run, spanish runners, elite, deliberate practice Changing my messy brain: An autoethnographic tale of neurofeedback for sport and health Arne Edvardsson (Halmstad University) Advances in neuroscience technology have opened up new ways of understanding the brain. This development has made it possible to work with new methodological approaches in sport psychology research. In the present study, I (first author) share an autoethnographic neurofeedback tale of my own sport psychology career struggles; from being an athlete with injuries and concentration problems to becoming a sport psychology practitioner using a neurosciences conceptual framework with a developing self-compassionate understanding of myself.
Pursuing a sport psychology career has been as much a social mission as it has been a self-therapeutic journey trying to change my own messy brain for the better. Over a 4-year period I took systematic notes of my own neurofeedback training and responses to different neurofeedback protocols (e.g., SMR training over sensorimotor strip, alpha theta training at Pz and different bipolar placements). These systematic notes, which started with a cognitive-function focus, have continued to develop into explorations of 640Posters Friday July 14th emotional self-regulation and quality of life perspectives.
I discuss the important lessons I learned (e.g., how to integrate different sport psychology skills to optimize neurofeedback learning, how to talk about one’s own neurofeedback experiences with clients). I hope future researchers will continue investigate this first-person, experiential neuroscience perspective that potentially can contribute to a better understanding of our brains and the potential of neurofeedback training for ourselves and the athletes and coaches we serve. Keywords: sport psychology career, brain activity, storytelling, concentration, psychological aspects of sport injuries, new methodological approaches The mediational role of autonomous and controlled motivation in the relationships between basic psychological needs satisfaction and athletes' self-talk Aristea Karamitrou, Nikos Comoutos* Note:*Former Zourbano, Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis, Yiannis Theodorakis (Department of Physical Education and Sport Science, University of Thessaly) Using Self-Determination Theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985) as the theoretical framework, we examined potential antecedents of athletes' self-talk in a sample of 381 athletes (154 females, 227 males; mean age 16.55 years).
Employing a cross-sectional design, our primary aims were to investigate the relationships between basic needs satisfaction, behavioral regulations, and athletes’ self-talk, and b) to examine whether autonomous and controlled motivation would mediate the relationships between basic needs satisfaction and athletes’ self-talk. Our self-determination theory derived hypotheses were partially supported. Bootstrap multiple mediation analyses revealed that: (a) competence directly predicted athletes’ negative self-talk (negatively);(b) autonomous motivation partially mediated the positive relationships that competence and “volition” aspect of autonomy had with athletes’ positive self-talk and fully mediated the positive relationships between relatedness and “internal perceived locus of causality (IPLOC)” aspect of autonomy and athletes’ positive self-talk; (c) relatedness and IPLOC neither directly nor indirectly (via the associations with autonomous and controlled motivation) significantly predicted athletes’ negative self-talk; (d) and finally controlled motivation partially mediated the positive relationship that “volition” aspect of autonomy had with athletes’ negative self-talk.
Overall, these preliminary findings stress the importance of both basic needs satisfaction and motivation as factors linked to athletes’ self talk and suggest that athletes’ basic psychological needs satisfaction, appear to foster more autonomous motivation toward sport and maximize athlete’ positive self–talk, while simultaneously reducing negative self-talk. Keywords: thoughts, self-determination, behavioral regulations, PROCESS, youth sport Pre-competition anxiety levels in the spanish athletics national team for the most significant competitions: European, World Championships and Olympic Games Antonio Sánchez Muñoz, Alberto Rodríguez Cayetano, Raimundo Castaño Calle, José María Fuentes Blanco, José María de Mena Ramos, Avilés Vicente Roberto, Salvador Pérez Muñoz (Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca) The control of this precompetition anxiety is one of the most important aims in the preparation for a high performance athlete. The current work is considered from the perspective of checking the anxiety levels in the Spanish women in national team who participate at the highest level, European Championships, World Championships and Olympic Games as well.
For the data obtaining, the questionnaire Competitive State Anxiety Inventory-2 (Martens et al., 1990) was applied in its Spanish version (Jaenes et al., 1999). The sample for this study is formed by the 100% of the Spanish athletes called up by the Royal Spanish Athletics Federation for the international competitions in different categories. 92 female with ages contained between 16 and 38 years old (M = 23.49; ± 5.504).
There are significant differences (p <.000) between cognitive anxiety and self- confidence and self-confidence with somatic anxiety (p <.005). In the "U 18" category (16-17 years), there are 641Posters Friday July 14th significant differences (p <.009) between cognitive anxiety and self-confidence. There is a significant correlation (p <.022), between cognitive anxiety and self-confidence in the U 20 category (18-19 years), as well as between self-confidence and somatic anxiety (P <0.011).
The two dimensions of anxiety: cognitive and somatic, have a significant correlation (p <.001) between them. There are also significant differences (p <.033), between cognitive anxiety and self-confidence in the "U 23" category (20-22 years), as well as in the senior category (p <.004). The obtained results show significant differences between the cognitive anxiety dimension and the self- confidence, that is, the negative expectations do not influence in the results due to the high level of self- confidence that women have.
Keywords: cognitive anxiety, auto confidence, somatic anxiety, spanish athletics Effects of perceived exertion of different training loads on the volleyball male players' performance Antonio Montalvo Espinosa (Universidad Pablo de Olvide), Elena Hernandez Hernandez (Universidad Pablo de Olvide) High level volleyball players are facing very intense and perceptual situations of training very often. Under such conditions, those players are subject to a negative and stressfull reaction, which is harmful for its performance. The purpose of this study was 1) analyze the subjective perception of the effort of a Superliga Spanish volleyball team in two different training situations; (2) check the influence on their performance and in the capacity of them players to face the competition.
The sample was composed of 11 players male adults (n = 11, age = 24 ± 3), apparently healthy. By the time of the study found half of the season, where the variables of performance in terms of training loads were stable. A group was training through concentrated loads, which made a weights and track training at the same time.
Another group was training through charges at two different times (moorning and evening). RPE test was used to determine the subjective perception of the participants, which was evaluated post-training in both groups. Moreover, POMS test was used to determinated the mood of athletes after the training and match week.
RPE was evaluated dayly after each training while POMS was used once for week, the day after the competition, right on the weekly rest day, in a quiet and relaxed atmosphere. The results showed that this test helps to adapt the planning loads of training, because it helps to control the perceived intensity to better cope with the competition. There were not significant differences in terms of objective performance variables.
No significant differences were observed between the intra and intra group training loads (p <.005). In addition, it was observed that the athletes' moods in the middle and end of the season were at competitive optimum levels, with no inter or intragroup differences observed (p <.005). Keywords: RPE, POMS, psychologist training, volleyball, performance Segmentation of clients in fitness centers according to quality and fidelity Jerónimo García-Fernández (Universidad de Sevilla), Antonio Jesús Sánchez-Oliver (Universidad Pablo Olavide), Moisés Grimaldi-Puyana, Jesús Fernández-Gavira (Universidad de Sevilla), Pablo Gálvez-Ruíz (Universidad de la Rioja) Quality has been a variable studied extensively in fitness centers (FC) as a predictor of customer loyalty (Theodorakis, Howat, Ko and Avourdiadou, 2014).
Few are those who have studied in the academic literature of the profiles of consumers according to these variables.Objective:to examine the segmenting the customers of FC according to quality and fidelity The sample was 4303women and 4159men from 33 FC. Brady and Cronin (2001) scale for perceived quality (facility, employees, programs) and Zeithaml, Berry and Parasuraman (1996) scale for loyalty was used (10-point Likert-type), adapted to the Spanish context by García-Fernández, Gálvez- 642Posters Friday July 14th Ruiz, Vélez and Bernal (2017). Data were analyzed using SPSS(descriptive and reliability analysis, two-stage cluster analysis and ANOVA) and AMOS(confirmatory factor analysis) The internal consistency were satisfactory.The results indicated that there were significant differences with the quality and loyalty scales with three sociodemographic variables.
Age and permanence obtained a predictive index of 1.0 and gender of 0.01. First cluster (28.6%) women (51.6%) aged 21-30 years (53.0%) stood out for a period of 1-2 years (55.1%). Second group (22.7%) were men (50.2%) aged 41-50 years (57.0%) with permanence of 1-2 years (40%).Third group (27.6%) were men (52.1%) aged 31-40 years (58.9%) with permanence of 3-6 months (54.6%).
Fourth cluster (21.1%) were women (54.7%) aged 21-30 years (100%) with permanence of 3-6 months (53.3%). The analysis of the variance between the four groups and the quality and loyalty scales, there were in all cases significant differences (p <.000).The measurement model showed an acceptable fit to the data [χ²(36)=381.61;χ²/df=10.60;RMSEA=.054;RMR=.066;CFI=.99;GFI=.98;TLI=.99] The findings show different customer profiles and perceptions of quality and loyalty. This fact helps the managers of the FC to propose actions to identify clients with low quality perceptions and, consequently, to improve their fidelity.
Keywords: quality, fidelity, fitness centers, clients Organizational culture and job satisfaction in fitness centers Pablo Gálvez-Ruíz (Universidad de la Rioja), Moisés Grimaldi-Puyana (Universidad de Sevilla), Antonio Jesús Sánchez-Oliver (Universidad Pablo Olavide), Jesús Fernández-Gavira, Jerónimo García-Fernández (Universidad de Sevilla) Numerous studies indicate the significant relationship between organizational culture and job satisfaction (Lamentan, Yuem and Mohad 2016).Its importance is that organizations with adequate organizational cultures, obtain competitive advantages (Theriou and Chatzoglou, 2008).For this reason, Bernabé,Campos-Izquierdo and González (2016) point out that this is a vital variable, especially in the search for job satisfaction of the internal customer in sports centers. The aim of this study was to work with a test a model between organizational culture and job satisfaction in fitness centers. The sample was composed of 180 employees (79 women and 101 men) from fitness centers.
A questionnaire was used to measure organizational culture (MacIntosh and Doherty, 2010) and job satisfaction (Warr, Cook and Wall, 1979) with a 10-point Likert scale. The back- translation followed the procedure described by Hambleton and and Kanjee (1995) The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin coefficient (.92) and the Bartlett test of sphericity (χ²=3966.96; df=378; p <.001) were adequate. After exclusion of 2 items with cross-loading in job satisfaction scale and 1 item in organizational culture scale with loading <.04, a principal components analysis using oblimin rotation yielded 3 factors in organizational culture and 2 factors in job satisfaction, explaining 71.69% of common variance across items.
The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient (α) obtained was .93 for organizational culture and .94 for job satisfaction. The CFA for the 5-factor model showed an acceptable adjustment [χ²(266)=592.36 (p<.001); χ²/df=2.23; RMSEA=.08; TLI=.90; IFI=.91; CFI=.91].The composite reliability (ranged from .88 and .94) and average variance extracted (ranged from .55 and .83) were adequate. Additionally, all constructs were considered to exhibit discriminant validity given all AVE values exceeded the appropriate squared correlations.
The findings indicate that the model between organizational culture and job satisfaction is accurate. Keywords: job satisfaction, fitness centers, organizational culture, employee satisfaction Determinants of moral decision-making in sport: Comparison between Olympic and Non- Olympic athletes António Fernando Rosado, Joana Viães (Universidade de Lisboa) Recently, the assessment of attitudes to moral decision-making , namely, attitudes towards fairplay among athletes has been the subject of research (see, for example, Vallerand, 1994; Vallerand, Brière, 643Posters Friday July 14th Blanchard, & Provencher, 1997; Vallerand, Deshaies, Cuerrier, Brière, & Pelletier, 1996; Vallerand & Losier, 1994), and by Boixadós and Cruz (1995) and Boixadós, Cruz, Torregrosa, and Valiente (2004). The main purpose of this study was to evaluate the associations between attitudes to moral decision-making, namely, acceptance of cheating, keeping winning in proportion and acceptance of gamesmanship and several demographic and psychological variables, as Olympic and non-Olympic status, gender, academic qualifications, the type of sports practiced and core self-evaluations.
A secondary aim was the translation and validation, for the portuguese population, of two measurement instruments: (1) the Attitudes to Moral Decision-making in youth Sports Questionnaire (AMDYSQ), developed by Lee et al. (2007) and (2) the Core Self-Evaluation Scale, developed by Judge et al. (2003).
The participants were 200 individuals (107 males and 93 females), among which 22 are Olympic athletes and 178 are non-Olympic athletes. Confirmatory Factorial Analysis (CFA) was used for the validation of the two instruments. A set of statistically significant differences were found between attitudes to moral decision-making and all exogenous variables, except for academic qualifications.
The correlation between core self-evaluations and keeping winning in proportion, among Olympic athletes, indicates that they have a higher perception of keeping winning in proportion, considering their self-evaluation. The study provided some preliminary data on the antecedents of ethical attitudes among athletes and clarify the importance of core self-evaluations on sport ethical behavior, providing sport psychologists valuable information to have a complete picture of determinants of moral behavior in sport. Keywords: sportpersonship, cheating, gamesmanship, core self-evaluations Approach and avoidance motivations in achievement contexts: A comparative test of two models Anne Teboul (University of Montpeller), Hervé Le Bars (Western Catholic University of Angers), Christophe Gernigon (University of Montpellier) Contemporary achievement goal models (Elliot & McGregor, 2001; Elliot, Murayama, & Pekrun, 2011) have been criticized for their lack of parsimony, discriminant validity, and predictive value (Gernigon, Vallacher, Nowak, & Conroy, 2015; Roberts, 2012).
As a parsimonious alternative to these models, Gernigon et al. (2015) proposed a dynamical model of approach and avoidance, according to which approach and avoidance patterns result from the interactions among a few key social-cognitive variables: competence expectancies (C), benefit for the self (Bs), and threat for the self (Ts). In this formal model, the control parameter, K, of approach (when K tends toward +1) and avoidance (when K tends toward -1) motivations results from the following equation: K = (C × Bs) – [Ts × (1 – C)].
The present study aims to test whether this model predicts intrinsic motivation in achievement contexts better than Elliot et al.'s (2011) six-goal model does. High school students (n = 130) familiarized themselves with a basketball training circuit. Then, one week later, right before carrying out the basketball circuit again, they answered the AASQ (Gernigon, Klosek, Montigny, & Teboul, 2017), which measures C, Bs, and Ts, thus enabling the calculation of K; the AGIQ-6 (Le Bars, Teboul, Pineau, & Gernigon, 2017), which measures involvement in the goals (task-approach, self-approach, other-approach, task- avoidance, self-avoidance, and other-avoidance) of Elliot et al.'s (2011) six-goal framework; and an intrinsic motivation scale (Elliot & Harackiewicz, 1996).
A stepwise regression analysis revealed that the parameter K was the first predictor of intrinsic motivation (b = .40; p < .001; R2 = .27), only followed by self-approach goals (b = .36; p < .001; added R2 = .11). This finding brings support to the relevance of Gernigon et al.'s (2015) dynamical model of approach and avoidance, as compared to Elliot et al.'s (2011) six-goal model. Keywords: achievement goals, dynamical systems, goal involvement Development and validation of the Approach-Avoidance System Questionnaire (AASQ) Christophe Gernigon, Cyril Klosek, Camille Montigny, Anne Teboul (University of Montpellier) 644Posters Friday July 14th Gernigon, Vallacher, Nowak, and Conroy (2015) recently proposed a dynamical model of approach and avoidance, according to which approach and avoidance patterns result from the interactions among a few key social-cognitive variables: competence expectancies (C), benefit for the self (Bs), and threat for the self (Ts).
In this formal model, the control parameter, K, of approach (K tends toward +1) and avoidance (K tends toward - 1) results from the equation: K = (C × Bs) – [Ts × (1 – C)]. This research aimed to develop a French questionnaire measuring the variables C, Bs, and Ts, which enable the calculation of K: the Approach-Avoidance System Questionnaire (AASQ), and to test its structural and theoretical validities. A pool of 18 items was selected and adapted from various instruments.
Items of competence expectancies stemmed from Gillet, Rosnet, and Vallerand's (2008) Satisfaction of Basic Needs Scale. Items of perceived benefit for the self stemmed from Ninot, Delignières, and Fortes' (2000) Physical Self-Perception Profile and from Vallières and Vallerand's (1990) Self-esteem Scale. Items of perceived threat for the self stemmed from Conroy's (2001) Performance Failure Appraisal Inventory.
A sample of 666 students in sport sciences answered these items. Exploratory factorial analyses revealed a three-factor structure accounting for 69% of the variance and led to retain 12 items (four per factor). Internal consistencies were good (.73 ≤ Coeff.
α ≤ .90). A second study was then conducted on 400 sport sciences students in their first academic semester. Only K significantly predicted exams performance for that semester (b = .14; p < .001), whereas none of the goals (mastery-approach, performance-approach, mastery-avoidance, performance-avoidance) of Elliot and McGregor's (2011) four-goal framework did so.
These findings support both structural and theoretical validities of the AASQ, which should be confirmed with future empirical research using this instrument. Keywords: achievement motivation, attractors, dynamical systems Specific questionnaire for motor riders. Evaluation of situations and difficulties management, self-confidence and team dimensions Anna Viñolas, Joaquín Dosil (Universidad de Vigo) During the last fifteen years Sports Psychology has carried out an increasing specialization to each sport modality (Dosil, 2002, 2005), including motor sports (Dosil & Garcés de Los Fayos, 2005).
The use of a vehicle to compete influences in many aspects such as the physical training of the rider, the capacity of adaptation to the vehicle or do an appropriate risks taking to obtain the higher performance of the tandem rider-vehicle, while preserving safety. These are the main reasons for creating and specific questionnaire for riders as a part of the author’s PhD. Motor sports had a large number of characteristics that made it peculiar at the mental level.
The speed in which the riders make the decisions, the consequences that those decisions have, including injures or dead risks; as well as the competition format, are intended to be collected in this specific questionnaire. The poster reflects the process followed for the preparation of the questionnaire and the results obtained. A priori CNPD dimensions (motivation, self-confidence, awareness level and attention-concentration) were targeted (Dosil, 2005).
To prepare the Likert scale items the phases stablished by Anguera (2002) were followed. The final questionnaire had 29 items, with a KMO of .804 and a Bartlett’s sphericity test significant (p < .05). After an EFA analysis four factors were formed: rider confidence, situations managing, team and management of difficulties; which are slightly different from what was expected.
The final version of the questionnaire explains the 44.5% of the variance, with an overall alpha of .87. The results show significant differences between genders: men score higher on self-confidence while women score higher on management of difficulties. Riders score significantly higher than drivers in team dimension.
Finally, the pilots who have never left competition get higher scores in the total punctuation. Keywords: motor sports, riders, drivers, questionnaire 645Posters Friday July 14th The effectiveness of respiratory and mobility exercises on anxiety and depression of hospitalized surgical patients Anna Christakou (National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece), Nektarios Stavrou (National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece, National Sport Research Institute, Olympic Athletic Center of Athens, Greece) Long hospital stay duration causes a significant impairment on patients’ psychological state. The purpose of the study was to examine the effects of respiratory and mobility exercises on anxiety and depression of hospitalized surgical patients.
The sample consisted of 60 surgical, not mentally disabled, patients from the same hospital (36 men, 24 women, aged 63.80 ± 13.74 years, duration of hospital’s stay 38.06 ± 27.06 days, duration of exercise program 22.87 ± 14.91 days). The participants of the experimental group (n = 30 subjects) participated in the same exercise program which consisted of breathing, cough, balance, standing and walking exercises. Another sample of thirty surgical hospitalized patients consisted the non-exercise (control) group.
All the participants completed the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale which has two factors, i.e. Anxiety and Depression factors of seven items each (HADS; Zigmond & Snaith, 1983; Michopoulos et al., 2007). The Greek version of HADS has good psychometric properties (Cronbach’s α for total HADS = 0.884, 0.829 for Anxiety and 0.840 for Depression and test-retest ICC for total HADS = 0.944) and has been used as a good tool for clinicians to assess anxiety and depression of hospitalized patients.
All the participants completed the same questionnaire in the first post-surgical day and in the last day leaving from the clinic. The experimental group completed just before the beginning of the exercise program and the control group was asked to complete the same questionnaire at the same time (morning hour). Wilcoxon W showed differences between pre-post measurements in the experimental group in both factors of the questionnaire (total HADS W = -3.40, p < .001, Anxiety factor W = -4.29, p < .000, Depression factor W = -.572, p < .000, Depression factor W = -.572, p <.000).
No significant differences were revealed in the control group. Keywords: exercise, anxiety, depression, surgery, patients The use of observational learning by youth athletes: Observing opponents in competition Angelita Cruz, Hyun-Duck Kim (Keimyung University) Recent studies have shown that athletes use the skill function of observational learning (OL) the most, followed by the strategy function and performance function respectively, and may vary based on factors such as gender and competition level. While gender and competition level differences were found in adult athletes, evidence in young players is lacking.
Hence, the purpose of the study was to determine young athletes’ use of OL and to compare any differences based on these factors. 167 athletes completed the Functions of Observational Learning Questionnaire to assess their use of the skill, strategy, and performance functions of OL at a national competition. Youth athletes ranked the strategy function the highest, followed by the skill and performance functions.
To determine differences in usage, repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests showed athletes used the performance function of OL significantly less compared to the strategy and skill functions respectively whereas no difference was observed in the use of OL between the strategy and skill functions. In addition, 2 x 2 MANOVA test showed a significant main effect for competition level. Univariate effects showed high school athletes used the strategy function of OL more than elementary athletes.
While previous results showed that the pattern of observational learning use in athletes employed the skill function the highest, the current study revealed that young athletes relatively favored the use of the strategy function first followed by the skill function and performance function. Further, competition level influenced athletes' use of observational learning but not gender. It appears that functions of OL in a sporting context may vary depending on the objectives of the specific situation and the target individual to be observed.
The results provide further insights on how coaches can recommend the use of observational learning in a competitive environment to their athletes. 646Posters Friday July 14th Keywords: FOLQ, young players, badminton, modeling Social support and negative affective responses influence on rehabilitation adherence among injured athletes: A longitudinal mediation approach Andreas Ivarsson (Halmstad University), Andreas Stenling (Umeå University), Urban Johnson, Emelie Elfsberg, Julia Zetterström (Halmstad University), Ulrika Tranaeus (The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences; Karolinska Institutet) A successful return to sport after a sport injury is positively influenced by the injured athlete’s adherence to the rehabilitation programs (Ivarsson et al., 2017). Two factors suggested to predict rehabilitation adherence are social support and negative affective responses (Wiese-Bjornstal, 2010).
Social support is suggested to decrease the level of negative affective responses that, in turn, is proposed to improve adherence to injury rehabilitation programs. In most published studies, however, the relationships between these variables have been studied using a cross-sectional design; a design that most often produces biased estimates (Stenling et al., 2017). The aim of the study was, using a longitudinal mediation design, to investigate if there was an indirect effect of social support on rehabilitation adherence via negative affective responses.
A total of 73 injured athletes (Mage=25.43, SD= 9.52) participated in the study, all engaged in rehabilitation of a major sport injury (i.e., absent from regular sport activities for more than 30 days). The athletes completed questionnaires related to perceived social support, negative affective responses, and rehabilitation adherence on three occasions with 10 days in between. A Bayesian path analysis showed a credible indirect effect (ab = .04) of social support (measured at time 1) on rehabilitation adherence (measured at time 3) via negative affective responses (measured at time 2).
Negative credible associations were found between social support and negative affective responses (β = -.27) and between negative affective responses and rehabilitation adherence (β = -.40). Coaches, teammates, and significant others are recommended to establish high quality relationships, based on empathy, with the injured athlete. Such relationships will decrease the likelihood for maladaptive responses and improve adherence to the rehabilitation program.
Keywords: adherence, negative affective responses, rehabilitation, social support, sport injury Patients’ experiences of physical activity on prescription with access to counsellors in routine care – a qualitative study in Sweden Andersen Pia (The Region of Kronoberg) Introduction Multi-professional physical activity on prescription (PAP) concepts are suggested to facilitate routine care delivery of PAP. There is a paucity of qualitative research on PAP concepts from the patients’ perspective to provide insights into how such concepts influence recipients’ physical activity. This study explores influences on PAP recipients’ engagement in physical activity.
PAP recipients in the study received prescription in routine care in a concept with access to physical activity counsellors implemented in a Swedish county. Method Interviews with a purposive sample of 13 adult invited to talk about their experiences of PAP and what influenced their engagement in physical activity over time. The interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim and analysed using deductive content analysis.
The framework COM-B (Capability-Opportunity- Motivation-Behaviour) was used to map emerged sub-categories. Results Capability to engage in physical activity concerned 1) tailoring the PAP to the individual’s physical capacity and 2) accounting for the individual’s experiences of physical activity. Opportunities given to engage in physical activity concerned 1) receiving a prescription 2) receiving professional counselling and follow-up from a physical activity counsellor 3) having access to appropriate activities 4) the time of the year 5) having a balanced life situation 6) having support and someone who can “push” for continued physical activity.
Motivation was influenced by 1) the individual’s own desire to improve one’s health condition 2) the individual finding stimulating activities that encourage 647Posters Friday July 14th continuation. Conclusion There was a great deal of interdependency between the sub-categories and the COM- B determinants. Many sub-categories were mapped onto Opportunities.
A person-centred approach to PAP along with counselling and follow-up by a physical activity counsellor were important for the PAP recipients to engage in physical activity. Keywords: qualitative, physical activity, prescription, health care, promotion, behaviour change Performance enhancing substances in exercise settings: a systematic review Ana Tavares (Lisbon University / Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon), Sidónio Serpa, Luís Horta, António Rosado (Lisbon University) Performance enhancing substances (PES) are used by gym/fitness users. This situations implies a public health problem, since it have been shown that drugs such as Steroids, Stimulants, Erythropoietin and Human Growth Hormone have significant performance enhancing effects, which can lead to dangerous side effects or even fatal with long-term use.
This systematic review aimed to analyze studies that describe attitudes, beliefs and knowledge, as conceptualized in Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) influenced by the use of PES by gym/fitness center users and provide a framework on the state of the art in this theme, and thus allow the design and foundation of future research lines. Twenty-six articles were identified from a systematic approach following the PRISMA Statement via electronic databases and hand-searching bibliographies of reference lists. Only peer-reviewed primary research published in English, Portuguese and Spanish (1997-2016), focusing on gym/fitness center users regardless of age and gender and provide some information on psychosocial factors towards using PES were included in this review.
Emergent themes conceptualized with the TBP concluded that the main reasons pointed for young male bodybuilders using steroids as prevalent drug, regards aesthetic issues, improve muscle size, strength and performance. Important influences come from groups and instructors. Drugs are obtained by a variety of sources.
Predisposition related to steroid use increase with years of physical training. Although some steroid users indicated a general lack of knowledge of the potential harmful effects of drugs, others had high knowledge about drug's side effects. The TPB illustrated a relationship between psychosocial factors influencing gym users to use PES.
TPB could be used in future research to provide a template when developing prevention programs to reduce the use of PES and promote new lines of investigation on this study groups, as well as different PES than steroids. Keywords: gym users, performance enhancing substances, theory of planned behavior How ongoing match status shapes variability and regularity of volleyball game actions Ana Ramos, Pedro Silva (University of Porto, Portugal), Keith Davids (Centre for Sports Engineering Research, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK), Isabel Mesquita (University of Porto, Portugal) Performance behaviours teams do not remain stable throughout competitive games, changing with momentary variations in score lines. In this study, we analysed and compared performance variability of volleyball teams of different standing in complex I (game phase that comprises the actions of reception, setting and attacking), according ongoing changes in match status.
Eight matches from the 2012 Olympics women’s volleyball competition (elite level) and eight matches from the Portuguese national women’s league (national level) in the 2014-2015 season were analysed. A total of 1496 rallies were observed and the following variables were analysed: setting conditions, attack zone, attack tempo, block opposition and match-status (i.e., advantage and disadvantage situations). Data reliability was measured through intra- and inter-observer testing procedures (K>0.75).
Variability of tactical performance indicators was assessed using Shannon entropy measures. Magnitude-based inferences were used to analyse and compare values of selected variables. Overall, results showed that, independent of match-status (i.e., in advantage and disadvantage situations), elite level teams displayed a higher level of regularity in setting conditions, attack tempo and block opposition, and 648Posters Friday July 14th greater variability in the attack zone, compared to national level teams.
These findings suggest that elite teams were more consistent, and their performance was less dependent on match-status when they were leading or trailing in games, therefore seems relevant that coaches manipulate the match status during the practice. Results reported here may highlighted coaches for the importance of stabilizing specific game patterns (setting conditions) and displaying greater variability in other game actions (attack), regardless of competitive level of performance. Keywords: performance analysis, entropy, volleyball, match-status Team ranking and exploitation of variability and regularity in game actions: Use of entropy to assess collective tactical behaviours Ana Ramos, Patrícia Coutinho, Pedro Silva (University of Porto, Portugal), Keith Davids (Centre for Sports Engineering Research, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK), Isabel Mesquita (University of Porto, Porto, Portugal) Measures of variability can provide useful insights into how expertise shapes performance in team sports.
In this study, we analysed and compared variability of tactical performance indicators in complex I in volleyball teams of different rankings, taking into account their final competitive standings. Two competitive levels were considered: elite, which included the eight ranked teams in the 2012 Olympic Games, and national, defined by the top eight ranked teams in the Portuguese national league (2014-2015). At each competitive level, variability in tactical behaviours of the top four (teams finishing 1st to 4th) and bottom four teams (5th to 8th) were compared.
Eight matches from each performance level were investigated, involving a total of 1496 game rally sequences. The following variables were analysed: setting conditions, attack zone, attack tempo and block opposition. Variability of tactical performance indicators was assessed using the Shannon entropy measure.
Magnitude-based inferences were used to analyse the practical significance of compared values of selected variables. Results of elite level competition showed that the top four teams displayed higher regularity in setting conditions and attack tempo, and higher variability in attack zone and block opposition, compared to the bottom four teams. At the national level, the top four teams displayed higher variability in all game actions, compared to the bottom four teams.
Results suggested that uncertainty in attacking actions was a key factor in the success of the top four elite teams, which was predicated on greater performance stability in other game actions. Data emphasized the importance of the setter in the top four national teams. Results also highlighted the importance for coaches of developing the setters’ capacity for playing at faster tempos in diversified attack zones.
Keywords: performance analysis, team sports, entropy, volleyball Discriminant analysis of need satisfaction, motivational regulations, wellbeing and performance between soccer players with high and low perception of coach-autonomy support Ana María del Mar Concha Viera, Rossana de Fátima Cuevas Ferrera (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán), Isabel Balaguer (Universitat de València), Javier Sanchez-Lopez (University of Verona), Jeanette Magnolia López Walle (Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León) It is important to know the social and personal factors that affect the athletes’ development in competitive sports in order to strengthen the strategies to achieve the optimal performance (Balaguer y Castillo, Duda and García-Merita, 2011). From the perspective of the Self-Determination Theory (SDT; Ryan and Deci, 2000), the aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the perception of coach-autonomy support in youth soccer players on basic psychological needs satisfaction, motivational regulations and wellbeing as investigated in most of previous studies, additionally athletic performance was included as novelty variable. 649Posters Friday July 14th Participants were 38 male soccer players (Mage=14.55, SD=1.26), with a sports experience around 7.4 years (SD = 3.5), who completed a questionnaire package tapping the variables of interest.
Based on the perception of coach-autonomy support questionnaire applied to the soccer players, a hierarchical cluster analysis (Ward method with a measure of squared Euclidean distance) was performed to obtain two groups: athletes with high perception of coach-autonomy support (H-AS), n=28; and athletes with low perception of coach-autonomy support (L-AS), n=10. No differences in age and sport practice experience were found between groups. A discriminant statistical analysis was performed to assess whether basic needs satisfaction, motivational regulations, subjective vitality and athletic performance distinct the groups.
Results revealed that autonomy groups, where H-AS group showed higher scores. No differences were observed in other variables. Our results highlight the importance of the perception of coach-autonomy support on autonomy development, motivation, wellbeing and most important on athletic performance in youth soccer players.
Keywords: perceived coach-autonomy support, self-determination theory, athletic performance Development and initial validation of the Italian Mood Scale (ITAMS) for use in sport and exercise contexts Alessandro Quartiroli (University of Wisconsin - La Crosse, United States), Peter Terry, Gerard Fogarty (University of Southern Queensland, Australia) Mood profiling is used in a variety of situational and cultural contexts for a range of purposes, such as monitoring psychological responses to training load, injury rehabilitation or travel across time zones, as a general wellbeing indicator, and to catalyze discussion between a sport psychologist and an athlete. This presentation chronicles the development and initial validation of the 24-item Italian Mood Scale (ITAMS) for use in exercise and sport domains. The ITAMS was developed from the Brunel Mood Scale (BRUMS; Terry et al., 2003) using the translation-back translation method prior to completion, via an online platform, by 950 Italian- speaking athletes (284 males), ranging in age from 16 to 63 years (M = 25.03, SD = 7.62).
To enhance the generalizability of the findings, participants were recruited from a wide range of sports. In the first stage of the validation process, statistical procedures in MPlus were used to evaluate the measurement model. Multigroup exploratory structural equation modelling supported the hypothesised 4-item x 6-factor (tension, depression, anger, vigor, fatigue, confusion) measurement model for males and females separately and for the combined sample.
Analysis of the scale scores using SPSS provided further support for the construct validity of the measure, with observed relationships between ITAMS scores and concurrent Italian-language measures of related constructs, including the 20-item Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Terracciano et al., 2003), and the 7-item depression scale of the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale-21 (DASS-21; Bottesi et al., 2015), shown to be consistent with theoretical predictions. Alpha coefficients for all ITAMS subscales exceeded the threshold of acceptability. The psychometric characteristics of the ITAMS suggest that the scale provides a valid and reliable measure of mood responses for use in Italian-language contexts.
Keywords: scale development and validation, mood, ITAMS Above board: Reframing the moral decision-making of NCAA student-athletes Amy Banas, Elliot Turiel (UC Berkeley) Researchers studying the psychological processes of athletes have maintained that, in sport activities, athletes engage in and approve of moral transgressions more than their non-athlete peers, seeing that as evidence that athletics promote social and moral deficiencies. Those propositions are based on several assumptions about moral development, as well as the nature of social reasoning with respect to sport 650Posters Friday July 14th participation. However, a body of research (Smetana, 2006; Turiel, 1983, 2002) on the development of distinct domains of moral, social, and personal judgments suggests that such approaches leave out important social contextual considerations in evaluations of sport activities and that these considerations are necessary for understanding moral reasoning and development within the sport context.
To examine the above, our study assessed the evaluations and reasons used by 48 male and female Division I NCAA student-athletes and 48 collegiate non-athletes in response to situations involving acts of physical harm in sport and non-sport contexts, administered in a semi-structured, clinical interview. We hypothesize that athletes will be more accepting of peer violence than their non-athlete counterparts, but that this finding only will hold for incidents taking place in the sport context. Additionally, we hypothesize that the justifications athletes use to explain their acceptance of the harmful act will provide evidence that while some participants condone potentially harmful acts and others do not, this difference is not due to moral deficiency, but to processes of balancing competing considerations about maintaining relationships and upholding the expectations of a sport or community.
Preliminary findings support such hypotheses and further indicate that informational assumptions about intentions, the purpose of sports, limits of consent and personal choice, the wisdom of authority, and the utility of physical acts factor into reasoning about peer violence. Keywords: decision-making, morality, cognition, social reasoning, NCAA, physical harm The utility of sports psychology in health and social intervention programs. Gender-based violence Amador Cernuda (King Juan Carlos University) An important area of application of the sport psychology is in the contributions in health and social welfare.
This study presents the results of an experience of using Karate in a social intervention program to support victims of gender-based violence. A very necessary aspect that we must promote and develop is their self-esteem and Karate is a sport discipline that enhances the personality. 38 women aged 25 to 51 years, with posttraumatic stress victims of gender-based violence.
Instruments: 16PF (Cattell); Self-esteem AF5 (Musitu & García) and STAI (Spielberger). Procedure: A program was applied for 8 months, two sessions a week of 90 minutes each. The first 30 minutes were dedicated to the learning of cognitive techniques and group dynamics used in sports psychology, and the remaining 60 minutes for the practice and learning of Karate.
After analyzing the data with the statistical package SPSS version 19 for Windows, we could observe that the majority of participants in the study improved their self-esteem (40%) and reduced their anxiety (30%). Conclusions: In social policies, the use of sport should be promoted for social intervention programs. Keywords: sport, karate, gender-based violence, posttraumatic stress, social policies Perceptual-cognitive skills in team and combat sports Alyona Grushko, Ekaterina Korobeynikova, Dmitrii Kabanov, Vladimir Kasatkin (Moscow Center of Advanced Sport Technologies) Outcome in sport competitions depends on a combination of various factors including perceptual- cognitive skills (PCS).
Well-developed PCS are crucial for combat and team sports in order to outsmart opponent by anticipating his or her actions (Faubert, Siddebottom, 2012; Mangine et al., 2014, Romeas et al., 2016). The purpose of the study was to identify relationships between PCS. 122 elite and intermediate level male athletes (soccer, judo & boxing; mean age ±SD: 19.1±3.9) participated in the study in the competitive period.
The following PCS were tested: 1) choice reaction time (RT) was assessed during a 3‐min session (ThoughtTechnology); 2) complex RT - by the completion of a 1‐min session on Dynavision-D2; 3) visual attention: a) multiple object tracking (MOT) - by completion of a Core-session on Neurotracker; b) attention allocation (AA-task), was assessed via “Red‐Black Tables” (Praktika-MSU). Athletes also completed Russian 651Posters Friday July 14th versions of SMS and STAI in order to reveal additional factors which may influence the results. Results.
There is a positive correlation between the complex RT and choice RT for the left and right foot (r=.358 / r=.375, p <.01); the complex RT and number of mistakes in AA task (r=.200, p<.05) and tempo characteristics of AA (r=.247, p<.05). There is a negative correlation between MOT and tempo characteristics of AA (r=-.247, p<.05). One-Way-data analysis indicates a significant difference in a number of mistakes in the AA task in athletes with different levels of state anxiety (F=3.41, p<.05).
The results also revealed a negative correlation between the number of mistakes in the AA task and intrinsic motivation (“to accomplish things” (r=.240, p<.05); “to experience stimulation” (r=.206, p<.05)) and “introjected” motivation (r=.243, p<.01)). The results demonstrated the relationships between different PCS. In order to enhance performance in team and combat sports we suggest organizing complex assessment and training of PCS.
Keywords: perceptual-cognitive skills, sensory-motor reaction, attention, visual attention, soccer, judo, boxing The implementation of the eye tracking in psychological diagnosis in rock-climbing and golf Alyona Grushko (Moscow Center of Advanced Sport Technologies) Nowadays eye tracking have become an inherent part of psychological diagnosis and training in different sports. The current research presents the results of eye tracking implementation (ETG SMI) in rock-climbing and golf. The purpose of the first study was to determine visual strategies that athletes use to preview the rock-climbing routes.
Twenty-eight rock-climbers participated in the study which was carried out in an indoor climbing gym. Athletes were supposed to preview climbing routes in eye-tracking glasses and after that complete the routes in on-sight in leading stile. Via quantitative & qualitative frame-by-frame analysis of eye tracking data (number & duration of saccades, fixations, gaze tracking) we determine different types of visual strategies in routes inspection: «ascending», «fragmentary », «zigzagging» and «sequence of blocks».
We consider that the most effective visual strategy is «sequence of blocks»: an athlete inspects the route by blocks of 2-4 handholds or footholds from the beginning up to the end, paying attention to cue elements. We consider that this strategy should be incorporated in imagery sessions as preparation for a climbing route because it is connected with tactical component of training and anticipation phenomenon in sport. The second study (case study) addressed the implementation of the eye tracking in golf.
Three golf-players participated in the study conducted in natural settings – during regular training sessions on a golf field. The qualitative frame-by-frame analysis of gaze tracking was used before and after the self-talk implementation. We found out that combining instructional self-talk technique and modifying gaze strategy according to the cue elements of golf-putting (the ball, hole etc.) allowed to enhance performance: first, by improving shooting accuracy, second, by managing automatic thoughts and negative emotions which may occur during golf putting.
Keywords: eye tracking, mental training, imagery, self-talk, rock-climbing, golf Consequences of prosocial and antisocial behavior for the recipient: An experimental study Ali Al-Yaaribi (Unversity of Birmingham) Prosocial behaviors are acts intended to help or benefit another individual (e.g., encouraging a teammate), while antisocial behaviors are acts intended to harm or disadvantage another individual (e.g., verbally abusing a teammate). The consequences of these behaviors for the recipient have received little research attention. The aim of this study was to experimentally examine the effect of prosocial and antisocial teammate behavior on the recipient’s anger, anxiety, happiness, attention, and performance.
One hundred and two participants (51 males; M = 20.31, SD = 2.30 years old) from a British university were randomly assigned to 3 groups: prosocial behavior; antisocial behavior; and control group. They were tested individually and performed a competitive basketball free-throw task in two sessions: a baseline (Time 1) and an experimental 652Posters Friday July 14th session (Time 2). During Time 2, a confederate – acting as the “teammate” - verbalized prosocial, antisocial, or neutral statements.
Anger, anxiety, happiness, and attention were measured after the baseline and experimental sessions; performance (successful baskets and shooting accuracy) was also recorded. Repeated measures ANCOVAs on the Time 2 variables controlling for Time 1 variables and LSD post hoc comparisons showed significant differences among groups. At time 2, the antisocial group reported higher anger and anxiety and lower attention than the prosocial and control groups.
It also reported lower happiness than the control group. The prosocial group reported higher happiness than the other two groups. Finally, the prosocial and antisocial groups performed better than the control group.
These findings suggest that prosocial and antisocial behaviors are significant determinants of the recipient’s emotions, attention, and performance and that teammates are significant social agents in sport. The present study provides the first experimental evidence of the potential consequences of moral behavior in sport. Keywords: teammate, happiness, anger, anxiety, performance Stressors and coping in voluntary sports coaches Alexandra Potts, Faye Didymus, Mariana Kaiseler (Carnegie Research Institute, Leeds Beckett University, United Kingdom) Sports coaching has been identified as a naturally stressful occupation.
Coaches must be able to competently and effectively manage stress that is inherent in competitive sport and perform under pressure. Yet, limited research exists that has explored coaches’ experiences of psychological stress. The research that does exist has mainly focused on full-time, elite coaches who represent just 3% of the coaching workforce in the United Kingdom (U.K.).
Despite the voluntary coaching workforce contributing to 72% of the total U.K. coaching personnel, little is known about the stressors that volunteer coaches experience or the ways they cope with these stressors. To explore the stressors that voluntary coaches experience and the coping strategies that they use.
Methods: Following institutional ethical approval, four (Mage = 38.5±11.68 years) voluntary coaches were interviewed using a semi-structured interview guide. Each interview was conducted face-to-face and lasted between 56.44 and 84.25 minutes (Mduration= 66.95±12.19 minutes). Thematic analysis was used to organise and analyse the rich, in-depth data.
Self-reflexivity was used by the primary researcher throughout to ensure rigor. The coaches reported 28 different stressors, which were categorised into four higher-order themes: personal, athlete-related, organisational, and external/uncontrollable. Thirty nine different coping strategies were discussed, which were categorised into two higher-order themes: problem-focused and emotion-focused coping.
Overall, the stressors and coping strategies reported by the voluntary coaches in this study were similar to those reported in previous literature by paid coaches. This research represents some of the first to explore voluntary coaches’ experiences of stressors and coping strategies. Further research is warranted to explore voluntary coaches' motivation to continue their engagement despite the stressors they experience.
Keywords: elite sport, NVivo, qualitative, recreational sport Athlete burnout: A multidimensional approach on predicting burnout under a conceptual integrated perspective Alexandra Markati, Maria Psychountaki, Kostantinos Karteroliotis, Nikolaos Apostolidis (Kapodistrian University of Athens Greece) Burnout among athletes is a syndrome characterized by various affective, cognitive, physical, and motivational dysfunctions. Although a number of theories and models have explained the burnout process adequately, results are contradicting. Gustafsson and colleagues (2011) suggested an integrated model of athlete burnout which includes antecedents, signs and other factors, derived from recent empirical research.
653Posters Friday July 14th The purpose of the present study is to quantitatively examine the predictive significance of the dimensions of athletic burnout (exhaustion, reduced accomplishment, devaluation) by a number of proposed core signs (mood states, performance satisfaction and amotivation) and the additive prediction of a variety of psychosocial/situational determinants and trait characteristics. 231 athletes completed a form of demographic/sport characteristics and 7 questionnaires: Athlete Burnout Questionnaire, Profile of Mood States Questionnaire, Sports Motivation Scale, single-item scale for performance satisfaction, Social Support Questionnaire, Self-Esteem Scale and State-Trait Anxiety Questionnaire. Three separate hierarchical regression analyses showed that (a) exhaustion was mostly predicted by negative mood and lack of motives (32% R²), whereas, training load contributed 1% explained variance, (b) reduced accomplishment was mostly predicted by performance satisfaction (42% R²), while, self-esteem contributed 6% explained variance, and (c) sport devaluation was mostly predicted by age, performance satisfaction, and amotivation (33% R²), while, intrinsic motivation and trait anxiety contributed 7% & 4%, respectively.
The present research is the first one so far to examine quantitavely some major antecedents, signs, and psychosocial/situational factors as proposed by Gustafsson's theoretical integrated model. Results highlight the value of integrating a variety of determinants to explain athlete burnout dimensions and considering burnout both as a state and as a process. Keywords: athlete burnout, satisfaction, integrated model, amotivation Evaluating the associations between coaches’ autonomy supportive behaviors, the quality of athlete-coach relationship and athlete burnout under a Self-Determination perspective Alexandra Markati (Kapodistrian University of Athens Greece), Kieran Kingston (Cardiff School of Sport, Cardiff Metropolitan University) Athlete burnout is a syndrome defined as a result of three concepts: Emotional - physical exhaustion, reduced accomplishment, and sport devaluation (Raedeke, 1997).
Previous research has shown that associations exist between different dimensions of the coaching environment (e.g. coaching behaviors and coach–athlete relationship quality) and athletes’ well-being (Felton & Jowett, 2013). However, it is unclear how these dimensions- when aggregated - affect burnout symptoms.
Recent research proposes that Deci & Ryan's (1990) Self-Determination perspective might be suitable to explain how social factors affect athlete burnout occurrence (Gauther, Guillet, & Lemyre, 2012). Thus, the current study aimed to examine; (a) whether the quality of the coach-athlete relationship mediates the relationship between autonomy-supportive coaching behavior and athlete burnout, and (b) how basic psychological needs might explain the predictive relationships between coaching behaviors, coach-athlete relationship and athlete responses. One hundred thirty one British athletes (Mage=22, SD=5.2) completed four established questionnaires in a single-shot design, measuring (a) coach autonomy support, (b) quality of coach-athlete relationship, (c) athletes’ basic needs satisfaction, and (d) athlete burnout.
Four Hierarchical regressions examined the proposed mediating relationships. Results revealed that, (a) quality of coach-athlete relationship partially mediated the relationship between autonomy supportive behavior and devaluation, (b) the need of relatedness partially mediated the relationship between autonomy supportive behavior and coach-athlete relationship, and (c) the needs of competence and autonomy fully mediated the relationship between the quality of coach-athlete relationship and burnout dimensions. The current study reinforces the potential impact of social environmental factors on athlete cognitions and experiences and the role of SDT in explaining the aforomentioned relations.
Keywords: athlete burnout, autonomy supportive, relationship, basic needs Assessment of self-regulation ability in psychological training for athletes of Russian national team Alexandra Gorovaya, Igor Mitin (FMBA) 654Posters Friday July 14th The leading components in the structure of psychological readiness that mostly defining the effectiveness of competitive performances of a world class athlete are self-regulation skills. The main goal of our study is validation of scientific basis for biofeedback technology for psychological readiness measurement among Russian national team athletes. 45 athletes of Russian national table tennis team participated in this study.
Mental readiness was studied by complex tests which were included in apparatus-program diagnostic complex “Multipsychometr”. Assessment of athletes’ self-regulation ability comprised game-based biofeedback by means of portable device named “Pulse Detector” that records, intensifies and feedbacks player’s physiological reactions due to control the game’s plot. Participants were given two biofeedback games: «Vira» and «Rally».
Subgroups were selected on the basis of the hierarchical cluster analysis on integral indicators EffRR of "Vira», EffRR and EffRT of "Rally", than comparison of psychophysiological results was conducted. Stepwise discriminant analysis revealed the most informative indicators, separating the mental state of "successful" and "unsuccessful" athletes: Group 1 has more developed cognitive functions such as memory; the ability to concentrate; the distribution of attention; the reaction rate etc. Athletes from Group 2 have more advanced features to efficiently perform tasks related to the implementation of stereotypical features; they are also characterized by high lability of nervous processes.
Results also showed a significant difference in the vegetative reactions of people with different levels of stress. Thus, the relation between the effectiveness of the performance during game biofeedback and stress resistance was found. The strategy of game biofeedback technology usage as modern assessment procedures of athletes’ mental readiness in the framework of psychological support of national teams was successfully elaborated.
Keywords: Russian national team, mental readiness,individual ability of self-regulation usage, game biofeedback, stress resistance Similar gaze metrics underlie visual-tracking behavior during motor execution and motor imagery for manual interception Alessio D'Aquino, Cornelia Frank, Thomas Schack (University of Bielefeld) When designing motor imagery interventions aimed at enhancing sport performance, practitioners should consider eye movements as a promising tool to monitor the imagery process during practice. However, while specific eye movements indicate the allocation of attentional resources towards task-relevant cues during movement, it is less clear whether a similar gaze behavior is replicated during motor imagery (i.e. the mental rehearsal of an action) (Heremans et al., 2008; McCormick et al., 2013).
In this study, we compared gaze metrics between motor imagery and motor execution using eye-tracking technology during computer-based manual interception. We recruited 24 varsity students (11 females) with a mean age of 26.9 ± 2.8 years and with no prior experience on the task. Overall, participants were requested to visually track and manually intercept a horizontally transient target as quickly and as accurately as possible by clicking with the mouse cursor.
During the task, both the target speed (i.e. fast and slow) and the performance conditions (i.e. motor execution, motor imagery, and control) were manipulated.
Each participant completed 6 blocks of 20 trials with each block representing a combination of the experimental manipulations for target speed and performance conditions. We found that the number of saccades and smooth pursuit duration were similarly affected by the target’s speed manipulation (p.05). These results suggest that motor imagery employs visuomotor strategies akin to motor execution and that the eye-hand coupling tends to remain intact for interceptive actions across states of action.
In the applied setting, we advise practitioners to consider eye movements as reliable markers of visual perceptual activity to assess and design imagery-based interventions. Keywords: motor imagery, eye movements, interception, motor execution, visual perception 655Posters Friday July 14th Is physical activity important in adolescent peer relationships? Geumran Seo, SeYun Park It is generally accepted that physical activities play critical role in peer relationships.
Nonetheless, there is very little research on how a physical activity relates to peer relationships (Smith, 2003). This study identifies the influence of physical activity in high school students’ peer relationships. We analyzed the relationships among several factors affecting peer relationships (self-esteem, life satisfaction, and peer stress), physical self- description, physical fitness, and academic achievement.
A total of 262 high school adolescents (154 male, 108 female, age mean=15.9 yrs, SD=0.25) responded to the questions about: self-esteem, life satisfaction, peer stress, and physical self-description. Participants identified three of their closest friends. Additionally, we collected data on aerobic capacity (20m PACER), muscle strength (hand grip), BMI, academic achievement of mathematics and Korean.
Peer relationships were measured through degree centrality using UCINET6. The data were analyzed Pearson correlation and multiple regressions by using SPSS 20. The result found that degree centrality had a significant correlation with aerobic capacity (r=.256, p<.01), muscle strength (r=.129, p<.05), physical self-description (r=.151, p<.05), and life satisfaction (r=.150, p<.05).
Through multiple regressions analysis, aerobic capacity had a statically significant effect on degree centrality (R square=.66, F=12.013, p<.001). Academic achievement did not have a significant effect on degree centrality. Overall, the results provided insightful information about physical fitness and physical self-concept, and that these factors would be more crucial than academic achievement, self-esteem, and peer stress.
This is associated with research (Jeon, 2016) that indicated physical attractiveness was regarded as an important factor when measuring the happiness of Korean adolescents. Keywords: social network analysis, peer relationships, physical activity, academic achievement Identification tools of the talented soccer player: A review focused on the psychological- decisional aspect Alejandro Prieto-Ayuso, Juan Carlos Pastor-Vicedo, Sixto González-Víllora, Onofre Contreras-Jordán (Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha) The identification of talent is a key issue for soccer clubs (Fernández-Río & Méndez-Giménez, 2014), regardless of their sports objectives (Hatum, 2012) or economic ones (Carazo, 2009) with their soccer players. However, in spite of the apparent importance attached to detection process, tests to measure talent performance do not seem to be clear (Nicolairé, Catuzzo, & De Mello Monteiro, 2009) based mainly on the intuition of the coach (Christensen, 2009).
This work has aimed to show the main tools (performance indicators or tests) of psychological and decisional measurement of the football player with talent, due to the great importance given to this aspect to become an elite player (Reina Gómez & Hernández Mendo, 2012). The methodology used has consisted of a review of the literature in academic and football databases (InStat, WhoScored, Opta and FourFourTwo). The results found point to the existence of multiple performance indicators related to the psychological-decisional aspect, both in previous studies and in databases to evaluate performance, as well as tools for evaluating tactical behavior in competition (GPET or FUT-SAT).
Some of the tools founded have been the Test of Color and Word of Stroop (mental concentration test), decision making in football (perception and anticipation test), or simulation of video + movement (psychomotor test). It concludes on the one hand the need to take into account the psychological-decisional aspect when evaluating the talented soccer player. On the other hand, the existence of tests and performance indicators that help measure this aspect.
As future lines of research, we propose the creation of psychological assessment instruments that are more ecological and not decontextualized from the real context of competition. Keywords: talent, psychology, detection, football, tool, performance 656Posters Friday July 14th Psychophysiological variables in competition chess, a journey to the center of the board Alejandro Parejo Martínez, José Carlos Jaenes (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) Chess as a competitive sport has been scarcely studied from a psychophysiological perspective. The purpose of this study was to verify the relationship between muscular strength, heart rate variability and precompetitive anxiety in professional chess players before, during and after an official game of chess.
Twelve Andalusian high-level chess players participated in the research. Heart rate variability (HRV) was tracked the night prior to an official competition, and from 30 minutes before the beginning of the game until the end. HRV was measured using the Complexity Index (CI), obtained through a multiscale entropy analysis (MSE).
The grip strength of the dominant hand was measured before (Fpre) and immediately after (Fpost) the game using a hand grip dynamometer. Besides, the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory (CSAI-2) test was applied to assess cognitive anxiety (AC), somatic anxiety (AS) and self-confidence (AUT), based on Multi-dimensional Anxiety Theory (Martens et al., 1990). The results showed a non-significant trend towards decrease of the CI of the HRV during competition compared to the resting value, and a non-significant trend towards decrease of the grip strength of the pre/post chess game.
Some trends were found between AC, AS and AUT values. There was a significant negative trend between AUT and AS (r=-6.30; p=0.028). AS and CI showed a non-significant negative trend.
This work provides an approach to a practically unexplored scientific reality. Trends were found between the different variables that may be corroborated in further studies. Would be needed to enlarge the sample size in order to increase the reliability.
The study variables can be useful while preparing for competition as stress indicators for evaluation in competition chess. Keywords: chess, stress, pre-competitive anxiety, hand grip strength, heart rate variability (HRV), multiscale entropy (MSE) The etiology of morbid obesity from a qualitative perspective Ángel Megías Boró, Alejandro Jiménez Loaisa, Vicente Javier Beltrán Carrillo, David González-Cutre, Eduardo Cervello (Miguel Hernandez University of Elche) Society frequently supports an obesity discourse which associates the responsibility for obesity with the individual behaviour. Nevertheless, obesity may, in part, be symptom of other environmental, cultural and psychosocial challenges.
The aim of this study was to gain an in-depth understanding of the factors influencing the etiology of morbid obesity from the subjective perception of post-bariatric patients. For that purpose, a total of ten post-bariatric patients (nine women and one man) participated in a first semi-structured interview seven months after surgical intervention. One year later, in order to solve some knowledge gaps identified after a process of data analysis, a second batch of interviews was carried out.
Findings showed that there were multiple factors which conditioned the participants’ sedentary lifestyle and bad eating habits, and led them to morbid obesity. In this sense, some elements that contributed to their sedentary lifestyles were embarrassment of showing their body in public, pain and poor physical condition, and their bad experiences in non-inclusive physical activity contexts. Other factors such as bad family food education, loss of a loved person, family problems, arguments or disputes, and past traumatic events like childhood sexual abuse influenced their development and maintenance of unhealthy eating behaviours.
Moreover, findings illustrate the continuous struggle that participants lived with obesity along their lives, with failed attempts of losing weight by multiple diets and physical activity, and the corresponding sense of failure. These results may be helpful to understand the etiology of morbid obesity and to design prevention/treatment strategies from a more holistic, sensitive and respectful perspective. Health and physical activity professionals should work as a team, taking into account that the etiology of morbid obesity transcends a simple equation between expended and consumed calories.
Keywords: sedentary lifestyle, eating habits, bariatric surgery 657Posters Friday July 14th Pre-competition anxiety in young paddle tennis players in Castilla y León Alberto Rodríguez Cayetano, Antonio Sánchez Muñoz, José Manuel De Mena Ramos, José María Fuentes Blanco, Raimundo Castaño Calle, Salvador Pérez Muñoz (Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca) Anxiety is one of the most frequently observed states of mind in competitive sport understanding it as “an inadequate adaptation of an individual to a specific situation which increases the activation level and modifies the emotional functioning” (Urra, 2014, p. 67). For the execution of this investigation, the Revised Competitive State Anxiety Inventory-2 (CSAI-2R) (Cox, Martens & Russell, 2003) has been chosen in its Spanish version from Andrade, Lois and Arce (2007).
The sample for the present study is formed by 221 paddle players in ‘Castilla y León’: 93 U12, 73 U14 and 55 U16 players. The average in the obtained answers are 1.51 (.622) for the features ‘somatic anxiety’, 1.96 (.716) for the ‘cognitive anxiety’ and 3.24 (.642) for the features ‘self-confidence’. By categories, the elements ‘cognitive anxiety’ and ‘somatic anxiety’ are higher in the U16 category (M = 2.20 y M = 1.62, respectively), while the element self-confidence is higher in the U12 category (M = 3.44).
The obtained results show that there is a significant positive correlation between the elements cognitive anxiety and somatic anxiety. Regarding to the self-confidence elements, there is a significant negative correlation between this feature and the somatic anxiety and the cognitive anxiety. Keywords: Cognitive anxiety, somatic anxiety, self-confidence, paddle tennis The impact of the Health Behavior with Quality Sports Thematic Network (REDDECA) and its degree of development and ability to convene, according to the IV International Colloquium on Sports Psychology Alan Limon, Karen Briseidy Villarreal, Zeus Omar Ontiveros, Juan Carlos Arturo González The creation of the Thematic Network Healthy Conduct with Quality Sport (REDDECA) was created in January of 2015 as an initiative for the development of psychology and sports sciences in Mexico.
The aim of the present research is to evaluate the expansion and divulgation of the advances of scientific knowledge at the national level with researchers of internatio nal prestige on the trends topics on the sport psychology and to identify the professionals with kn owledge to the thematic network . This in order to avoid pseudoprofessionals who profit or damage the sport psychology and sports sciences, through an incorre ct use of information or inefficient methodological application in their research. The event of "IV International Colloquium of Sports Psychology", held on November 14 and 15, 2016, in the city of Tepic, in Nayarit, Mexico was attended by 21 experts in Spo rts Psychology, 8 (38%) were national and 13 (62%) were international.
The International Society of Sports Psychology (ISSP) endorsed the academic, scientific and international character of the event. A total of 545 attendees were distributed as follows: A utonomous University of Nayarit 370, University of Guadalajara 53, Autonomous University of Nuevo León 40, State University of Sonora 23, Autonomous University of Colima 17, Universidad Juárez del Estado de Durango 10, Autonomous University of Yucatan 10, Autonomous University of the State of Morelos 6, National Autonomous University of Mexico 4, Autonomous University of San Luis Potosí 2, Autonomous University of Sinaloa 2, Autonomous University of Baja California 2, University of Guanajuato 2, YSCSPORT 2, Universidad Autónoma de Ciudad Juárez 1, Autonomous University of Querétaro 1. The results are intended to serve as a reference poin t for future parameters of the announcement.
Keywords: ability to convene, sport, science, Mexico Emotional management in athletes neurosis with physical exercise Akira Esqueda (UNAM) 658Posters Friday July 14th This research is based on Cullen's investigation (1969) approved by some studies done by Salazar, Murillo and Sierra (2007) which refers on neurosis as a movement and sense disease that affects the nervous system. Similarly, the definition founded in Salama's research (2007) neurosis is defined as emotional blockages. That lead us to develop this research, which focus on determine a correct management of energy through physical activity.
Exercise help in a more efficient way working with neurosis compared to a Gestalt psychotherapy treatment. We decided to work as Antoni and Zenter (2015) with only four emotions: fear, anger, sadness and happiness. It was evaluated by perceptual scale of Borg without taking care of the different issues that can appear (Scherr, Wolfarth 2013).
The psychotherapeutic model consist in generate an emotional change of the participants through physical movement and physical activity that generates energy so they can modify their emotional states evolving their neurosis. We did a comparative and perceptive study of the emotional movement through two psychotherapeutic models, looking that the client perceptually indicates how they feel with ten sessions. It has to be emphasized that through the frequency study, we concluded that each emotion reacts with a specific strength: fear and maximum effort, anger an explosive effort, sadness and aerobic effort and happiness with a quick effort.
It was concluded that in neurosis management, exercise is more effective than Gestalt psychotherapy. Keywords: emotional management, exercise, neurosis, psychotherapeutic model Social attitude and value in sport -comparative study between German and Japanese youth athletes- Akihiko Kondo (Keio University), Reinhild Kemper (Friedrich-Schiller Universität Jena) The reason behind sports being broadly accepted in society is the expectation of people that “sports have educational effects on personality development.” Lee, M.J et al. (2008) in the UK have focused on this issue and conducted their studies on the theme “Whether sports have effects of improving the social attitude of young people” using measurements called YSVQ–2, SAQ, MSOS and POSQ.
This study aims to conduct comparative studies on “what educational effects sports have” between Germany and Japan, which have different social and educational environments. In this study, we translated the questionnaire, which was comprised 27 items developed by Lee in Japanese and German. The first step of data analysis was to attempt factor analysis of each of the three domains (i.e.
Values of sport, attitude in sports and achievement orientations) in Germany and Japan. The second step of data analysis was to examine the relationship among subscale of all of the domains. The third step was to compare the factor point between Germany and Japan.
Participants of this study were 280 German and Japanese youth athletes aged 15–24. Results on Factor structure of each domain of Germany and Japan were the same result of Lee´s English data. Value of sport was composed of morality, competence, and status.
Attitude at s sport was composed of pro-social attitude, such as commitment and convention, and anti-social attitude, such as cheating and gamesmanship. Achievement orientation was composed of task orientation and ego orientation. About Direct influence of each factor of values of sport, attitude in sports and achievement orientations, it was found that task orientation factor significantly correlate with convention factor.
In the factors of morality, status, convention, cheating and ego and task orientation, there were some differences between Germany and Japan. Keywords: social attitude, value in sport Relationship between basic needs satisfaction in sport and burnout/engagement among Japanese soccer players Akari Kamimura, Yujiro Kawata (Juntendo University) Clarifying the basic psychological needs in sport related to athlete engagement and athlete burnout would be useful for mental support of athletes. Therefore this study examined the relationship between basic 659Posters Friday July 14th psychological needs satisfaction in sport and athlete burnout and athlete engagement among Japanese soccer players.
We collected data from 1765 Japanese soccer players from 33 different teams (1584 males, 181 females; Mage = 17.71 years, SD = 2.03; mean continuous competitive sports participation = 10.58 years, SD = 3.10). Players completed the Basic Needs Satisfaction in Sport Scale (BNSSS; Johan et al., 2011), Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ; Raedeke and Smith, 2001), and Athlete Engagement Questionnaire (AEQ; Lonsdale et al., 2007). We analyzed data using Pearson’s correlations.
We examined correlations between basic needs satisfaction in sport (BNSSS) and the extent of Burnout (ABQ) or Engagement (AEQ).There were significant, moderate-to-strong positive correlations between subscale scores of the BNSSS and subscale scores of the AEQ (r =.37–.72, p <. 001). In contrast, there were significant, weak-to-moderate negative correlations between subscale scores of the BNSSS and subscale scores of the ABQ (r = -.16–-.60, p <.
001). In particular, ABQ sports devaluation scores were significantly moderately negatively correlated with BNSSS subscale scores. We conclude that the basic needs satisfaction in sport and athlete burnout or athlete engagement are closely associated among Japanese soccer players, consistent with earlier studies outside Japan.
Satisfying of basic psychological needs in sport might be an effective way of suppressing athlete burnout (sports devaluation), and an effective method of improving athlete engagement. Keywords: athlete burnout, athlete engagement, basic needs satisfaction The relationship between attitudes toward sport and the characteristics of autobiographical memories in high school students Aiko Okuda (Biwakogakuin University), Shiro Nakagomi (Kokushian University) Current behaviors might be understood and even defined by analyzing autobiographical memories. This study aimed to reveal the relationship between attitudes toward sport and the characteristics of autobiographical memories.
For 200high school students, the scale for attitude toward physical exercise and self-administered semi-structured questionnaires on autobiographical memories were distributed. Based on a questionnaire of the attitude toward physical exercise, the 25students most favorable towards sport (“groupA”) and the 25least favorable towards sport (“groupB”) were selected, and their autobiographical memories compared. The content of the memories differed.
Nearly 40%of the respondents in the groupA recalled a “specific activity,”while over 50%of the respondents in the groupB recalled “a landscape.” Respondents in the group A recalled formative images in which the subject was actively involved, whereas those in the groupB recalled scenes in which the subject was passively involved. And also, early experiences of play and sport were evaluated from the perspective of “area of experience” and “dynamism.” Under the “area of experience”category, over half the respondents in the groupA answered “sport,” while most respondents in the groupB gave answers falling into the “other” category, such as making things, drawing, playing cat’s cradle, and other indoor activities. A further difference was apparent in levels of “dynamism.” 52%of the groupA had a score of “very high” compared with 20%of the groupB, and 20%of the groupB scored “very low” compared with 0%of the groupA.
This suggests that the respondents in the students most favorable towards sport participated from a young age in highly dynamic physical activities and that this activity overlaps with features of their formative images. These results appear to indicate that autobiographical memories such as recollections of formative images and proto-experiences in sport influence current attitudes toward sport. Keywords: autobiographical memories, attitudes toward sport Greek traditional dance learning: Impact on student motivation Aikaterini Koupani, Stella Rokka, Bebetsos Evagelos, Filippos Filippou The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of a learning program of Greek traditional dance with music and movement motives from dance aerobic, hip-hop and break dance on the 4th, 5th, and 6th grade 660Posters Friday July 14th elementary school student motivation for participation.
300 students, none interesting for traditional dance, participated in the research of which 192 constituted the experimental team and 108 were the control group. The experimental group followed the three months program while the control group followed the typical physical education program. To evaluate students’ motivation the Greek version (Moustaka, Vlachopoulos, Vazou, Kaperoni, & Markland, 2010) of “Behavioural Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire – II” (Markland & Tobin, 2004) was used.
Descriptive statistics, reliability analysis, and ANOVA repeated Measures were used for data analysis. At the beginning independent sample tests were held to find out if there were statistically significant differences between the experimental and the control groups in the initial measurement. Results showed that there were not statistically significant differences in any of the five factors.
Results showed that a. Cronbach’s alpha for all factors was satisfactory. b.
he experimental group decreased significantly the levels of “external regulation” and “amotivation”, and enhanced significantly their “introjected regulation”, “identified regulation” and “intrinsic motivation”. c. Both male and female students of the experimental group were influenced similarly by the program.
d. Grades (or age) are not differentiation factors of motivation in traditional dance program. In conclusion, we can say that a program of teaching traditional Greek dance, with music and movement motives from dance aerobic, hip-hop and break dance, reduces the rates “external regulation” and “amotivation” while it simultaneously increases student “introjected regulation”, “identified regulation” and “intrinsic motivation”.
Keywords: teaching methods; dance aerobic; intrinsic motivation; identified regulation Effects of acute aerobic exercise on executive control network: Rs- fMRI study of preadolescent children Aiguo Chen, Lina Zhu, Xuan Xiong, Yue Li (Yangzhou University) Executive function (EF) lies at the core of cognitive function and plays a crucial role in children’ s learning, reasoning, problem solving, and intellectual activity. Behavioral findings have suggested that acute aerobic exercise improves children’ s EF; however, there is still very little knowledge about whether a single session of aerobic exercise can alter functional connectivity(FC) in executive control network (ECN) ,which are assumed to reflect intrinsic brain activity during resting-state, as assessed by resting-state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Resting-state functional MRI, Rs-fMRI). Therefore, we investigated the effect of acute moderate- intensity aerobic exercise on executive function and executive control network in preadolescent children, and further explored the neural basis of acute aerobic exercise on EF in these children.
We used a within-subjects design with a counterbalanced order. Nine healthy, right-handed children were scanned with a Siemens MAGNETOM Trio 3.0 Tesla magnetic resonance imaging scanner and performed an executive function task (Flanker task) following a baseline session and an exercise session , which was consisted of 30 minutes of aerobic exercise on a bicycle ergometer (MONARK 834, Sweden) at 60% of their estimated maximum heart rate (HRmax; 220-age). Compared with the baseline session, acute moderate-intensity aerobic exercise benefitted performance in the Flanker task, decreased the FC between left dorsolateral prefrontal and right cerebellum, further, the decreased FC was positively correlated with the EF’ s behavioral improvement.
These data extend the current knowledge by indicating that acute aerobic exercise enhances children’ s EF, and the neural basis may be related to functional connectivity changes in the ECN elicited by acute aerobic exercise. Keywords: acute aerobic exercise, preadolescent children, executive function, executive control network, functional connectivity 661Posters Friday July 14th 10 years of the Hungarian sport psychologist education Ágota Lénárt (University of Physical Education), Miklós Fischer Fischer, Gáborné Haraszti (Hospital for Sport), Tom Ormay, Judit Boda-Ujlaky, László Tóth, Noémi Gyömbér, Krisztina Kovacs, Lilla Török (University of Physical Education) The sport psychologist postgradual education started at the University of Physical Education (Budapest, Hungary) in 2007. Prerequistite of the admission is a degree in Psychology (MA).
The program takes 4 terms and students should gain 120 credits. To be able to get the accredited certification, students write a thesis and complete a final exam. The degree meets the requirements of all of the areas of sport psychology, from giving lectures (even at university level) to working in elite applied sport pschology.
Our poster shows the structure and the content of the courses. In each term there are sport-related (like sport sociology, sport physiology), psychology-related (like sport psychological interventions), and auxilliary courses (like sport psychiatry and visiting trainings, and sport events under supervision). There is an emphasized part of the course: the method- specific interventions aiming personal growth of the students.
This part consists of 50-50 lessons per each term and provides an introduction to different intervention methods (autogenic training, mental training, group interventions, imaginative interventions, neurolingusitic programming, non-verbal therapies), considering the previous knowledge of the students. Another significant part is the presentation and discussion of case studies. From the beginning students can provide services at sports clubs, under supervision.
The program unites well the psychoeducative interventions and the European psychotherapeutical methods, which makes possible the individualized psychological preparation of the athletes. In the program, that starts in every second year, 70 students have had a degree, and this year 20 more are foreseen. We present the carrier of our students, who work in many different fields, from leisure sport activities to elite Olympic athletes.
The program broadens with child and youth sport psychology special program from 2017. Keywords: sport psychologist education Optimal emotions and self efficacy of polish gymnasts Agnieszka Zajac (The University of Physical Education in Cracow), Aleksandra Tokarz (Jagiellonian University) Artistic gymnastics is characterized by a wealth of emotional experience, associated with time-consuming and labor-intensive training, the necessity of full mobilization at a specific time, so as to best show own skills during the competition. That might be a reason why elite gymnasts were found to exhibit very high anxiety levels in comparison to similarly skilled athletes in other sports (5).
Determination of the optimal emotions guarantees the full involvement in the tasks performed and the best use of available resources, enabling high- quality start and achieve the highest possible result (3). Four major IZOF-based predictions of emotion- performance relationships (used in this research) focus on interindividual variability of optimal emotion intensity and content, the in-out of the zone notion, interactive effects of emotions enhancing and weaken performance, and bi-directionality of emotion-performance relationships (9,8). According to Lee (6) the performance of female artistic gymnasts has been shown to vary according to self-efficacy expectations and how about male gymnasts?
Our study of the temporal pattern shed light on the mechanisms by which emotions influence performance and identifies the most favorable for the gymnasts psychological conditions. Thirty five best polish male gymnasts participated in the study. They filled out: General Self-Efficacy Scale (10), a Competitive Sport Anxiety Inventory – 2 (7,1), Popular Questionnaire of Emotional Intelligence (4) and polish adaptation of Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (2).
The collected data were analyzed using STATISTICA and a Direct Discriminant Function Analysis was used in analyzing results. The findings suggest that emotional intelligence correlates positively with a range of emotions and experiencing more positive and optimal emotions is associated with higher level of self-efficacy. The research suggests which emotions during the gymnastics competition might be optimal.
Keywords: emotions, emotional intelligence, self efficacy, anxiety, gymnastics, peak performance 662Posters Friday July 14th Yoga poses increase psychological empowerment and state self-esteem in comparison to ‘power poses’ Agnieszka Golec (Goldsmiths, University of London) "The effects of yoga poses on psychological empowerment and self - esteem. " Agnieszka Golec de Zavala Goldsmiths, University of London Keywords: yoga , psychological empowerment , self - esteem Research on beneficial consequences of yoga focuses on the effects of yogic breathing and meditation. Less is known about the psychological effects of performing yoga postures.
The present study investiga ted the effects of yoga poses on psychological empowerment (How empowered, powerful, in control, energetic, alert do you feel in the present moment?) and self - esteem (Measured by the State Self - Esteem Scale) . The effects of yoga postures were compared to the effects of expansive body postures: ‘power poses’, which arguably increase psychological sense of power and self - confidence due to their association with interpersonal dominance (Carney et al., 2010). The study tested the novel prediction that yoga poses, which are not associated with interpersonal dominance but increase energy, would increase the sense of psychological empowerment a nd self - esteem compared to ‘power poses’ (high and low).
A two factorial, between participants design was employed. Participants performed either two standing yoga poses with lifted chest and open front of the body (n = 19), two standing yoga poses with co vered front of the body (n = 22), two expansive, high power poses (n = 21), or two constrictive, low power poses (n = 20) for 1 - minute each. The results showed that yoga poses in comparison to ‘power poses’ increased self - esteem.
This effect was mediated b y an increased sense of psychological empowerment and was observed when baseline trait self - esteem was controlled for. Keywords: yoga, empowerment, self-esteem 2016 Olympic Games: Perceptions about the development of sport psychology in brazil Adriana Lacerda (Veiga de Almeida University), Leonardo José Mataruna-dos-Santos (Coventry University- CTPSR / TUM) Sport Psychology in Brazil is a relatively recent field, compared to other areas of Sport Sciences, such as medicine, biomechanics and kinetics analysis. According to Rubio (2000), the first work of a sport psychologist was developed by João Carvalhaes in the 1958 Football World Cup.
However, since that date until the end of the last century the field presented a gap of professional interventions. Regarding Olympic Games, only in Athens 2004, Brazilian Olympic Committee (COB) invited a psychologist, Dietmar Samulski, to accompany the delegation of 247 athletes. In 2008, in Beijing there was no psychologist in the teams.
In London 2012 the COB supported sport federations that already had psychologists in their staff. For Rio, COB created the “Mental Preparation Department” to systematize the work, with more than 30 psychologists. The Research Question: Is possible to have immediately feedback of this strategical psychological intervention promoted by COB through small words of athletes after the medal ceremony?
The data was observed in the last six months before the Games and after the Olympic Medal Ceremony (speeches) in the competition field. This paper is multi-method research that used the ‘After Reaction Review’ (Darling, 2005) based on the ‘experience report’ of the people involved in the action; and the ‘situational analysis’ to report the ‘professional ethnography description’ (Mataruna, 2007). The results show that the most part of the athletes recognized in the media the importance of mental work.
As preliminary results, the area finally is consolidated in the COB as a part of the overall preparation of the athletes regarding the positive report by themselves. The conclusion points that the preparation had an important participation in the best result of Brazil in Olympic Games ever. It is perceived that this was a great advance for greater acceptance and recognition of Sport Psychology.
Keywords: olympic games, sport psychology, sport science 663Posters Friday July 14th Sports and exercise psychology in 21st century present in sports psychology in Mexico: AMPDAF Ada Sarai Albarran, Luz Antonia Vazquez Romo, Claudia Alicia Rivas Garza, Juan Carlos Perez, Jonatan Gadiel Yañez Lopez (ISSP/SOLCPAD/AMPDAF), Alexandre Garcia-Mas (ISSP) Right now, the sport presents high levels of technical-tactical, physical and psychological exigency in all its levels: as much as in the physical activity, as in initiation sports, of specialization and of high performance; It is for this reason that the Mexiquense Association of Sports Psychology and Physical Activity since its creation in 2008 has helped to enhance the performance of sports players in Mexico, and has been a platform to promote research in the field of Sports, Contributing in this way to the development of the Sciences Applied to Sport. The brief history of the AMPD is presented, with the events held: congresses, diplomas and courses, including the organization of the meeting of ISSP Manager Council on 2014. The present poster shows the statistical results of the work in different contexts of the variables self-efficacy and sports commitment from the scale of commitment of Scatlan adapted to the sport and self-efficacy.
It has been used the Perceived Collective Efficacy Questionnaire, CEC, to measure in the context of football, following the proposals made by Heuzé, Raimbault et al. (2006) for sports like basketball and handball; (Effectiveness and Behavior Questionnaire for Teamwork (CETE) in order to evaluate the relationship between collective efficacy and capacity for teamwork (balance individualism-collectivism). The results obtained will be presented in the different inferior teams of the soccer club of Santos and in the equipment of 2nd and 3rd division of Colts of the UAEMex, from 2015 to the date.
Keywords: history, research, commitment, self-efficacy, soccer, Mexico Psychological intervention protocol in sport from the motivational coaching perspective Enrique Cantón (University of Valencia. General Council of Psychology of Spain), David Peris Delcampo (Spanish Federation of Sport Psychology, Valencia, Spain) Psychological intervention in modern sport demands effective and rapid results; for this reason, it is necessary to have efficient and well-founded applied tools that offer appropriate intervention solutions. From this perspective and using the "coaching approach" (in which the professional creates the necessary environment for the client or coachee to achieve their goals, through a non-directive intervention and taking advantage of the coachee's own resources), in motivational facets an intervention tool, elaborated by Enrique Cantón, that uses the figure of a "giraffe" as a metaphorical image has been applied to describe the motivational processes (see Cantón, 2013, 2014, 2017) Structured in four main components that collect existing motivational variables (achievement, expectations, attributions, self-confidence,...), facilitates the understanding process, achieving goals and improving self-confidence.
This working model, named "The Giraffe of Cantón", is applied through a protocol structured in three phases, with a total of 7 sessions of approximately one hour: Identification (assessment of each motivational processes component, beginning with the goal - "head" -); Change/development (facilitating the coachee’s identification and change of the motivational components in order to clarify their goal and increase the confidence); and Monitoring (the effect of the process on the coachee is evaluated after a while). This paper explains this protocol, showing an effective tool from the coaching approach that can facilitate work in sport psychology. Keywords: coaching, psychological intervention, Canton’s Giraffe, the giraffe of Cantón What is the relation between fitness condition and psychological parameters in shooting sports?
Daniel Mon (Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain) 664Posters Friday July 14th Due to the high precision requirements, both physical and psychological factors, can determine the shooting performance. Among these two parameters, the ability to stabilize the weapon seems to play a very important role. This ability is determined by the shooters’ physical condition[1].
Mental preparation plays also a very important role, being the anxiety an important parameter that affects performance in Olympic shooting. However, what is the exact relation between the fitness condition and the anxiety? The objective is to find out the relation between fitness condition and psychological parameters in competition.
23 female shooters, from whom 5 were elite, competed at a national Spanish Olympic shooting championship for this study. The shooters completed a demographic and a CSAI-2 questionnaire 10 minutes before each competition stage. Performance was measured by the use of electronic targets during competition.
The competition consisted of: A qualification round and an Olympic rapid fire final round. The normal distribution of the variables was tested via implementation of the Shapiro-Wilk test. The data analysis of the 8 finalists revealed a negative correlation between somatic anxiety and physical condition (r2=0.71; p <0.01).
On the other hand, self-confidence was found to be positively correlated with physical condition (r2=0.64; p<0.05). Regarding the importance of the athletes’ physical condition, the results of the present study are in accordance with other studies. The perceived physical condition has been found to be positively correlated with performance as well as self-confidence, reducing the precompetitive anxiety.
For this reason, physical condition programs should be recommended in the Olympic shooting sport [1]. Keywords: fitness, psychological parameters, shooting sports Effects of physiotherapeutic and psychological intervention program on emotion regulation in a sample of Spanish soccer players Patricia Catala Mesón, Lilian Velasco Furlong (Rey Juan Carlos University, Madrid, Spain) This study aimed to assess the results of a psychological intervention program to improve emotion regulation in a sample of male soccer players from the third division of Madrid. The sample consisted of 22 players.
The players were assigned to one of the following intervention modalities: a group that received a psychological treatment and a physiotherapy treatment (the combined program), a group that received a physiotherapy treatment and a control group. A pre-post treatment design was carried out. The Spanish version of the Schutte Self Report Inventory (SSRI) was used (García-Coll, Graupera-Sanz, Ruiz-Pérez, & Palomo- Nieto, 2013).
The physiotherapy treatment lasted 12-weekly sessions of 30-40 minutes. The players assigned to the combined program received, in addition to the previous 12 physiotherapeutic sessions, 12 sessions of psychological treatment of the same duration on different days of the week. Both treatment modalities lasted 3 months.
The results showed that the combined treatment improved all emotion regulation variables assessed: emotional perception (p=.02), self-emotional management (p=.01), emotional management (p=.02) and the use of emotion (p=.03). In addition, the control group significantly worsened in self-emotional management (p=.02) and the use of emotions (p=.04). Implications for injury prevention and well-being of the players are discussed.
Keywords: emotional intelligence, psychological intervention, soccer Motivation, anxiety and sports injury. Results of a psychological intervention program applied to a sample of soccer players Patricia Catala Meson, Cecilia Peñacoba Puente (Rey Juan Carlos University, Madrid, Spain) This study aimed to assess the effect of a psychological intervention program based on motivational variables and anxiety reduction, with the ultimate goal of injury prevention in a sample of soccer players. The sample consisted of 22 players (mean age 21.31; SD=4.24) of male soccer from a club of the third division of Madrid.
The players were assigned to one of the following intervention modalities: a group that included 665Posters Friday July 14th psychological treatment and physiotherapy treatment (combined program), a group with physiotherapy treatment and a control group. A pre-post treatment design was carried out. The instruments used were the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory 2 (CSAI-2), the Behavioral Regulation Questionnaire in Sport (BRSQ) and the clinical history of injuries.
The physiotherapy treatment lasted 12-weekly sessions of 30-40 minutes. The players assigned to the combined program received, in addition to the previous 12 physiotherapeutic sessions, 12 sessions of psychological treatment of the same duration on different days of the week. Both treatment modalities lasted 3 months.
The results showed that both interventions decreased the levels of demotivation of the players. The combined program achieved positive effects on the most intrinsic motivations [specifically in knowledge motivation (p=.02), stimulation motivation (p=.03) and accomplish motivation (p=.04)]. Both modalities managed to reduce anxiety levels, with greater improvements in the combined program.
Given the clearly established effect of physiotherapy on somatic anxiety, it is worth noting the effect of the physiotherapeutic intervention on cognitive anxiety (pre-post p=.04). An improvement in self-confidence was revealed after the combined program and a decrease in somatic anxiety seemed to play an important role in the prevention of injury.The results of our work highlight the importance of designing combined programs that include both psychotherapy and physiotherapy. Keywords: motivation, anxiety, injury, psychological intervention, physiotherapy, soccer Factors related to psychological competitive ability of Japanese college athletes Takashi Takenouchi (Nagoya University, Japan), Mikiko Oohata (Kawabeyasuragi Clinic, Japan) Psychological competitive ability (PCA) refers to a trait that enables an athlete to compete to the best of his or her ability (Tokunaga, 2001).
This ability is necessary to excel in sports, and therefore, it is important to investigate factors related to this construct. Takenouchi and Oohata (2015) indicated that the achievement of psychosocial developmental tasks was related to PCA of athletes. This study focused on commitment to issues in and outside sports, and examined relationships among commitment, achievement of psychosocial developmental tasks, and PCA of athletes.
Japanese college athletes (169 males and 118 females) completed a questionnaire assessing their commitment to five issues in the athletic domain and seven issues in the daily life domain. Identity, which is a psychosocial developmental task in adolescence was assessed using the subscale of the Japanese version (Nakanishi & Sakata, 2001) of the Erikson Psychosocial Stage Inventory (Rosenthal et al., 1981). PCA was assessed using the Diagnostic Inventory of PCA for Athletes (Tokunaga & Hashimoto, 2000), which includes five factors: Volition for competition, Mental stability and concentration, Confidence, Strategic ability, and Cooperation.
Correlation analyses indicated that commitment to three issues, i.e. team management/team organization, studying, and future occupation, as well as identity were positively associated with PCA in male athletes. Moreover, commitment to four issues, i.e.
athletic performance, future occupation, lifestyles and values, and relationship with the mother, as well as identity were positively associated with PCA in female athletes. Structural equation modeling indicated that identity mediated the relationship between commitment to the issue of future occupation and PCA. These results suggest that facilitating commitment to various issues in and outside sports and the achievement of psychosocial developmental tasks could develop the PCA of athletes.
Keywords: college athletes, psychological competitive ability, commitment, psychosocial developmental tasks Effects of acute exercise on food-related cognition in obese adolescents Jen-Hao Liu, Chih-Han Wu, I-Lun Huang, Tsung Yi Wu, Yu-Kai Chang (National Taiwan Sport University) Obesity results from an excessive consumption of high-calorie foods, and can easily lead to high blood pressure, stroke, and diabetes, in relation to physiological disease. Obesity has also been highly associated with cognitive impairment, including impaired executive functions. Many studies have indicated that exercise can 666Posters Friday July 14th reduce cognitive decline; however, whether its benefits affect food-related cognition functions remains unknown.
The purpose of the study was to examine the effects of acute exercise on food-related cognition factors in obese adolescents. Thirty-eight male preadolescents, aged 13-16 years, and with a body mass index > 26, were randomly assigned into control and exercise groups. The exercise group underwent a bout of a jumping rope exercise program, performed at moderate intensity, and the control group engaged in reading for 30 minutes.
The measurements, regarding the different types of cognitive functions possibly affected, included a Stroop Test, and a food-related cognition test. The results revealed that the obese preadolescents within the exercise program significantly enhanced both their general and obesity-specific aspects of executive functions, improved their food-related cognition test performances, and reduced their hunger status. These findings suggest that acute exercise may be an effective treatment for enhancing executive functions, improving food- related cognition and reducing hunger status in obese preadolescents.
Keywords: acute exercise, food-related, obesity, adolescents, cognition The role of athletes’ mindfulness on future alexithymia, burnout, and performance Rei Amemiya, Yosuke Sakairi (University of Tsukuba) There have been nearly no examinations of the mechanism related to the effects of mindfulness programs as a method of approaching both the mental health and performance of sports competitors. This longitudinal study aimed to investigate the relationship between athletes’ mindfulness, alexithymia, burnout, and performance efficacy. The participants were 125 university athletes.
They completed a questionnaire comprising of the Athletes Mindfulness Questionnaire, Sport Alexithymia Scale, Burnout Scale for University Athletes, and self-reported and objective of Psychological Performance Efficacy Scale at three intervals (Time1; Time2, conducted two months after Time1; and Time3, conducted 4 months after Time1). The results showed acceptable fit indices in the hypothesis model. Athletes’ mindfulness at Time 1 was negatively associated with alexithymia at Time2 (β=-.61, p <.001), burnout at Time3 (β=-.23, p<.05), and positively associated with performance self-evaluation at Time3 (β=.23, p<.01).
Furthermore, athletes’ mindfulness was negatively associated with burnout through alexithymia, and positively associated with performance evaluation by their partner through burnout indirectly (p<.05). The results of this study supported the relation between the athletes’ mindfulness, their alexithymia, burnout and performance scores using a longitudinal approach. Prior research has suggested that athletes’ mindfulness facilitates awareness of positive emotions and it controls their negative emotions that are a source of burnout (Gustafsson et al., 2015).
Furthermore, previous studies reported that athletes whose performance was not going well were noted as facing psychological barriers that had a negative impact on their performance and daily lives (Gardner et al., 2006). Therefore, based on the results of this study and the implications of prior research, it has become clear that the strength of mindfulness contributes to regulating athletes’ mental health and performance. Keywords: mindfulness, alexithymia, burnout, perfromance, longitudinal study A qualitative exploration of martial artists’ mental training: Interpretations of the function of Qi and energy Chien-Hsun Lin (Fu-Jen Catholic University, Taiwan), Frank Jing-Horng Lu, Theresa Chyi (Chinese Culture University, Taiwan) Early sport psychologists frequently use oriental martial artists’ mental training to explain how psychological skills enhancing athletic performance (Nideffer, 1985; Singer, 1990; Suinn, 1986).
However, very few studies examined how martial artists practice psychological skills training (PST) and its meaning to contemporary sport psychology. The purpose of this study was to explore the contents of martial artists’ mental training and its psychological implications. Focus group interview and individual interviews were 667Posters Friday July 14th undertaken in this study.
We interviewed 8 martial artists (5 males, 3 females) who have practiced martial arts more than 5 years. The interviews were semi-structured through use of recording pen, and transcribed verbatim. The group meeting lasted for 90 min, and the individual interview lasted 30 min per participant.
A grounded theory approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) was employed throughout the data collection and analysis. Further, Heidegger’s (1962) philosophical stand of Hermaneutics was used to examine/interpret findings. We found martial artists used meditation, self-talk and imagery to practice their mental training.
Also, they have special philosophy to guide their thoughts and physical training. They believe such mental training bring them into a state of fully concentrated, well-prepared, relaxed, spiritually inspired, happy, and healthy. Their interpretation of mental training is concentrated by the concept of “Qi” and “perceived psychological energy.” Compare to general sport athletes, martial artists’ mental training was concentrated more in the circulation of Qi in their practice, particularly in meditation, to “gain” more energy.
The strategies martial artists used might be helpful for performing better to athletes. We suggested future study should deeply explore the application of mental training on martial artists qualitatively and quantitatively. The implications of Qi and psychological energy also should be further examined.
Keywords: qi kong, psychological training, mental energy The relationship between mental arousal and performance Changzhu Qi The object of the paper is to explore the relationship between mental arousal and performance is one of the most important topics concerned by sport psychologists, and many hypotheses and theories focus on the topic. But the meaning of “medium strength” and “optimal arousal intensity” ,which have been widely used in previous models, is still unclear. Second, there are many inconsistencies in the definition and measurement of the concept of mental arousal.
The present model is to clarify the concept of mental arousal and offers a new perspective and a theoretical basis for the research related to mental arousal and sports performance. This paper summarized a series of researches carried out by the authors and the research team, which focused on the concept of mental arousal and the arousal-performance relationship. The intensity-direction model indicates that mental arousal contains both intensity and direction dimensions.
Mental Arousal Scale for Athlete (MASA) is developed to measure both the dimensions. Based on the model and systematic integration of previous theories related to the arousal-performance relationship, a new hypothesis is proposed: higher mental arousal is necessary for all physical activity tasks while different tasks call for different directions to enhance performance. The more delicate and complex a task is, the higher need for positive mental arousal will be.
To test the model,a study about the the relationship between the decision-making and mental arousal was conducted .The study found that direction (positive or negative) influences athletes’ intuitive decision- making significantly. For both the expert and novice, intuitive decision-making and sports performance in positive arousal status are significantly better than negative arousal state.This result supported the hypothesis of the present model. Keywords: mental arousal, intensity-direction model, MASA, hypothesis Impact of emotional pictures with different valence on attentional bias of tennis plays: behavioral and ERP evidence MengYang He To contrast the attentional bias characteristics of the experts tennis players and the novices players, the present study uses event-related potentials (ERP)technique which has the high-time-synchronic characteristic.
The purpose is to explore tennis players' attentional bias characteristic, and revelate the brain mechanism of tennis players' attentional bias. This experiment uses 2 (group:expert-novice) x 3 (picture priming type: 668Posters Friday July 14th positive, neutral, negative) mixed design. The emotion valence is within-subject factor, and the group is the between-subject.
The dependent variables were response time.Measures were recorded as response time, latency and amplitudes of N1,P1,P2 . Three types of picture(positive,netural,negative) were used in present experiment ,the valences are evaluated by 40 students and they have siginificant differences statistically. First, Compared with novices tennis players,the expert tennis players had faster RT(reaction time).Both the experts and novices tennis payers had faster RT(reaction time) toward negative words under negative pictures.
Second, the experts showed smaller P1,N1,P2 amplitude and shorter latencies ,which means greater ability of attention. Third, Both he experts and novices tennis payers displayed smaller P1, P2 amplitude on positive and negative words following negative pictures. The novices tennis payers showed a lower P300 amplitude on positive words and a larger amplitude on negative words following positive pictures .
Tennis players dispayed a lower P300 amplitude toward negative words following positive pictures. N1 is mainly concerned with the processing process, and its amplitude generally represents the allocation of individual attention resources. P1 is an exogenous component, which is related to the processing of visual information, and is affected by attention.
Numerous studies show that the P2 was highly related to automatic allocation of attention and attentional blink. Keywords: attentional bias, affective priming effect, ERP, tennis player, college students, P1, N1, P2, P300 Role of the social state in pre-performance routines: A psychobiosocial state approach Thierry R.F. Middleton (Laurentian University), Ismael Pedraza (University of Jyväskylä), Michelle Seanor, Odirin P.
Oghene (Laurentian University) The concept of individual zones of optimal functioning (IZOF; Hanin, 2000) has received increasing interest (Ruiz, Raglin, & Hanin, 2017); however, few studies have focused on the role and impact of athlete’s social states prior to performance. An exploration of the role that athletes’ social states play in pre-performance routines was conducted using a thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006) of semi-structured interview data from elite swimmers (n = 8) competing at the university level in Canada. Interviews were conducted as control group interviews of a larger study focused on swimmers’ individual zones of optimal functioning (Hanin, 2000) in relation to their psychobiosocial state (PBS-S; Ruiz, Hanin, & Robazza, 2016).
Swimmers’ were introduced to the concepts of IZOF and PBS-S directly prior to interviews and then asked to describe their routine beginning from 20 minutes prior to a race. Three central themes were identified: (a) determinants of an athlete’s social state (e.g., temporal factors, contextual factors), (b) connection of the social state to the psychological state (e.g., impact on cognitive state) and biological state (e.g. impact on motor-behavioural state), and (c) connection of the social state to components of the pre-performance routine (e.g., impact on self-talk prior to competition).
This study highlights the important role that athletes’ social states play during pre-performance routines and how this state is an integral and interactive component of an athletes’ psychobiosocial state. Results highlight the need for future research on the impact of athletes’ social states on pre-performances routines and subsequent performance. Practical recommendations are provided using Hanin’s (2000) Triple-A framework: need for increased awareness of the role one’s social state plays in achieving optimal performance, acceptance of this influence on performance, and action to self-regulate one’s social state according to perceived needs and objectives.
Keywords: social state, pre-performance routines, IZOF, psychobiosocial state Influence of parental education styles in support Higinio González-García, Antonio Pelegrín, José Luis Carballo (Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche) Parental educational styles and parents support have been related to higher levels of physical activity. There are no previous studies that examined the relationship between parental educational styles and support 669Posters Friday July 14th for sport. On the other hand, in the field of health it has been demonstrated that permissive and democratic mothers were associated with greater support for physical activity.
Therefore, the aim of this study is to determine if parental education styles influence in parents support of athletes. The total sample consisted of 374 athletes. In order to measure the different variables were used, an ad hoc Sociodemographic questionnaire, the Oviedo Scale of Infrequency Response (INF-OV) and the “Multifactor Self-Assessment Test of Child Adjustment” (TAMAI).
The results showed significant differences in: mother protectionism (p<.05), democratic mother (p<.01), democratic father (p<.01) and father protectionism (p<.01), in favour of athletes who felt support from parents, who obtained lower levels. On the other hand, authoritarian mother (p<.01) and authoritarian father obtained significant differences, in favour of athletes who did not feel support in physical activity and sport. Finally, a binary logistical regression was performed using the introduce method (X2=339.40; R2 Nagelkerke=.79).
The regression analysis showed that mother protectionism (p<.05) and democratic father (p<.05), are linked with perceived greater support in sport. On the other hand, higher levels of authoritarian mother (p<.05) and authoritarian father (p<.05) are related to perceiving less support in physical activity and sport. It was concluded that athletes who perceived support for physical activity, obtained higher levels of mother protectionism, democratic mother, democratic father and father protectionism.
In addition, mother protectionism and democratic father, are related to support for physical activity. Keywords: parents, athletes, collaboration, sport career Starters and non-starters in football: Differences in the perceptions of coach’s leadership behaviors Yiannis Zarotis, Konstantina Papailia (National & Kapodestrian University of Athens) In a football team, coach's behavior determines substantially the members’ satisfaction and, in the long term, impacts on each member’s personal performance during the training and the game (Mackenzie, 2003). More specifically, if the coach aspires to keep the team in balance, it is necessary to treat equally the starters and non-starters (Chelladurai, 1980).
The aim of the present study is to explore the differences in the perceptions of starting lineup players and bench players regarding their coaches’ behavior. A sample of 124 football players from 5 different teams and between the age of 15 to 19 participated in the study. Athletes completed the Greek version of Leadership Scale for Sports (Aggellonidis, Zervas, Kakkos, & Psychountaki, 1996), namely the perceived leadership style version, which consisted of five factors.
The results demonstrated differences on perceptions of leadership between starters and non-starters players and these differences referred to the following factors: autocratic coach behavior, democratic coach behavior, positive feedback, and training and instructions. The differentiation between starters and non-starters with regard to the perceived coach’s behavior, as implied by the study’s results, suggests that the coach’s behavior “must” adapt to the players’ “perceptions” in order to preserve their motivation and team’s balance (Smith, Kendall, & Hulin, 1969). Keywords: leadership, coach behavior, starters, non-starters Supported or pressured: Differences on perception of parental role among athletes and parents Yiannis Zarotis, Konstantina Papailia (National & Kapodestrian University of Athens) Parents are substantially involved in their children’s sport experiences.
They typically make the initial decision to enroll their children in sport and have a significant impact on many of the positive outcomes of their child's sport participation (Wuerth, Leeb, Alfermann, 2004). The primary role of the parent in youth sports is to provide emotional, financial and provisionary support for their children. However, there is a growing concern about the parents’ excessive involvement in sports as it seems that certain aspects of parental involvement are detrimental to the development and experiences of young athlete (Nicholas, Holt, Tamminen, 670Posters Friday July 14th Black, Sehn, & Wall, 2008· Williams &Lester, 2000).
The purpose of the present study was to assess the perception of athletes and parents for the parental role in football. The sample was three football teams, 128 participants (athletes and their parents). They complete a Questionnaire for the Parental Role in Sports (Leff & Hoyle, 1995) with 17 items and three factors: parental support, parental pressure and athlete’s satisfaction.
The results demonstrated statistical significance differences among athletes and parents on factors of pressure and support. Αthletes demonstrated less “pressured” and more “supported” than their parents’ perception. The results of the study for parent-child agreement presents preliminary evidence in support of the notion that parents and their children do not agree on measures of parental pressure and support in their children's sport (Elliott & Drummond, 2015· Marsh, Zavilla, Acuna, & Poczwardowski, 2015).
Keywords: parental role, pressure, support, athletes 671AUTHORS INDEX 672Authors Index A. O. Adesokan, 316 Alex Toward, 588 A.
Rui Gomes, 626, 627 Alex Wallace, 398 A.V. Ogunleye, 315 Alexander S. Haslam, 78, 79 Abdullah Nurzulaikha, 148, 251, 252, 253 Alexander T.
Latinjak, 167, 232, 233, 358, 516 Abel Nogueira, 114, 118, 213, 456 Alexandra Gorovaya, 654 Abiodun Moronfolu, 632 Alexandra Markati, 653, 654 Abril Cantú-Berrueto, 43, 216, 489 Alexandra Melo, 444 Ada Sarai Albarran, 116, 117, 339, 664 Alexandra Mosher, 326 Adeolu Adesokan, 631 Alexandra Potts, 653 Adrian Agricola, 453 Alexandre Garcia-Mas, 115, 116, 117, 212, 220, 296, 313, Adrian H. Taylor, 9 349, 356, 664 Adriana Lacerda, 412, 663 Alexandre Nascimento, 620 Adriele Ishimoto, 355, 411 Alexandro Andrade, 620 Agnieszka Golec, 663 Alexi Ponce, 38, 238, 239 Agnieszka Wojtowicz, 478 Alexis Geiger, 305 Agnieszka Zajac, 662 Alexis Holt, 97 Ágota Lénárt, 662 Alfermann Dorothee, 638 Agustín Negrete Cortés, 516 Alfonso Ignacio Martínez Samperio, 596 Aiguo Chen, 661 Alfonso Salguero, 118, 456 Aikaterini Koupani, 566, 579, 660 Alfonso Sámano Sánchez, 516 Aiko Okuda, 660 Alfredo Higueras-Herbada, 600 Airi Naoi, 347 Alfredo Marchant, 43, 44 Aizuddin Bin Hidrus, 183 Alfredo Sáenz, 285 Akane Ogawa, 617 Alhambra Nievas, 227, 228 Akanksha Tripathi, 273, 274 Ali Al-Yaaribi, 652 Akari Kamimura, 392, 438, 659 Ali Brian, 579 Akihiko Kondo, 659 Ali Yildiz, 268 Akira Esqueda, 658 Alicia L. Jiménez, 208 Alan Limon, 658 Alina Franck, 124 Alan Smith, 27, 56 Alina Mertgen, 188 Alberto Aibar, 73 Alka Naik, 378 Alberto Cei, 3 Alvaro Redondo, 477 Alberto Filgueiras, 412 Alvaro Rodríguez Díaz, 210 Alberto Lorenzo Calvo, 522 Álvaro Sicilia, 75 Alberto Rodriguez, 413 Alyona Grushko, 651, 652 Alberto Rodríguez Cayetano, 641, 658 Amador Cernuda, 651 Alejandra Florean, 169, 170 Amanda J.
Wambach, 245 Alejandra Rodriguez, 403 Amilcar Colon-Cortés, 96 Alejandra Yazmin Landeros Rubio, 218 Amir Behrouz Daghoghi, 388 Alejandro Domínguez Fernández, 432 Amir Hosein Memari, 388, 395 Alejandro Jiménez Loaisa, 657 Amparo Escarti, 162, 570 Alejandro Jiménez-Loaisa, 74 Amy Banas, 650 Alejandro Parejo, 580, 657 Amy Blodgett, 70, 72 Alejandro Prieto-Ayuso, 656 Amy Dyer, 307 Alejo García Naveira, 413 Amy M. Gayman, 472, 494 Alejo García-Naveira, 43, 45, 220 Ana Andrés Valle, 610 Aleksander Metodiev, 564 Ana Beatriz Gomes Leite, 529 Aleksandra Krukowska, 85, 86 Ana Besteiro, 444 Aleksandra Pogorzelska, 85, 86 Ana Gabriela Magallanes Rodríguez, 516 Aleksandra Tokarz, 662 Ana García-Dantas, 410 Aleksandra Zienowicz, 85, 86 Ana María del Mar Concha Viera, 649 Alessandra Galmonte, 571 Ana Queralt, 543 Alessandra Monteiro, 561, 562 Ana Ramos, 648, 649 Alessandro Quartiroli, 71, 246, 650 Ana Silva, 567 Alessio D'Aquino, 655 Ana Tavares, 648 Alev Aktürk, 582 Anastasiya Khomutova, 50, 197, 208 Alex Channon, 199 Anaurene Roy, 92, 94 Alex Montoye, 398 Anders Haugen Rønning, 183 Alex Torres, 477 Andersen Pia, 647 673Authors Index Andre Koka, 74, 551 Antonio Montalvo Espinosa, 642 Andrea Chirico, 180, 570, 571 Antonio Palmeira, 318, 320, 417 Andréa Duarte Pesca, 148, 149, 336, 338, 564 António Paula Brito, 628 Andrea Partida Ochoa, 163 Antonio Pelegrín, 669 Andrea Perez-Rivases, 14, 48, 124 António Rosado, 648 Andrea Petróczi, 26, 27, 28, 460 Antonio Sanchez, 413 Andreas Claeson, 186 Antonio Sánchez Muñoz, 641, 658 Andreas Flouris, 234 Antonio Yébenes Montoro, 421 Andreas Ivarsson, 246, 319, 348, 542, 605, 647 Antonio-Jesús Sánchez-Oliver, 526 Andreas Stenling, 20, 605, 647 Antonis Hatzigeorgiadis, 214, 232, 234, 516, 641 Andrés Cencerrado, 492, 493 Anuradha Solanky, 255 Andres Chamarro, 573 Apitzsch Erwin, 638 Andrés López, 286 Araceli Fernández Gea, 432 Andressa Ribeiro Contreira, 500 Aralambos Tsorbatzoudis, 369 Andrew C.
White, 245 Arantza del Valle, 634 Andrew Cooke, 637 Arash Mirifar, 204 Andrew Friesen, 200, 201 Areti Paraskevi Maragkou, 369 Andrew Hill, 435 Ariadna Angulo-Brunet, 13 Andrew Manley, 554 Arif Ozer, 433 Andrew P. Hill, 65, 66, 67 Aristea Karamitrou, 641 Andrew Prestwich, 423 Arnaldo Zelli, 402, 491 Andrew Siddall, 276 Arne Edvardsson, 640 Andrew Tunnicliffe, 382 Arthur Pineau, 575 Andriy Kolosov, 292 Artur Poczwardowski, 83, 84, 85, 86, 295, 297 Andy Lane, 199, 200, 201 Arturo Casado, 113, 640 Ángel Abós, 73 Ashley Stirling, 207, 539 Angel Alejandro Herrada Garibo, 516 Ashutosh Acharya, 298, 299 Ángel Megías Boró, 657 Asko Tolvanen, 68 Angela Donato, 412 Astrid Becker-Larsen, 639 Angela Nogueira Neves, 475 Atahan Altintas, 23, 356, 446 Ángela Urrea, 277, 278 Atakan Yazici, 638, 639 Angeli Gawlik, 507 Athanasios G. Papaioannou, 312 Angelita Cruz, 646 Athanasios Papaioannou, 54, 638 Angelo Altiere, 17 Athanasios Pappous, 589 Angus Mugford, 40, 296 Athanasius Nwanegbo Amasiatu, 290, 315, 321 Anjali Forber-Pratt, 247 Atsushi Suzuki, 521 Anna Benito, 48 Attila Szabo, 43, 44 Anna Christakou, 646 Audrey Pérusin, 15 Anna Jordana, 14, 48, 167 Aurélie Ledon, 193 Anna Kavoura, 50 Aurelio Olmedilla, 246 Anna Nawrocka, 17 Avilés Vicente Roberto, 641 Anna Ussorowska, 466, 484, 485 Aya Takayama, 637 Anna Viñolas, 266, 645 Aydan Gözmen Elmas, 573 Anna Wasserkampf, 319 Aylton José Figueira Júnior, 552 Anna-Marie Jaeschke, 76 B.
E. Folarin, 317 Anne Spitse, 47 B. L.
Oluwatunbi, 316 Anne Teboul, 575, 644 B.G Akuru, 315 Anne-Marie Elbe, 214, 232, 295, 516 Bahri Gürpinar, 231, 596, 635, 636 Anne-Sophie Denault, 565 Barbara Mullan, 308 Anshuman Mishra, 298, 300 Bart Staal, 149 Anthony Battaglia, 207 Basak Eroglu, 25 Anthony Papathomas, 144, 304, 305, 583 Beatriz Galilea Ballarini, 635 Anthony Watt, 174, 270, 328, 329 Bebetsos Evagelos, 660 Antje Hill, 59 Belen Pineda, 170 Antonia Pelegrín, 574 Benjamin Strenge, 258 Antonia Zamora, 635 Berkant Özmen, 596 António Fernando Rosado, 149, 213, 336, 337, 338, 643 Bernat-Carles Serdà, 634 Antonio Hernández Mendo, 140, 432, 435 Bernd Strauss, 312, 368, 460 Antonio Jesús Sánchez-Oliver, 642, 643 Bernier Marjorie, 591 António Labisa Palmeira, 587, 588 Bert De Cuyper, 78 António M. Fonseca, 102, 103, 434 Berta Veiga, 48 Antonio M. Pérez-Flores, 209, 210 Bertrand Fincoeur, 77 674Authors Index Bettina Callary, 634 Ceri Wynne, 27 Bettina Rulofs, 139 Chang Huang, 624 Bianca Andrade de Sousa, 633 Changzhu Qi, 359, 458, 668 Bin Seo, 281 ChaoHui Zhang, 459 Bin Wang, 410, 454, 547, 633 Chein-Heng Chu, 622, 624 Bin Xie, 632 Chen Chien-Wei, 623 Blanca Rangel-Colmenero, 489 Chen Gong, 281 Blessing Oluwatunbi, 631, 632 Chen Kuan-Fu, 619 Bob Challis, 342 Chen Tai-Ting, 619 Boen Filip, 638 Cheng-Hui Yang, 618 Bolanle Folarin, 442 Chenglin Zhou, 592, 612 Bonnie Berger, 96, 97 Chi Lin, 618 Borui Shang, 323 Chiaki Raima, 415, 617 Bradley W.
Young, 194, 195, 196, 327, 398, 634 Chiao-Ling Hung, 617 Brandon Giles, 58 Chiara Corvino, 121 Brett Smith, 304, 305 Chiara D'Angelo, 122, 166, 167 Brian Gearity, 51 Chien-Chang Ho, 425 Brian Seiler, 579 Chien-Heng Chu, 376, 517, 611 Bryan Mora Flores, 340 Chien-Hsun Lin, 667 Burton Elissa, 308 Chien-Ming Hsu, 403 C. O. Osifeko, 317 Chih-Han Wu, 616, 622, 624, 666 Caio Rosas Moreira, 500, 630 Chihiro Kemuriyama, 453, 615 Camila Bicalho, 576 Ching-Wen Ko, 615 Camila Castro Barros Valicente, 467, 468, 629 Chloé Chermette, 319 Camila Cristina Fonseca Bicalho, 562, 629 Chloe Leprince, 614 Camila Ferezin Resende, 500 Chnaghyun Kim, 506 Camilla Knight, 164, 165 Chonghui Zhang, 614 Camille Montigny, 644 Chris Englert, 69 Camilo Sáenz-Moncaleano, 261 Chris Hammer, 247 Carla Giuliano de Sá Pinto Montenegro, 552 Chris Harwood, 21, 164, 166, 209, 222, 236 Carla Martins, 498, 523, 628 Chris Lonsdale, 32, 153 Carla Meijen, 58 Chris Visscher, 111 Carla Tavares, 467 Chris Wagstaff, 409 Carles Ventura Vall-llovera, 610 Christian Andrä, 476 Carlolyn Plateau, 387 Christian Herrmann, 613 Carlos Arnoldo Ceballos Aguayo, 627 Christiana Osifeko, 442 Carlos Marín, 134 Christiane Trottier, 585 Carlos Muniesa, 92, 193 Christina Todd, 450 Carlos Nunes, 338 Christine Graf, 598 Carlos Peñarrubia, 285 Christophe Gernigon, 575, 644 Carlos Pereira, 490 Christopher David Flores Tello, 583 Carlos Pérez Campos, 364 Christopher Heim, 613 Carlos R.
Carrasquillo-Rios, 95 Christopher M. Spray, 166, 275, 276 Carlos Silva, 338 Christopher Mesagno, 202 Carme Viladrich, 12, 13, 124, 531 Christopher N. Sellars, 613 Carmen-Gloria Ortiz-Saldaña, 526 Christopher Ring, 538, 637 Carolina Lundqvist, 184 Christopher Wagstaff, 146, 244, 250 Caroline Jannes, 110, 111, 112 Christos Argiropoulos, 234 Caroline Tozzi Reppold, 487 Christos Katsikas, 622 Carolyn Roskell, 470 Chueh Ting-Yu, 619 Carsten Hvid Larsen, 126, 184, 185, 242, 243, 492 Chu-Min Liao, 354, 361, 389, 427, 431, 612, 618 Cássia Hess, 578 Chun Hu, 325 Catarina Morais, 626, 627 Chun Xie, 612 Catarina Sousa, 635 Chun-Chih Wang, 611, 622, 624 Caterina Gozzoli, 121, 122, 167, 587 Chung-Ju Huang, 258, 384, 437, 611, 616, 617 Cathy Craig, 310, 312 Chun-Ju Huang, 597 Cecilia Duarte Erales, 626 Chunqing Zhang, 32 Cecilia Peñacoba Puente, 416, 665 Chun-Qing Zhang, 370 Cecilia Silva Gutiérrez, 595 Chunxiao Li, 611 Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani, 275, 308, 423, 447 Cindy Gray, 308 Celina Adewunmi, 632 Claire Rossato, 198, 260 Celina Gonçalves, 625 Clara Selva Olid, 486 675Authors Index Clara Teixidor Batlle, 610 Darias Holgado, 601 Clare MacMahon, 195 Dario Fegatelli, 570 Clare Stevinson, 387 Darío Hernán Iglesias, 472 Claudia Alicia Rivas Garza, 356, 664 Daryl Marchant, 175 Claudia Larenas, 314 Dave van Schie, 377 Claudia Rivas, 115, 116, 117, 141, 292, 293, 609 David Blanco-Luengo, 464, 490 Claudio Robazza, 59, 68, 343, 397, 608 David Fletcher, 147 Clifford J.
Mallett, 79 David González-Cutre, 73, 74, 75, 657 Climent Giné-Giné, 277 David Gutiérrez, 488 Comille Bandura, 621 David John Edwards, 599, 600 Conde Monserrat, 498, 523 David Lacambra, 285 Constantino Arce, 607 David Llopis, 283 Constanza Pujals, 500 David M Hansen, 326 Consuelo García Antunez, 41 David M. Jacobs, 600 Cornelia Frank, 257, 343, 655 David Mora, 288 Costas Karageorghis, 262, 263, 264 David Peris, 113, 173 Courtney Mason, 501 David Peris Delcampo, 598, 599, 664 Courtney R. Porter, 195 David R.
Owen, 97 Craig Williams, 230 David Sánchez-Oliva, 13, 318, 320, 418, 587, 588 Cristiana Bessa, 102, 621 David Tod, 3, 126, 128, 190, 191 Cristiana Conti, 177, 608 David Travieso, 600 Cristiane Bhering Moretzsohn da Silva, 629 David Zamorano García, 519 Cristiano Barreira, 355, 411 Deborah Kerr, 308 Cristiano Roque Antunes Barreira, 271 Dellia Ibáñez-Granados, 108 Cristina Cuesta-Zamora, 608 Denis Hauw, 76, 77, 156, 157, 158 Cristina De Francisco, 607 Dennis Dreiskämper, 460, 598 Cristina Fink, 163, 236, 286 Deokgyu Won, 506 Cristina López de Subijana, 92, 192, 193 Derek Panchuk, 518 Cristina Melo, 362 Derwin King Chung Chan, 31, 32, 153, 179 Cristina Nunes, 498, 523 Diana Amado, 106, 108, 429 Cristina Reche García, 606 Diana Lorena Flores Escalante, 627 Cristina Sanz-Fernández, 606 Diana van Winden, 597 Cyril Klosek, 644 Diana Vázquez, 595, 596, 636 Dagmara Budnik-Przybylska, 328, 330, 342 Diana Vázquez Cruz, 596 Dahiana Salazar-González, 43, 216 Diana Zerdila, 516, 595 Daisuke Takeda, 605 Diane Gill, 33, 35, 580 Dale Quain, 58 Diane M. Wiese-Bjornstal, 245 Damian Farrow, 518 Diego Pastor Campos, 205 Damián Ursino, 420 Dieter Hackfort, 352, 464 Damien Clement, 604, 605 Diletta Gazzaroli, 168, 587 Damien Tessier Philippe Sarrazin, 560 Dilip Kumar Dureha, 52, 53, 299 Dan van der Westhuizen, 174 Dimitrios Goulimaris, 381, 561 Daniel Birrer, 225, 380, 426 Diogo Monteiro, 420, 443, 594 Daniel Brown, 147 Diogo Teixeira, 318, 594 Daniel Duarte, 428, 603 Dirk Büsch, 368 Daniel Gould, 125, 235 Dirk Koester, 342 Daniel Green, 195 Dmitrii Kabanov, 651 Daniel Gucciardi, 58, 180, 309, 423, 447 Dojin An, 593 Daniel J.
Madigan, 66 Dominika Kwasnicka, 423 Daniel Jimeno Ruiz, 413 Donatella Di Corrado, 593 Daniel Krokosz, 484 Donatella Minelli, 17 Daniel Mon, 603, 664 Dong Wang, 104, 105 Daniel Pires, 602 Dong-Chan Huh, 592 Daniel Sanabria, 601 Dong-Ho Lee, 549 Daniel Trujillo Torrealva, 468 Dongkeun Lee, 281 Daniela Barni, 231 Dong-Seop Lee, 549 Daniella Paína, 602 Dongshi Wang, 592 Danilo Coimbra, 620 Dong-Wook Han, 395 Danilo Menicucci, 341 Dora Bartulovic, 195 Dany J. MacDonald, 223, 326, 327 Doron Julie, 591 Dany MacDonald, 221, 325, 567 Dorothee Alfermann, 4, 123, 474 Dapeng Zhu, 601 Douglas Popp Marin, 552 676Authors Index Do-Young Lee, 528 Erika Alejandra Lorenzo Contreras, 636 Dr. Guneet Inder Jit Kaur, 559 Erika Gadea, 421, 581 Dr.
Jess C. Dixon, 505 Eriko Katagami, 581 Dr. Mark Campbell, 448 Erin Reifsteck, 34 Dr.
Mathieu Bélanger, 505 Erkut Konter, 181, 182, 183, 300, 301 Dr. Matthew Herring, 448 Estefania Lopa Peralto, 580 Dr. Sean Horton, 505 Ester Cerin, 308 Dr.
Stephen Cobley, 504 Eugenio Antonio Pérez Córdoba, 440 Duarte Araújo, 244, 529, 626 Eugenio Pérez Córdoba, 595 Duksun Chang, 281, 590 Eun Choi, 534 Dung Tien, 175 Eungwang Oh, 35, 580 Duygu Karadag, 576 Eunji Kim, 515 Dylan Warner, 58 Eva M. Agea-Pérez, 598 Edda Lorenzo-Bertheau, 589 Eva Monsma, 579 Edson Filho, 260, 588 Eva Skawiniak, 562 Eduardo Cervello, 74, 204, 205, 657 Evangelos Bebetsos, 566, 579 Eduardo Generelo, 73 Evangelos Galanis, 234 Eduardo Jorge Brazâo Vacas de Sousa da Silva, 587, 588 Evaristo Barrera Algarín, 210 Eduardo Morelló Tomás, 133 Evelia Franco Álvarez, 540, 578 Edwin Lopez, 288 Ewa Serwotka, 86 Eivind Anderson, 151 Ezgi Aypar, 572 Ekaterina Fedai, 494 F. Hülya Asçi, 407, 576 Ekaterina Gilyazetdinova, 365 F.
Javier Ponseti Verdaguer, 349 Ekaterina Korobeynikova, 651 F.Hülya AsÇi, 573 Elbe Anne-Marie, 638 Fabian Pels, 139 Eleanor Quested, 107, 275, 308, 423, 447 Fabiano Pereira, 620 Eleftheria Morela, 214 Fabien Legrand, 333, 334, 335 Elena Conde, 192 Fabienne Collette, 562 Elena Hernandez Hernandez, 642 Fabienne D'Arripe Longueville, 614 Elena Marta, 123 Fabienne Ennigkeit, 613 Eleonora Reverberi, 123, 168, 587 Fabienne Meerstetter, 480 Eliana de Toledo, 578 Fabio Alivernini, 180 Eliana V.
Carraça, 320 Fábio Dominski, 620 Elie Alam, 193 Fabio Lucidi, 180, 212, 402, 491, 570, 571 Eliot Brito, 586 Fabio Serpiello, 518 Elisa Ferrari, 586 Fabrizio Sors, 461, 571 Elisa Menardo, 341 Faye Didymus, 164, 487, 553, 554, 653 Elisabeth Rosnet, 585 Federica Galli, 570, 571 Elise Marsollier, 585 Federico Carreres, 162, 570 Ella Malloy, 584 Federico Guede-Fernández, 130, 131 Ellen MacPherson, 207, 584 Feigean Mathieu, 569 Elliot Turiel, 650 Felipe Dambroz, 569 Eloisa Cianci, 587 Felipe Reynoso, 56 Elvia Alexandra Valadez Jiménez, 583, 620 Felipe Ruy Dambroz, 568 Emelie Elfsberg, 647 Felipe Turbay, 568 Emilio Villa-González, 589 Felipe Vieira, 467 Emily Hunt, 304, 583 Felippe Cardoso, 569 Emily Ortega, 18, 19, 51, 52 Felippe da Silva Leite Cardoso, 568 Emine Çağlar, 251, 252, 268, 547, 582 Felix Arbinaga, 171 Emma Kavanagh, 187, 582 Felix Ehrlenspiel, 204 Emma Mosley, 187, 188, 582 Félix Guillén, 43, 44, 277, 278 Emma Vickers, 190 Felix Heldmann, 377 Eneko Larumbe-Zabala, 113 Felix Huelsmann, 257 Enric Barri-Vilardell, 524 Fenghua Sun, 611 Enrico Staderini, 156 Fernanda Serra de Queiroz, 567 Enrika Kromerova, 379 Fernando Falavigna Vianna Falavigna Vianna, 467 Enrique Aguayo, 313 Fernando Gimeno Marco, 285 Enrique Cantón, 219, 296, 321, 440, 664 Fernando González Guirval, 432, 435 Eoin Murray, 590 Fernando Luiz Cardoso, 586 Erez Mosek, 267, 270 Fernando Santos, 567 Eric Srecki, 585 Ferran Calabuig Moreno, 519, 529 Erica Ting-Wen Wang, 350 Fevziye Hülya Asçi, 446 677Authors Index Filip Boen, 78, 79, 80 Gernigon Cristophe, 638 Filippos Filippou, 566, 579, 660 Gershon Tenenbaum, 60, 259, 260, 261, 262, 397, 450, Fiona Chambers, 161 539 Flavia Guidotti, 17 Gert Vande Broek, 78, 79 Flavia Vique, 471 Geumran Seo, 656 Flora Colledge, 465 Gil Rodas, 132, 493 Florence Kinnafick, 142, 143, 144, 262, 263 Gilda Moheno Gurza, 452 Forteini Zervou, 150 Gily Meir, 450 Frances L.
Price, 98 Giorgos Mavridis, 595 Francesc Xavier Ponseti, 213 Giovanna Vietta, 620 Francesca Cavallerio, 99 Gislaine Contessoto Rizzo, 500 Francesca Danioni, 231 Giusy Versace, 227, 228 Francesco Di Gruttola, 341 Gloria Balague, 10, 161, 235 Francisco Atienza, 55 Glyn C. Roberts, 151 Francisco Batista Espinosa, 43, 45 Gokhan Caliskan, 433 Francisco Cruz-Quintana, 589 Gonzalo Gil, 532 Francisco Garcia Ucha, 293, 340 Göran Kenttä, 137, 186, 332 Francisco José Trillo Padilla, 525 Gözde Ersöz, 25 Francisco José Vela Rubio, 523 Grace Otinwa, 631 Francisco Luis Atienza, 109 Graciela C. Alatorre-Cruz, 154 Francisco M.
Leo, 13, 565 Graig M. Chow, 62 Francisco Miguel Tobal, 442 Graziela Néspoli Feltran, 475 Francisco Moreno Morales, 435 Gretchen Kerr, 207, 539, 584 Franco Noce, 362, 576 Gretter Ehizibue, 461 Francois Poulin, 565 Grzegorz Wieclaw, 178, 560 Frank Abrahamsen, 183, 277, 278 Guido Geisler, 474 Frank J.H. Lu, 350, 407 Guilherme Bevilacqua, 620 Frank Jing-Horng Lu, 354, 425, 615, 667 Guilherme Machado, 569 Frank Lu, 83 Guilherme Vilarino, 620 Franziska Preis, 125 Guillermo Mendoza, 559 Fu-Ching Hsu, 615 Guillermo Perez Recio, 236 Fu-Shu Hsu, 615 Guneet Inder Jit Kaur, 273 G.Yasemin Aldemir, 546 Hai-Feng Guo, 281 Gáborné Haraszti, 662 Hakan Kolayis, 443, 558, 559 Gabriel Martínez Rico, 364 Hamideh Abrishamkar, 388 Gabriela Frischknecht, 338, 564 Hanako Fukamachi, 557 Gabriele Wulf, 419 Hannah Levi, 557 Gaëtan Garraux, 562 Hannah Manley, 145 Galatea Cristaldi, 289 Hannah Uren, 275 Galina Domuschieva-Rogleva, 563, 564 Han-Seung Yang, 528 Gamze Deryahanoglu, 24 Hao Liu, 556 Gangyan Si, 297, 320, 324, 325, 446 Harald Seelig, 613 Gao Zhiqing Gaozhi, 563 Harri Rintala, 455 Gao-Xia Wei, 495 Harri Selänne, 240, 241, 462, 503 Gareth E.
Jowett, 66, 67 Haruo Sakuma, 508, 541, 556 Gareth Morgan, 380 Hasenbring Monika, 537 Gareth Roberts, 146 Hassan Gharayagh Zandi, 394 Garry Kuan, 92, 93, 94, 148, 175, 183, 252, 253 Hayley McEwan, 127, 128 Gaspar Maza, 121 Heather Gatten, 261, 539 Gayatri Pandey, 299 Heather Kiefer, 539 Geoffory Boucard, 562 Héctor Gutiérrez, 285 Geoffrey Jalleh, 180 Héctor Moreno-Casado, 418, 555 Georg Lozhkin, 292 Heeju Kim, 590 George Cunha, 561, 576 Heidari Jahan, 537 George Mavridis, 381, 561 Heinrich Grobbelaar, 554, 555 George Pavlidis, 307 Hei-Rhee Ghim, 431 Georgia Ridler, 19 Helen Heaviside, 554 Geraldine Escriva-Boulley, 560 Helen Staff, 553 Gerard Fogarty, 650 Heloisa Elesbão, 382, 383, 404, 405 Gerber Markus, 399 Helton Magalhães Dias, 475, 552 Germán Hernández-Cruz, 489 Heng Tsai, 597 Germano Gallicchio, 637 Henk Erik Meier, 368 678Authors Index Henna Hukkanen, 552 Ioannis Kordoutis, 595 Henri Tilga, 74, 551 Ioannis Ntovolis, 181 Henrik Gustafsson, 20, 22, 183, 184, 208, 480 Irene Checa, 107 Henrique Campos, 567 Irene González-Martí, 519, 608 Henrique Martins, 428, 575 Irina Simonenkova, 291, 545 Henrique Rodrigues Nunes, 552 Irina Watkins, 240 Herbert Ugrinowitsch, 602 Irit Bluvstein, 544 Hervé Le Bars, 575, 644 Irith Kist, 47 Hideaki Takai, 373, 465, 506, 551 Isaac Estevan, 543, 544 Higinio González-García, 574, 669 Isaac Uribe Alvarado, 620 Hila Gil Bar-Mecher, 60 Isabel Balaguer, 54, 55, 56, 141, 160, 403, 451, 649 Hiroaki Funahashi, 558 Isabel Castillo, 54, 55, 56, 141, 160, 471, 543 Hirokazu Arai, 557 Isabel Mesquita, 102, 103, 434, 648, 649 Hiroki Takase, 463 Isabella C Belem, 327 Hironobu Tsuchiya, 400, 581 Isabella Fren, 193 Hiroshi Matsumoto, 515, 550 Isao Uebayashi, 558 Hiroshi Sekiya, 371, 415, 617 Ismael Pedraza, 512, 669 Hiroto Tsuji, 510 Isobelle Kennedy, 188 Hiroyuki Yamamoto, 550 Israel Teoldo da Costa, 568 Hitomi Okubo, 373 Israel Villarrasa-Sapiña, 544 Homook Kim, 18 Itay Basevitch, 260, 342, 450 Honey Thaljieh, 227, 228 Iván Guirola Gomez, 519 Hong Hu, 614 Iván Pérez Carlos, 43, 45 Hong Sunghee, 549 Ivonne Michel Jiménez Ortega, 218, 583 Hong-Yu Liu, 407 Iwan de Kok, 257 Hosang Yoo, 549 J.
Joaquín García-Lluch, 598 How Peck Ngor, 87 J. Viñas Rodríguez, 511 Howard Hall, 54, 55 J.M. Gamito Manzano, 511 Hsin-Yun Chuang, 548 Jaana Viljaranta, 241 Hsiu-Tin Wu, 368 Jacek Przybylski, 330 Hu Jing, 563 Jack Watson, 38, 39, 296 Huang Chung-Ju, 619 Jacob Latour Dupuis, 72 Hubert Krysztofiak, 17 Jacqueline Schmidt Rio-Valle, 589 Hugo Aranguiz Aburto, 415 Jade Salim, 542 Hui Li, 548 Jae-Moo Lee, 375 Hui Yin Ler, 88 Jaime Díaz-Ocejo, 381 Hui Zhang, 393, 410, 547 Jaime Torres-Pinazo, 464, 490 Hülya Asçi, 25, 268, 547 Jaiprakash Bhukar, 298, 299 Hung Tsung-Min, 619 Jairo Vázquez, 132 Hüseyincan Göçmen, 596 James Hardy, 233 Hutter Vana, 638 James L.J.
Bilzon, 146, 276 Hyeonjin Lee, 431 James Parker, 542 Hyun-Duck Kim, 646 James Rumbold, 363 Hyunmyung Chang, 593 James Soanes, 145 Ian Boardley, 27, 56 James Turner, 146, 147 Ian Taylor, 248, 249, 250, 276 James W. Adie, 208 Icíar Eraña, 287 Jan Blecharz, 85, 541 Igor Mekjavic, 449 Janaína Tomás, 444 Igor Mitin, 654 Janet Young, 268 Ihsan Sari, 23, 24, 546 Janja Tekavc, 16 Ilaria Santoro, 461 Jason Bantjes, 555 Ilkay Ulutas, 639 Jasperina Coenen, 110, 111, 112 Ilker Özmutlu, 25 Jatcee Malo Barriga, 339 I-Lun Huang, 546, 616, 666 Jaume Cantallops Ramón, 349 Inbal Perry, 539 Jaume Cruz, 2, 12, 54, 212, 348 Indu Bora, 299, 300 Jaume Martí, 135, 136, 173 Ineke Vergeer, 545 Jaume Sabaté, 284 Ines Tomás, 451 Javier Cejudo, 434 Inés Tomás, 54, 56 Javier Ciruela, 14 Ingrid Van Gelder, 47 Javier Coterón, 540, 578 Inmaculada González-Ponce, 108, 565 Javier de la Mata, 477 In-sun Kang, 431 Javier de La Mata, 477 679Authors Index Javier Gil, 540 Joan Riera Riera, 521 Javier Molina-García, 543 Joan Vives Ribó, 136 Javier Ramos, 92, 192, 193 Joana Cruz, 417 Javier Sanchez-Lopez, 153, 649 Joana Maria Osório, 524 Javier Sevil, 73 Joana Osorio, 156 Jayashree Acharya, 297, 298, 300, 386, 391, 406, 424, Joana Viães, 643 540 Joanna Sztachanska, 530 Jazmin Rivera, 609 Joanne Butt, 414 Jean Marie Place, 401 João Moutão, 420, 443, 594 Jean Rettig, 260 Joaquín Delgado Giralt, 432 Jean Whitehead, 158, 159, 228, 229, 231, 636 Joaquín Díaz, 171, 172 Jean-Charles Lebeau, 261, 450, 539 Joaquín Dosil, 265, 645 Jeanette López-Walle, 56, 141, 216, 218, 403, 489 Joaquin Luque, 477 Jeanette M.
Lopez-Walle, 452 Joël Pincemail, 562 Jeanette Magnolia López Walle, 451, 649 Johan Ekengren, 190, 531 Jeannine Ohlert, 137, 138, 139 Johanna Belz, 537 Jean-Paul Chéramy, 562 John Elvis Hagan Jnr, 291 Jean-Pierre Philippon, 585 John Mills, 27 Jeffrey Thijssen, 149 John Nezlek, 463, 530 Jenessa Banwell, 539 John Wang, 152 Jen-Hao Liu, 376, 622, 624, 666 Johnmarshall Reeve, 447 Jenn Jacobs, 162 Johnson Urban, 638 Jennifer Cumming, 470 Jolan Kegelaers, 110, 111, 112, 526 Jennifer Etnier, 394 Jolene Jacquart, 334 Jennifer Henderson, 538 Jolly Roy, 61 Jennifer L. Etnier, 8 Jonatan Gadiel Yañez Lopez, 664 Jenny Back, 537 Jonatan Yañez, 116 Jens Kleinert, 138, 139, 187, 319, 537 Jonathan Grix, 27 Jeong Dog Sul, 515 Jonathan Weiss, 326 Jeonghee Kim, 536 JoonYoung Lee, 366, 525 Jeongjoo Kim, 506 Joost Pluijms, 525 Jerónimo García-Fernández, 526, 642, 643 Jooyoung Park, 515 Jessica Francombe-Webb, 423 Jordi Martín, 131 Jessica Fraser-Thomas, 326 Jordi Moreno, 492, 493 Jessica Gal, 198 Jordi Segura, 277, 279 Jessica Pistella, 536 Jorge Ballesteros, 398 Jessica van Geemen, 377 Jorge Brito, 578 Jessica Vilchez Vivanco Ordoñez, 469 Jorge Ferrari, 37 Jesús Chalela, 36, 37, 38, 535 Jorge Jiménez Salas, 435 Jesús Fernández-Gavira, 526, 642, 643 Jorge Lorenzo Calvo, 522 Jesús Moo Estrella, 218 Jorge Martínez Ojeda, 525 Jesús Rico-Ballesteros, 490 Jorge Salazar Espinoza, 415 Jia Lin Guo, 632 Jorge Zamarripa, 217, 471 Jiaying Lu, 251 José A. Julián, 73 Jie Cui, 495 Jose A.
Navia, 600 Jie Li, 346, 624 José Alberto Calva-Franco, 422 Jifu Wang, 534 Jose Alberto Perez Garcia, 421 Ji-Hang Lee, 82, 375, 379 Jose Carlos Caracuel Tubio, 114 Jihye Chung, 533, 534 José Carlos Jaenes, 42, 112, 114, 211, 212, 217, 348, 422, Jihyun Sung, 280 489, 657 Jim McKenna, 396 José Carrascosa, 315 Jim Ressler, 162 Jose Cela-Ranilla, 524 Jin Hwang, 280, 281, 528 José Fernando Cruz, 524 Jingcheng Li, 389, 533 Jose Flores Rodríguez, 523 Jingdong Liu, 532 José Guilherme, 498, 523, 628 Jingu Kim, 349 José Juan Robles, 119 Jinling Fan, 388 José L. Chamorro, 522 Jitendra Mohan, 253, 254, 273, 274 José Lino Oliveira Bueno, 272, 301, 417 Joan Duda, 54, 55, 69, 160 José Luis Carballo, 574, 669 Joan Guàrdia-Olmos, 277 Jose Manuel Boquera Navarrete, 364 Joan Palmi, 532 Jose Manuel Bustamante Castaño, 525 Joan R Tarragó, 493 José Manuel De Mena Ramos, 658 680Authors Index José Manuel Hernández, 246 Juliana Camilo, 272 José Manuel Martín Migez, 523 Juliana Frainer, 149 José Manuel Martínez Rodríguez, 523 Julie Doron, 614 José Manuel Sánchez Galán, 522 Julien Chanal, 475 José María Buceta, 286 Julio Román Martínez-Alvarado, 516 José María de Mena Ramos, 641 Jung Gil Park, 280 Jose Maria Fuentes, 413 JungHun Heo, 503, 515 José María Fuentes Blanco, 641, 658 Junichi Nishida, 515, 550 José María López Chamorro, 192 Jürgen Beckmann, 182, 204 Jose Milan, 156 Juri Hanin, 68 José Navia, 310, 311 Justine J.
Reel, 7 José R A Nascimento Junior, 327 Justine Vosloo, 71 José Roberto Andrade do Nascimento Junior, 500, 630 Juyoung Kim, 506 José Tristán, 56, 216 Kaan Eroglu, 25 José Viñas, 348 Kagan Ducke, 58 José-Angel Díaz-Cabrera, 464 Kahori Tsujita, 581 José-Ángel Díaz-Cabrera, 490 Kai Essig, 258 José-Carlos Caracuel Tubío, 521 Kai Yamada, 514, 558 Josefa Idem, 227 Kaihong Sun, 105 Josep Crespo-Hervás, 529 Kaisa Aunola, 240, 241, 370, 462 Joseph Baker, 195, 196, 472, 494 Kaitlyn LaForge-MacKenzie, 328 Joseph Ciorciari, 330 Kamil Radomski, 86 Joseph Gurgis, 207 Kamila Litwic-Kaminska, 514 Joyo Sasaki, 352, 521 Kana Goto, 352, 513 Jo-Yun Chen, 520 Kaori Ishii, 557 Juan A.
Simón-Piqueras, 488 Karen Briseidy Villarreal, 658 Juan Antonio Vázquez Diz, 432, 435 Kari Tokola, 552 Juan Carlos Arturo González, 620, 658 Karin de Bruin, 198 Juan Carlos Fernandez-Truan, 520 Karin Moesch, 186, 295 Juan Carlos Gonzalez Castro, 421 Karin Weman Josefsson, 309, 318, 319 Juan Carlos Pastor-Vicedo, 656 Karl Marius Aksum, 513 Juan Carlos Perez, 116, 117, 664 Karl Steptoe, 236 Juan de Dios Beas Jiménez, 41 Karla Santos, 449 Juan Gavala González, 211, 519 Karolina Chlebosz, 463, 512 Juan González Hernández, 218, 265, 627 Karolina Jenczylik, 463 Juan Gregorio Fernandez-Bustos, 418, 519 Karoline Michalski, 355, 411 Juan José Miguel Tobal, 442 Katariina Salmela-Aro, 462 Juan Jose Pulido, 192 Kate Fallon, 188 Juan José Pulido, 555 Kate Hunt, 308 Juan Manuel Gamito, 213 Kate Jolly, 470 Juan Manuel Núñez Pomar, 519 Kate O'Keeffe, 512 Juan Martín Tassi, 266, 267, 288, 355 Katharina Geukes, 377 Juan Pablo Morillo Baro, 432, 435 Katherine Tamminen, 222, 223, 345 Juan Pons, 12, 14 Kathleen Martin Ginis, 462 Juan Ramos-Castro, 130, 131, 132, 492, 493 Katrien Fransen, 78, 79, 80 Juan Silva-Pereyra, 155 Katrina McDonald, 342 Juan Tomás Escudero, 135, 136, 410, 481 Katsuhiko Kotani, 511 Juan Tortosa-Martinez, 206 Kazuhiro Suzukawa, 390 Juanita R.
Weissensteiner, 195 Kazutoshi Kudo, 408, 510, 550 Jubeau Marc, 591 Kehinde Adeyemo, 460, 461 Judit Boda-Ujlaky, 517, 662 Keiko Yokoyama, 510 Judith Jimenez, 376 Keith D Hill, 308 Ju-Hee Moon, 528 Keith Davids, 648, 649 Juho Polet, 151 Kellmann Michael, 537 Jui-Fu Chen, 365 Kelsey Kendellen, 509 Jui-Ti Nien, 375, 517, 546 Kensuke Suzuki, 373 Julia Schmid, 364 Kent Lindahl, 47 Julia Zetterström, 647 Kenta Karakida, 352, 509 Julian Fritsch, 232, 516 Kenta Kusanagi, 485 Julian König, 59 Kenta Yonemaru, 521 Julian Paul, 477 Kento Hibi, 508 Julian Wienert, 325 Kerry McGannon, 72 681Authors Index Khelifa Bartura, 234 Leif Lay-Sipf, 528 Khon Natalia, 493 Leighton Jones, 262, 264 Kieran Kingston, 654 Leisha Strachan, 221, 223, 501 Kim Alla, 493 Lena Henning, 598 Kim Peters, 79 Lena Kessler, 64 Kimberley J. Bartholomew, 208 Lenamar Fiorese Vieira, 327, 500 Kimberly Cologgi, 450 Leocricia Jiménez López, 40 Kimio Hashimoto, 82 Leon Van Niekerk, 499 King Chung Derwin Chan, 611 Leonardo Eliecer Tarqui Silva, 498 Knud Ryom, 122 Leonardo José Mataruna-dos-Santos, 663 Koen Buseman, 149 Léonore Perrus, 48 Koen De Brandt, 15, 16, 46, 90, 91 Leslee Fisher, 71 Kohei Ueno, 508 Leslie Podlog, 247 Ko-Hsin Chang, 354 Lesly Castellanos, 43, 216 Koibagarova Dayana, 365 Levenig Claudia, 537 Koichiro Oka, 557 Ley Clemens, 497 Kojiro Matsuda, 507 Lia Gorden, 71 Konstantina Papailia, 670 Liancheng Zhang, 497, 611 Konstantinos Velentzas, 507 Liang Hu, 251 Kooin Jung, 506 Li-Kang Chi, 496, 520, 548 Kook Cho, 528 Lilian Velasco Furlong, 665 Kostantinos Karteroliotis, 653 Lilla Török, 496, 662 Kosuke Hirayama, 506 Lin Chi, 376 Kosuke Sasaki, 605 Lin Li, 495 Kota Matsui, 505 Lin Yu, 527, 616 Krista Van Slingerland, 331 Lina Hu, 495 Kristel Taelman, 90 Lina María Rodríguez, 480 Krister Hertting, 213 Lina María Urrego, 480 Kristin N.
Wood, 245 Lina Zhu, 661 Kristoffer Henriksen, 185, 242, 243, 479, 492, 639 Linda Bucsánszki, 517 Kristy Smith, 504, 505 Linda Schücker, 59 Krisztina Kovacs, 445, 662 Lindsay McCardle, 195, 472, 494 Krommidas Charalampos, 638 Lindsey Hopkins, 334, 335 Krzysztof Malej, 330 Line Maj Nielsen, 479 Kudo Kazutoshi, 463 Ling-Wen Huang, 431 Kuldeep Singh, 504 Lintunen Taru, 638 Kun Wang, 104, 105, 106 Lisa Barnett, 543 Kunimune Fukui, 521 Lisa Whitaker, 307 Kyungju Kim, 18 Liu Ji, 495 Ladislav Petrovic, 348 Liudmila Rogaleva, 365, 493, 494 Lalit Sharma, 52, 53 Livia Meireles, 412 Lambros Lazuras, 27 Liwei Zhang, 18, 321, 459 Lan Guo, 324 Li-Yen Chang, 618 Lars-Eric Uneståhl, 255 Liza Willemsen, 555 Larumbe-Zabala Eneko, 598 Lluís Capdevila, 129, 130, 131, 132, 492, 493 László Tóth, 662 Lorena González, 55, 109 Laudemiro Volmar da Cunha Trindade, 382, 383 Lorna Tweed, 143, 144 Laura Arenas, 480 Louise Davis, 20, 22 Laura Bortoli, 59, 68, 343, 397, 608 Louise Kamuk Storm, 242, 243, 492 Laura Chittle, 505 Luca Mallia, 180, 402, 491, 571 Laura Girelli, 571 Luca Oppici, 518 Laura Koivusalo, 240 Lucas Motta Palermo, 450 Laura Santamaria, 480 Lucas S.
Capalbo, 491 Laura Sebastiani, 341 Lucia Cabrera, 162 Laura Segovia, 488 Lucia Calloni, 123 Laura Tallano, 36 Lucía Carmona-Álamos, 464, 490 Lauren Billing, 502 Luciana Benavides-Aramburu, 469 Laurie Patterson, 307 Luciane Aparecida Moscaleski, 552 Le Wang, 454 Lucy Frearson, 164 Léa Farhat, 193 Ludovic Seifert, 157 Leandro Javier Lorusso, 502 Ludvik Valtr, 453 Leapetswe Malete, 317, 501 Ludwig Vogel, 259 682Authors Index Luis Alonso Rosales Delgado, 481 Marcelo Morillo, 472 Luis Blanco Romero, 435 Marcelo Roffé, 289, 292, 293, 339, 340 Luis Calmeiro, 269, 338, 489, 490 Marcelo Zanetti, 238, 239 Luís Cid, 420, 443, 594 Marcin Krawczynski, 474 Luís Faísca, 498, 523 Marcio Domingues, 473, 591 Luis Felipe Tubagi Polito, 475, 552 Marcio Geller, 37 Luis García-González, 73 Marco Correia, 337, 594 Luis González Barato, 488 Marco Salvati, 536 Luis Horacio Aguiar Palacios, 516 Marc-Oliver Löw, 125, 474 Luís Horta, 648 Marek Graczyk, 17 Luis M. García-López, 488 Margarida Matos, 489 Luis Marqués-Molías, 524 Margarita Asuncion Zavala, 52, 53 Luis Miguel García-López, 608 Margarita Cerviño, 286 Luis Miguel Ruiz, 454, 640 Mari Paz Quesada, 206 Luis Rodenas, 217 María Auxiliadora Franquelo Egea, 432, 435 Luis-Felipe Reynoso-Sanchez, 489 Maria Carbó-Carreté, 277 Luiza Figueiredo, 355, 411 María Clara Rodríguez, 480 Luiza Santos D'Azevedo, 487 María de los Ángeles Corró Molas, 133 Lukas Linnér, 47, 243 María del Pilar Méndez Sánchez, 217, 422, 580 Lukasz Bojkowski, 512 María del Pilar Vílchez, 607 Luke Goggins, 230 María García-Arabehety, 472 Luke Hopper, 107 María Huertas González-Serrano, 529 Luke Norris, 487 María Jiménez, 285 Luke Wilkins, 27 María Julia Raimundi, 435, 472 Luna Moral Campillo, 432 Maria Kavussanu, 6, 178, 180, 312, 635 Luz Antonia Vazquez, 116 Maria Luisa Guinto-Adviento, 52, 53, 229 Luz Antonia Vazquez Romo, 664 María Luisa Zagalaz Sánchez, 218 Lv Ye, 454 María Marentes Castillo, 217, 471 Lynn A.
Darby, 97 Maria Martinez, 162 M. Verónica Planella, 314 Maria Newton, 247 M.Evangelina Tribolo, 277, 279 Maria Noel Givogre, 471 M.Luisa Gennari, 277, 279 María Noel Givogre, 482 Mª Ángeles Atienzar, 141, 160 María Oliva Marquez, 246 Mª Carmen Pérez-Llantada, 286 María Pilar Rodríguez, 141, 163 Mª Dolores González Fernández, 486 Maria Psychountaki, 148, 150, 269, 622, 653 Ma. de los Ángeles Vacio Muro, 620 Maria Regina Capanema Bahia, 629 Maarten Vansteenkiste, 79 Maria Regina Ferreira Brandão, 475, 552 Macarena del Rosario Prado Salinas, 440 Maria Romero Elias, 470 Maciej Tomczak, 478, 512 María Romero Elías, 74 Madhusudhan Reddy Pothula, 486 Maria Ruiz, 284 Madoka Nishida, 485 Maria-Christina Kosteli, 470 Magdalena Jochimek, 466, 484, 485 Marian Arevalo, 279 Magnus Lindwall, 309, 319 Mariana Froeseler, 561, 562 Maike Tietjens, 484, 598 Mariana Kaiseler, 269, 487, 653 Maite Iriarte Rego, 479 Maribel Barriopedro, 92, 193 Malgorzata Lipowska, 466 Marie Hengst, 125 Malgorzata Pajaczkowska, 86 Marijana Mladenovic, 469 Malgorzata Siekanska, 84, 478 Marije T.
Elferink-Gemser, 111 Malgorzata Slawinska, 177 Marina García, 399 Malgorzata Walczak, 478 Mario Botsch, 257 Manu Cargol-Pugés, 233 Mario Reyes-Bossio, 134, 468, 469 Manuel Conceição, 567 Marion Sulprizio, 138 Manuel Mücke, 476 Marisa de Mello Santiago, 467, 468 Manuel Müecke, 465 Marisa Lucia de Mello Santiago, 629 Manuel Naranjo, 477 Maristela Padilha de Souza, 467 Manuel Teixeira, 417 Marit Sørensen, 151, 277, 278 Manuela Pfeffer, 476 Maritza Delgado, 217, 471 Marc Allroggen, 139 Mariusz Lipowski, 466, 484, 485 Marc Yangüez Escalera, 475 Marja Kokkonen, 50 Marcela Mansur-Alves, 561, 562 Mark Nesti, 128 Marcela Mendes Almeida Gomide Leite, 468 Mark Stevens, 466 Marcelo Callegari Zanetti, 475, 552 Mark Wetherell, 22 683Authors Index Markus Gerber, 465, 476, 480 Melissa Day, 101, 306 Markus Raab, 69 MengYang He, 459, 668 Marlene Kritz, 308 Mercedes Rivera Morales, 95, 96 Marlene N. Silva, 320 Mert Nalbant, 635 Marta Borrueco, 213, 348 Merve Ayvalli, 231, 596, 636 Marta Carrasco, 635 Micael S. Couceiro, 529 Marta García-Tascón, 464, 490 Michael Kellmann, 401 Marta Soler, 283 Michael Page, 435 Marte Bentzen, 151 Michael Sachs, 76 Martin Camiré, 221, 222, 509, 567 Michael Spittle, 93 Martin Colclough, 146 Michaela Cocca, 452 Martin Eubank, 128, 129, 190, 191 Michala Bednáriková, 178 Martin Gibala, 462 Michel Salesse, 585 Martin Hagger, 491 Michelle Seanor, 669 Martin Klämpfl, 189, 464 Michelle Smith, 127 Martin Littlewood, 241 Midori Kondo, 458 Martin Ridley, 405 Mieko Ae, 457 Martin S.
Hagger, 5, 31, 32, 151, 152, 179 Miguel A García-González, 493 Martina Jurkovic, 419 Miguel Ángel García-González, 130, 131 Martyn Standage, 32, 147, 276 Miguel Ángel Rodríguez González, 429 Martyna Kotyko, 514 Miguel Aranzana, 118 Martyna Tadzik, 86 Miguel Aranzana Juarros, 456 Mary Fry, 378 Miguel Flores, 620 Mary J. MacCracken, 97 Miguel Goltermann, 109 Maryna Van Niekerk, 499 Miguel Morilla, 266, 267, 355 Marzena Cypryanska, 463, 530 Miguel Rodríguez-González, 555 Marzena Śniarowska-Tlatlik, 560 Miguel Sampaio, 213 Masaaki Koido, 373 Miguel Santolaya, 456 Masahiro Katagiri, 390 Mikel Vaquero Solís, 429 Masahiro Kokubu, 619 Mikel Zabala, 601 Masahiro Shinya, 408, 550 Mikiko Oohata, 666 Masakazu Nemoto, 463, 510 Miklós Fischer Fischer, 662 Masamitsu Ito, 390 Milagros Ezquerro, 285 Masao Nakayama, 372, 373, 474 Milla Saarinen, 455 Masataka Hirosawa, 392, 558, 572 Min Wang, 455 Masato Kawabata, 152 Min Wu, 454 Mateu Capell, 573 Ming-Yang Cheng, 258 Matheus Almenara Rosendo, 429 Minjie Zhang, 454 Matilda Sorkkila, 240, 241, 462 Miquel Torregrossa, 14, 16, 46, 48, 89, 91, 124, 167, 192, Matt Watson, 187 233, 358, 486 Matteo Luzzeri, 62 Mireya Fernández-Chimeno, 130, 131 Matthew Bridge, 538 Míriam Barra, 634 Matthew Herring, 334 Miriam Crespillo Jurado, 432 Matthew Marini, 328 Miriam Palomo-Nieto, 419, 453, 454 Matthew Smith, 147 Mirna García-Méndez, 422 Matthew Stork, 462 Misun Kim, 533, 534 Matthew Williams, 145 Mitsuhiro Amazaki, 453, 615 Mauricio González-López, 154 Mohammad Hadi Hadizadeh, 395 Maurizio Bertollo, 57, 59, 68, 343, 397, 608 Mohammad Khabiri, 395 Mauro Murgia, 461, 571 Mohd Ismail, 148 Mauro Pérez-Gaido, 472 Moisés Grimaldi-Puyana, 526, 642, 643 Maxime Bourdageau, 585 Monica G. Flores-Ibarra, 452 Maxime Trempe, 195 Monique Crane, 309 Maximilian Pelka, 177 Monna Arvinen-Barrow, 604 Mayowa Adeyeye, 460, 461 Montse C.
Ruiz, 67, 68, 69, 329, 572 Mayu Okuno, 521 Montserrat Grau, 452, 634 Meena Sehgal, 253, 254 Montserrat Vallejo, 285, 286 Mehmet Güçlü, 638 Mpaphi Ramolale, 501 Meike Kolb, 460 Murat Uygurtas, 252, 451 MeiLing Li, 18, 459 Murillo José Lemos Nogueira, 629 Meisam Savadelavar, 92, 94, 175 Murillo Lemos Nogueira, 467 Mei-Yen Chen, 353, 359 Nadège Rochat, 76, 157 684Authors Index Nadia Jessop, 326 Nurgül Keskin, 573 Nadine Debois, 15, 48 Nuria Caus Pertegaz, 205 Nadja Walter, 125 Nuria Santana Rubio, 525 Nallely Castillo, 403, 451 Nurul Hamzah, 174 Nancy Ponce-Carbajal, 422 Nurullah Celik, 443, 558, 559 Naruepon Vongjaturapat, 52 O. A. Ipinmoroti, 316 Natalia Franco N Bittencourt, 468 O.
R. Osifeko, 317 Natalia Maria Dancuart Allende, 340 Obdulia Tejón López, 442 Natalia Palacios, 329 Octavio Alvarez, 543 Natalia Stambulova, 47, 124, 189, 190, 191, 212, 214, Oddrun Samdal, 54 215, 242, 243, 492, 531, 639 Odirin Oghene, 72, 215 Natalie Durand-Bush, 30, 39, 331 Odirin P. Oghene, 669 Nataniel Boiangin, 261, 450 Okonkwor Oby, 290 Nathan Smith, 143, 144 Ola Eiken, 449 Natsumi Hamano, 392 Ola Krukowska, 21 Nayara Malheiros Caruzzo, 450, 500, 630 Olalekan Osifeko, 442 Nektarios Stavrou, 150, 173, 267, 268, 269, 449, 646 Olanrewaju Ipinmoroti, 441, 631, 632 Nely Giscafre, 171 Olga Mariela Mogollon Canal, 441 Nenad Stojiljkovic, 427 Olga Molinero, 118 Néstor Sánchez-Rivera, 108 Olga Molinero González, 456 Niall Kelly, 448 Oliver Schulz, 377 Nibu R Krishna, 298 Oliver Twizell, 440 Nibu R.
Krishna, 362 Olivier Hanicotte, 585 Nicholas Holt, 221, 222 Olle Anfelt, 224 Nicholas Stanger, 179, 590 Omar Benjamín Solís Briceño, 218 Nick Aplin, 159 Omar Estrada Contreras, 440 Nick Galli, 247 Omer Seydaogullari, 443 Nicky Van Rossem, 526 Omiros Vlahos, 439 Nicola Heneghan, 470 Onofre Contreras-Jordán, 656 Nicola Jänsch, 447 Oriana Incognito, 341 Nicolas Fernández Martínez, 440 Orlando Reyes, 403 Nicolas Lemyre, 333 Oscar Herrera Gacitua, 415 Nicole Koontz, 398 Óscar Saura, 285 Nicolette Bishop, 249 Osman Urfa, 547 Nicolette Schipper-van Veldhoven, 47 Owen Kavanagh, 435 Niels Mertens, 78, 79 Øystein Røynesdal, 151 Niilo Konttinen, 439 Ozbay Guven, 451 Niki Stolwijk, 148, 149 P. Antoni Borrás Rotger, 349 Nikita Bhavsar, 447 P.J. Beek, 198 Niklas K.
Steffens, 78, 79 Pablo Ferreira, 483 Nikolaos Apostolidis, 653 Pablo Gálvez-Ruíz, 642, 643 Nikos Chatzisarantis, 31, 152 Pablo Jodra Jiménez, 172, 440 Nikos Comoutos, 234 Pablo Luna, 434 Nikos Ntoumanis, 56, 107, 306, 307, 312, 423, 447 Pablo Molero, 108 Nikos Spiliotopoulos, 449 Paloma Escamilla Fajardo, 519 Nilay Hande Kocadag, 446 Pamela Lubowa, 213 Nina Ferrari, 598 Panteleimon Ekkekakis, 262, 263, 304 Ninette Steenkamp, 554 Parma Aragon, 132 Ning Su, 446 Pasi Roslund, 439 Noel Brick, 57 Patrícia A Gaion Rigoni, 327 Noémi Gyömbér, 445, 662 Patrícia Aparecida Gaion Rigoni, 500 Noémie Lienhart, 445 Patrícia Carolina Borsato Passos, 630 Noora J. Ronkainen, 49, 50, 191, 215, 241 Patricia Catala Meson, 665 Noora Ronkainen, 455 Patricia Catala Mesón, 665 Norbert Hagemann, 59 Patricia Catalá Mesón, 416 Norbert Vanbeselaere, 78 Patrícia Coutinho, 101, 102, 103, 401, 649 Noriko Miyake, 444 Patrícia Coutinho, 434 Nükte Özgör, 446 Patricia Domínguez Pérez, 482 Nuno Antunes, 444 Patricia Irene Sosa Gonzalez, 430, 431 Nuno Corte-Real, 444 Patricia Jaenes-Amarillo, 114, 519, 580 Nuno Couto, 420, 443, 594 Patricia Sosa Gonzalez, 437 Nuno Rocha, 625 Patricia Villanueva, 285 685Authors Index Patricia Weir, 504, 505 Qi Luo, 424 Patrick Swain, 342 Qi Si, 322 Paul Appleton, 55, 69, 143 Qi Xiang, 495 Paul Davis, 20, 22 Rachael Newport, 164, 165 Paul Freeman, 230 Rachel Arnold, 145, 146, 147, 423 Paul Goods, 58 Rachel Carr, 423 Paul Stephenson, 165 Rachel Jewett, 422 Paul Wright, 162 Rachel Jordan, 470 Paul Wylleman, 15, 16, 46, 90, 91, 110, 111, 112, 224, Rachel M. Jackson-Kersey, 276 226, 526 Rachel Sandford, 161 Paula Muiños, 141 Rachel Tomlinson, 76 Paula Ortiz, 292, 294 Rafael A.B.
Tedesqui, 194, 195 Pauliina Husu, 552 Rafael Enrique Reigal Garrido, 432, 435 Paulina Campos Romero, 627 Rafael Peñaloza Gómez, 217, 422, 580 Paulo Marcio Oliveira, 500 Rafael Reigal, 140 Paulo Martins, 430 Rafael Rivas Caballero, 421 Paulo Vitor Suto Aizava, 429, 450, 500 Raimundo Castaño, 413, 641, 658 Pawel Atroszko, 17 Raimundo de las Heras, 282, 283 Pedro Almeida, 239 Ralph Appleby, 22 Pedro Antonio Sánchez, 108, 429 Ramón Antonio Centeno Prada, 42 Pedro Antonio Sánchez-Miguel, 108 Raquel Morquecho Sanchez, 421 Pedro Casagrande, 620 Rasool Hemayattalab, 394 Pedro Cornejo-Daza, 464 Raul Antunes, 420 Pedro Galvis Leal, 428 Raúl Antunes, 443, 594 Pedro J. Teixeira, 320 Raul Barrios, 294 Pedro Martins, 628 Raúl Barrios, 292, 420 Pedro Pires, 412 Raymond Bertram, 240, 439 Pedro Reynaga Estrada, 218, 583, 620 Rebecca F. Hings, 146 Pedro Silva, 648, 649 Rebecca Larner, 250 Pedro Teques, 338, 428, 575, 603 Rebecca Wong, 89 Pedro Velazquez, 227, 348 Rebeka Prosoli, 342, 419 Pedro Velázquez, 212 Regina Brandao, 237, 238, 239 Pei-Pei Cho, 427 Rei Amemiya, 667 Penny Werthner, 332 Reinhard Stelter, 122 Pep Marí, 135, 136 Reinhild Kemper, 659 Peta Blevins, 107 Renan Codonhato, 500 Petar Mitic, 427 Renata Baric, 302, 419 Peter C.
Rouse, 276 Renee N. Appaneal, 64, 247 Peter Gröpel, 202, 203 Renzo Bianchi, 480 Peter Peeling, 58 Reza Abdollahipour, 419 Peter Schneider, 176 Ricardo Chavarriaga, 156 Peter Terry, 19, 200, 201, 650 Ricardo Cuevas, 13, 418, 488, 519, 555 Peter Totterdell, 200, 201 Ricardo de la Vega, 43, 44, 119, 412 Peter Wiggers, 47 Ricardo Gonçalves, 417 Petra Dolenc, 426 Ricardo Marinho de Mello de Picoli, 272, 417 Peymane Adab, 470 Ricardo Martínez- Romero, 415, 416, 438 Phatsorn Waraphongthanachot, 174 Ricardo Ponzanelli, 115 Philip Lew, 86, 87, 88 Ricardo Porem, 213 Philip Morgan, 308 Ricardo Sanchez, 121 Philip Sullivan, 328 Ricardo Steffens, 620 Philip Temby, 309 Rich Neil, 409 Philip Turner, 276 Richard C. Thelwell, 146, 147 Philipp Röthlin, 380, 426 Richard Cheetham, 80 Philippe Dedieu, 585 Richard Keegan, 29, 62, 63, 64, 153 Philippe Sarrazin, 54 Richard M.
Ryan, 275 Phillippa Wood, 425 Richard Pulsford, 143 Phoebe Sanders, 100, 244 Richard Ryan, 447 Po-Fu Lee, 425 Richard Steel, 249 Pooja Rawat, 391, 424 Rick Van Eupen, 149 Pothula Madhusudan Reddy, 302 Rika Sekiya, 415 Priyanka Sharma, 52, 53 Rita Kovácsik, 414 Puja Kakkar, 273, 274 Robert Donovan, 180 686Authors Index Robert J. Schinke, 61, 70, 71, 72, 215, 225, 312 Samuel Collington, 145 Robert Morris, 190, 191 Samuel Rees, 145 Robert Newton, 308 Sanchita Baruah, 386, 406, 540 Robert Stadulis, 97 Sandra Ferro, 169 Robert Vaughan, 188 Sandra Mara Mayer, 382, 383, 404, 405 Robert Weinberg, 414 Sandra Nogues Recasens, 404 Roberta Antonini Philippe, 75, 76, 157 Sandrini Isoard-Gautheur, 480 Roberto Aviles, 413 San-Fu Kao, 403 Roberto Baiocco, 213, 536 SangKook Park, 515 Roberto Cruz, 336, 338 Sangmo Han, 403 Roberto Moraes Cruz, 149, 564 Sanjay Singh, 378 Roberto Pérez Lobato, 432 Santiago Reyes, 212 Roberto Ruiz Barquín, 413 Santiago Rivera Matiz, 266, 267, 287, 355 Roberto Ruiz-Barquín, 43, 44, 45, 119, 412 Santiago Troncoso, 403 Robin Jackson, 310 Sara Agnello, 402 Rocío Juárez Ruiz De Mier, 432 Sara Alfieri, 123 Rocío Pérez López, 435 Sara Alonso, 413 Rodrigo Batalha, 620 Sara da Silva, 103, 401, 434 Rodrigo de Vasconcellos Pieri, 272 Sara García García, 440 Rodrigo Pieri, 412 Sara Márquez, 117, 118, 212, 456 Rodrigo Salomão, 355, 411 Sarah Gilmore, 146 Roger Newman-Norlund, 579 Sarah H. Mallinson-Howard, 67 Rong Fan, 410, 547 Sarah J.
Hardcastle, 275 Ronja Højbjerg, 530 Sarah Jack, 64 Ronnie Lidor, 527 Sarah Kölling, 401 Rosa Hechavarria-Gomez, 95 Sarah Williams, 470 Rosa Maria Alfonso Rosa, 430, 431, 437 Saša Cecic Erpic, 16, 90, 168 Rosa Mota, 114 Sasa Elizabeth Vann, 401 Rosana Llames, 135, 136, 410 Satoshi Tominaga, 400 Rosario Navarro Durán, 421 Saül Alcaraz, 12, 399, 400 Rosendo Berengüí-Gil, 43 Saúl Jesus, 498, 523 Ross Wadey, 99, 100, 247, 409, 542 Sayaka Matsumoto, 556 Rossana Cuevas Ferrera, 626 Schilling René, 399 Rossana de Fátima Cuevas Ferrera, 141, 218, 583, 649 Scott Rathwell, 325, 327, 331, 398 Rouault Quentin, 591 Sean Smith, 423 Rouwen Cañal-Bruland, 310, 311 Seang-leol Yoo, 282 Roy Bedard, 262 Sebastian Brueckner, 27, 28 Roy David Samuel, 60 Sebastian Ludyga, 465, 476, 480 Ruben Bravo, 266 Selen Razon, 397, 398 Rubén Moreno, 522 Selenia Di Fronso, 59, 343, 397, 608 Rudney da Silva, 633 Selina Khoo, 94, 150 Rudolf Psotta, 419 Selso Ananias, 630 Rui Batalau, 417 Seo Ryung Park, 18 Rui Manuel Sofia, 524 Seo-Jin Yoon, 379 Rui Rego, 628 Seong Taek Hong, 18 Ruth Boat, 250 Seong-Hun An, 503 Ryan Sacko, 579 Serefcan Çalli, 596 Ryo Konno, 409 Serge Brand, 465, 480 Ryoji Onagawa, 408, 510 Sergio Costa, 396 Ryoko Takemura, 408 Sergio Lara-Bercial, 213, 396 Sae-Mi Lee, 49 Sergio Lorenzo Jiménez Sáiz, 522 Safter Elmas, 25, 407 Sergio Luis González Ruiz, 140 Sally Wyke, 308 Sergio Remis, 400 Salma Soleman Hernandez, 633 Serkan Toprak, 231, 636 Salvador Miró, 14, 48, 91 Serpa Sidonio, 638 Salvador Perez, 413 Seul Lee, 395 Salvador Pérez Muñoz, 641, 658 Seung-Hun Kim, 281 Salvatore Ioverno, 536 Seunghyun Hwang, 280, 281 Sam H. H.
Hsu, 407 Seungmin Lee, 395 Sam Thrower, 164, 166 Sevim FiDan, 407 Samantha Meredith, 250 Seyed Ahmad Ghaziasgar, 388, 395 Samantha Weber, 579 Seyed Mohammad Zadkhosh, 394 687Authors Index SeYun Park, 34, 394, 656 Stiliani Chroni, 50 Shailaja Mohan, 299, 300 Stinne Soendergaard, 62 Sharleen Hoar, 195 Stuart Biddle, 308, 380 Sharon Chirban, 29 Su-Hui Yang, 611 Sheila Greenfield, 470 Sukys Sukys, 379 Sheng- Hsien Fang, 366 Sungje Park, 383 Shi Luo, 393, 410, 547 Sungmin Oh, 379 Shialja Mohan, 378 Susan Backhouse, 553, 554 Shih Wei Chan, 392 Susan H. Backhouse, 26, 179, 307, 590 Shingo Imagawa, 556 Susan Jones, 435 Shino Izutsu, 392, 438 Susana Pallarès, 14, 48, 124, 486 Shipra Srivastava, 391, 424 Susana Regüela, 48, 91, 124 Shiro Nakagomi, 391, 660 Susanne Tafvelin, 22 Sho Itoh, 92, 93 Sushma Ghildyal, 378 Shohei Yamakoshi, 390 Susumu Iwasaki, 378 Shota Sakamoto, 390 Suzan Blijlevens, 111 Shousen Xu, 389 Suzanne Robinson, 308 Shruti Shourie, 273, 274 Sven Hoffmann, 69 Shu Fang Huang, 389 Svenja A. Wolf, 377 Shu Yang, 387 Svenja Wachsmuth, 21, 176, 207, 209 Shubhda Bhosle, 386, 406, 540 Sviatlana Kamarova, 152 Shu-Ching Wu, 615 Sydney Stavert, 223 Shuo-Fen Fan, 612 Syed Ibrahim, 377 Shu-Shih Hsieh, 386, 597 Sylvain Laborde, 43, 44, 69, 186, 187, 188, 443, 582 Shuzhi Chang, 385 T.
Hentschel, 189 Sibak Sung, 539 Tadej Debevec, 449 Sicong Liu, 450 Tadhg MacIntyre, 57 Sidónio Serpa, 141, 149, 212, 336, 337, 338, 648 Taeho Kim, 343 Silvia Comani, 59 Taewon Kim, 376 Silvia María Bartolomé García, 412 Tai-Fen Song, 375, 376, 517 Silvia Sole, 385 Tai-Seok Chang, 375 Sima Zach, 384 Tai-Sheng Chen, 375, 546, 616 Simon Best, 480 Taiyo Fujimoto, 374 Simon Defruyt, 15, 16, 46, 90, 91 Takaaki Kato, 372, 374, 408 Simon Voorwinden, 149 Takahiro Matsutake, 372, 373 Simone Inácio de Lima, 552 Takamasa Sakabe, 373 Sin-Chi Liu, 384 Takashi Takenouchi, 666 Siti Raihanah Binti Roslan, 93 Takayuki Murayama, 352, 372 Siwan Han, 383 Takayuki Natsuhara, 372, 373 Sixto González-Víllora, 656 Takeru Gushiken, 390 Snezana Stoljarova, 176 Takeshi Asai, 372, 373 Sofia Baggio, 30 Takuya Endo, 371 Sofia Cagigal de Gregorio, 520 Talita Santos, 576 So-Hee Shim, 592 Tao Huang, 104, 106 Soni John Thanikkal, 329, 330 Tao Li, 371 Sonia Carolina Mantilla Toloza, 441 Tao Zhang, 366, 525 Sonia Lippke, 324, 325 Tara-Leigh McHugh, 501 Sophia Jowett, 20, 21, 22, 208, 209 Tarek Brahimi, 388 Sophie Laloux, 562 Taru Lintunen, 150, 151, 512 Sophie X. Yang, 208 Tatiana Boletini, 362 Stefan Koehn, 267, 268, 269, 381, 382, 405, 406 Tatiana Ryba, 455, 462, 503 Stefan Kopp, 257 Tatiana Stancheva, 564 Stefano Pecci, 570 Tatiana V. Ryba, 50, 191, 213, 214, 215, 239, 240, 241, Stella Kaffe, 307 290, 370 Stella Rokka, 381, 561, 566, 579, 595, 660 Tatsuki Sogabe, 619 Stephan Horvath, 380, 426 Telma Matos, 355, 411 Stephanie J.
Hanrahan, 98, 316, 567 Teoldo Israel, 569 Stephen David Edwards, 599, 600 Teresa García Valderrama, 421 Stephen Mellalieu, 312, 409 Thabata Castelo Branco Telles, 270, 271 Stephen Murphy, 249 Thalía Fernández Harmony, 155 Steve Howell, 162 Thea Rau, 139 Stewart Cotterill, 28, 30, 78, 80 Theresa Chyi, 667 688Authors Index Thiago Ferreira, 369 Vicky Price, 363 Thierry Middleton, 72, 215 Victor Cavallari Souza, 301 Thierry R.F. Middleton, 669 Victor Ferrer-Mileo, 130, 131 Thomas Curran, 65 Víctor M.
Muñoz Sánchez, 210 Thomas Heinen, 507 Victor Rubio, 245, 246, 312, 456, 568 Thomas Schack, 257, 258, 259, 291, 342, 343, 527, 655 Víctor Rubio Franco, 488 Thomas Zandonai, 601 Victor Souza, 363 Tianxue Cui, 346 Victoria Ivancheva, 370 Tiffany Astolfi, 157, 158 Vincent Gesbert, 77, 157 Till Utesch, 368, 598 Vincent Hagin, 156 Timothy Osborne, 143, 144 Vineet Kumar Sharma, 362 Ting-Chih Huang, 368 Vinicius Freitas, 362 Tiziano Agostini, 461, 571 Virginia Cagigal de Gregorio, 520 Toby Woolway, 63, 367 Virginie Nicaise, 445 Tom Ormay, 662 Vítor Pires Lopes, 625 Tom Penman, 406 Vivek Pandey, 298, 299 Tomás García-Calvo, 13, 132, 192 Viviana Espinoza Torres, 438 Tomasz Kurach, 85, 86 Vladimir Kasatkin, 651 Tomasz Tomiak, 17 Vladison Reis, 348 Tommi Vasankari, 552 Walan Robert da Silva, 586 Tomonori Tatsumi, 367 Waldemar Moska, 17 Tomoyuki Matsuo, 350 Walter Brehm, 323 Toni Caparrós, 131 Walter Staiano, 479 Toni Williams, 303, 304, 305 Wan-Un Chung, 361 Tony Morris, 92, 93, 94, 147, 148, 149, 150, 174, 175, Wei Liang, 324 251, 252, 253, 268, 270, 329, 330, 572 Wei-Chieh Tseng, 403 Torregrosa Miquel, 638 Will Vickery, 22 Tracey Devonport, 200, 201 William Fernando Garcia, 450 Traci Statler, 40 William Massey, 305 Triin Põder, 74 Wim van Lankveld, 361 Tshepang Tshube, 316 Wim Van Lankveld, 149 Tsung Yi Wu, 666 Wojciech Tadzik, 86 Tsung-Min Hung, 257, 384, 437, 597, 616, 617 Won-Min Choi, 360 Tsung-Ming Hung, 258 Xavier Camino, 121 Tsung-Yi Wu, 366 Xavier García-Massó, 544 Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu, 303, 366, 525 Xavier Sanchez, 214, 234 Tynke Toering, 196 Xi Wang, 611 Tzu-Wen Lin, 365 Xia Xu, 359 Ulrich Kirk, 479 Xiadan Zhang, 454 Ulrika Tranaeus, 605, 647 Xiaobin Hong, 359, 360 Umit Tokac, 397 Xiaona Wei, 359 Urban Johnson, 246, 309, 319, 542, 605, 647 Xiao-Yan Wang, 495 Uwe Pühse, 465, 476 Xin-Yu Hsieh, 359 Valerii Malkin, 365, 493, 494 Xristodoulos Maltezos, 32 Vana Hutter, 63, 127 Xuan Xiong, 661 Vanessa Gut, 364 Yago de Moura Carneiro, 552 Vanessa Wergin, 203 Yago Ramis, 14, 48, 91, 167, 233, 358, 531 Vanina Schmidt, 472 Yaira Barraco-Ruiz, 589 Varley Costa, 369, 602 Yan Shi, 358 Varley Teoldo da Costa, 629 Yang Ge, 72, 215 Vassilis Barkoukis, 32, 180, 181, 307 Yanlin Sun, 353, 388 Vello Hein, 551 Yannis Tzioumakis, 516 Veronica Formentin Formentin, 107 Yanping Duan, 322, 323, 324, 325 Verónica Morales Sánchez, 140, 421, 432, 435 Yanru Li, 351 Verónica Tutte Vallarino, 606 Yasuhisa Tachiya, 357, 521 Véronique Leseur, 15, 48 Yawen Hsu, 357 Veronique Richard, 61 Ye Wang, 539 Veysel Kucuk, 433 Yee Cheng Kueh, 148, 183, 251, 252, 253 Vicente Javier Beltrán Carrillo, 657 Ye-Lim Choi, 360 Vicente Javier Clemente, 119 Yen-Shan Chang, 611 Vicente Javier Prado Gascó, 364 Yesica Jimenez Arcos, 356 Vicente Prado Gascó, 519, 529 Yesim Karaç, 23, 356 689Authors Index Yiannis Theodorakis, 641 Yujin Kim, 349 Yiannis Zarotis, 670 Yujiro Kawata, 438, 572, 659 Yi-Chen Peng, 354 Yu-Jung Tsai, 384, 437, 616 Yi-Chieh Chang, 366 Yuka Murofushi, 572 Yi-Hsiang Chiu, 354, 365 Yu-Kai Chang, 81, 375, 376, 517, 546, 597, 611, 612, 616, Ying Liu, 354 618, 622, 624, 666 Yi-Ting Chang, 258 Yuki Hongo, 465 Yi-Ting Tsai, 353 Yuko Hayashi, 541 Yngvar Ommundsen, 54 Yuliya Tyagunova, 494 Yoan Hoyos Martinez, 340 Yuma Hayashi, 347 Yongchul Chung, 18 Yu-Min Ho, 618 Yongtao Yang, 353 Yun Li, 393, 410 York-Peter Klöppel, 352 Yusuke Sato, 347 Yoshifumi Tanaka, 350, 352, 513 Yusuke Tabei, 373 Yoshinori Okade, 474 Yuta Uematsu, 390 Yoshiyuki Mano, 558 Zahra Jafari, 254, 255, 346 Yosuke Sakairi, 667 Zeus Omar Ontiveros, 658 Young Ho Lee, 515 Zhang Bin, 328, 329 Youngho Kim, 81, 83, 593 Zhao Zhiguang, 563 Youngsun Lee, 580 Zhijian Huang, 52, 370, 527 Yudai Ura, 351 Zhongqiu Zhang, 387 Yue Li, 661 Zipeng Yang, 346, 624 Yuede Chu, 351 Zoe Mcvinnie, 387 Yufu M.
Tanaka, 350 Zoe Poucher, 345 Yufu Tanaka, 352 Zuber Claudia, 345 Yuhui Chiu, 350 Zuosong Chen, 104, 106 Yuji Yamamoto, 7, 510 Zvezdin Anton, 493 690
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/329881672 Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Chapter · December 2018 DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.162 CITATIONS READS 8 13,553 3 authors: Shuge Zhang Tim Woodman University of Derby Bangor University 17 PUBLICATIONS 36 CITATIONS 100 PUBLICATIONS 3,250 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE Ross Roberts Bangor University 66 PUBLICATIONS 1,133 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Development and promotion of resilient behaviours in young people who offend, via a theoretically driven resilience intervention in conjuction with Youth Justice Services View project Self-efficacy View project All content following this page was uploaded by Shuge Zhang on 23 December 2018. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Psychology Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Shuge Zhang, Tim Woodman, and Ross Roberts Subject: Sport Psychology Online Publication Date: Dec 2018 DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.162 Summary and Keywords Anxiety and fear are unpleasant emotions commonly experienced in sport and performance settings. While fear usually has an apparent cause, the source of anxiety is comparatively vague and complex.
Anxiety has cognitive and somatic components and can be either a trait or a state. To assess the different aspects of anxiety, a variety of psychometric scales have been developed in sport and performance domains. Besides efforts to quantify anxiety, a major focus in the anxiety-performance literature has been to explore the impact of anxiety on performance and why such effects occur.
Anxiety- performance theories and models have increased the understanding of how anxiety affects performance and have helped to explain why anxiety is widely considered a negative emotion that individuals typically seek to avoid in performance settings. Nonetheless, individuals approach anxiety-inducing or fear-provoking situations in different ways. For example, high-risk sport research shows that individuals can actively approach fear-inducing environments in order to glean intra- and interpersonal regulatory benefits.
Such individual differences are particularly relevant to sport and performance researchers and practitioners, as those who actively approach competition to enjoy the fear-inducing environment (i.e., the “risk”) are likely to have a performance advantage over those who compete while having to cope with their troublesome anxiety and fear. Future research would do well to: (1) examine the effects of anxiety on the processes that underpin performance rather than a sole focus on the performance outcomes, (2) test directly the different cognitive functions that are thought to be impaired when performing under anxiety, (3) unite the existing theories to understand a “whole picture” of how anxiety influences performance, and (4) explore the largely overlooked field of individual differences in the context of performance psychology. Keywords: conscious processing, explicit monitoring, reinvestment, processing efficiency, attentional control, ironic processing, performance catastrophe, high-risk sports, individual differences This chapter starts with definitions of anxiety and fear, providing a foundation for examining the two different terms in sport and performance.
It is also worth noting that Page 1 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance the discussions on anxiety and fear in this chapter are in relation to the normal population rather than clinical settings or patients with particular disorders (see American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Distinguishing Anxiety From Fear Fear was one of the critical themes in ancient Greek philosophy. The conceptualization of fear can be traced back to the era of the great thinkers such as Aristotle (384 BCE–322 BCE), Epicurus (341 BCE–270 BCE), and Galen (CE 129– CE 216). For example, Aristotle’s Theory of Contrariety (Anton, 1957) stated that the complexities of the cosmos consist of basic pairs of opposites (e.g., hot versus cold).
When using contrary pairs to conceptualize fear, Aristotle made fear the opposite to confidence, and he attributed one’s fearfulness as connected to life events relating to poverty, loneliness, friendlessness, dishonor, pain, illness, and death (Bywater, 1894). After Aristotle, other great thinkers such as Epicurus and Galen also provided fruitful thoughts on fear (see Hall, 1974). Despite their different opinions on how to deal with fear, Epicurus and Galen agreed that fear is the specific effect of one’s painful anticipation or imagination of unpleasant feelings (Irwin, 1947; Laërtius, 1925).
These ancient viewpoints foresee some essential modern discussions on fear. In his Theory of Psychoanalysis, Freud (1920) argued that any fear has an apparent cause. That is, fear always has a specific source, and individuals detect threats and react to them accordingly (e.g., fight or flight).
Anxiety is different from fear. Whereas fear has a direct link to identifiable objects (e.g., a spider) or circumstances (e.g., darkness), the source of anxiety is comparatively vague. Freud suggested that anxiety is “the evolution of fear” (Freud, 1920, p.
345). That is, when experiencing anxiety, one perceives sensations that are similar to those experienced when fearful, but the anxiety experience appears more complex and vague compared to fear. Specifically, whereas people will fairly rapidly know how to avoid fear, they will less readily understand how to avoid anxiety.
For example, a person who is fearful (scared) when seeing a spider will experience a decline in fear once he/she is away from the spider. Conversely, an athlete suffering from performance anxiety during an important competition will likely find it more difficult to reduce or overcome such unpleasant feelings. The distinction between anxiety and fear has also been supported at a neurobehavioral level (Perusini & Fanselow, 2015).
In particular, a person who feels fearful tends to initiate post-encounter defense (i.e., react toward the existing dangerous situation), which is related to the activation of the subcortical forebrain (e.g., Price, 2005). However, a person who is anxious tends to initiate pre-encounter defense (i.e., respond toward the potentially dangerous environments where typical “threat” has yet to be encountered), which is related to the activation of the prefrontal cortex (e.g., Mobbs et al., 2009). Page 2 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Anxiety is an unpleasant emotion. Apart from some discordant views (cf.
Zajonc, 1980, 1984), most researchers (e.g., Eysenck & Calvo, 1992; Gray, 1982; Lazarus, 1982; Sarason, 1984) agree that anxiety is a primary emotion that that requires cognitive processing before being experienced (see also Woodman & Hardy, 2001). Early conceptualizations (e.g., Lévy-Valensi, 1948) suggested that anxiety is a distressing feeling that comprises both cognitive worrying and somatic symptoms such as dizziness, breathing difficulty, heart palpitations, tension, and trembling(see also Liebert & Morris, 1967). Both cognitive and somatic anxiety can occur at either a trait or state level.
While literature usually gives credit to either Cattell and Scheier (1960) or Spielberger (1966) in introducing the distinction between trait and state anxiety, this distinction has existed for more than two thousand years. The Latin philosopher Cicero (106 BCE–43 BCE), in his “Tusculan Disputations” (Cicero, 1927), clarified that anxietas (trait anxiety), one’s temperament of being prone to anxiousness is different to angor (state anxiety), one’s subjective feeling of tension and worry under certain circumstances. According to Cicero, the extent of one’s state anxiety depends on the synergic effect of one’s trait anxiety and perceived environmental threats.
This interplay between trait anxiety and environmental threats contributes to the performance anxiety literature (e.g., Cheng, Hardy, & Markland, 2009). Page 3 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Measuring Anxiety in Sport and Performance To quantify one’s perceived anxiety in performance settings, researchers have developed a variety of measurements. For trait anxiety in sport, Smith, Smoll, and Schutz (1990) developed the Sport Anxiety Scale (SAS). The SAS consists of three subcomponents: worry, somatic anxiety, and concentration disruption.
Due to the inconsistency of the SAS’s factor structure across adult and child samples, Smith, Smoll, Cumming, and Grossbard (2006) revised the SAS to create the SAS-2. In this revised measure, they retained the same subcomponents of trait anxiety and improved the items so that the measure demonstrated acceptable validity for adults and children. To measure state anxiety in sport, Martens, Burton, Rivkin, and Simon (1980) first constructed the Competitive State Anxiety Inventory (CSAI).
Martens, Burton, Vealey, Bump, and Smith (1990) later developed the 27-item CSAI-2 by specifying three relatively independent pre-competition subcomponents including cognitive anxiety, somatic anxiety, and self-confidence. The CSAI-2, later revised to the CSAI-2R to enhance the factor structure (Cox, Martens, & Russell, 2003), is the most widely used measure of competitive state anxiety in sport psychology research. Nonetheless, when researchers wish to measure these pre-competition constructs in a less time-consuming manner to capture participants’ affect within a short timeframe, they often resort to administering single-item versions of the CSAI-2 (e.g., Hardy & Hutchinson, 2007) or the Mental Readiness Form (MRF) (e.g., Barlow, Woodman, Gorgulu, & Voyzey, 2016; Woodman, Barlow, & Gorgulu, 2015; Woodman & Davis, 2008).
The MRF (Krane, 1994) comprises three single-item factors that measure worry/cognitive anxiety, tension/somatic anxiety, and self-confidence. The single-item format of the MRF is less intrusive and thus convenient for allowing researchers and practitioners to measure anxiety as close as possible to either the manipulative instructions or the subsequent performance. Furthermore, the use of the word “worry” in the MRF is a better description of state cognitive anxiety than the word “concern,” which is used in both the CSAI-2 and the CSAI-2R.
Indeed, the word concern is open to ambiguous interpretation because concern might reflect worry, but it might also reflect the perceived importance of an event (e.g., “I am concerned about this competition”; see Woodman & Hardy, 2001). Work using the CSAI-2 or CSAI-2R only assesses the intensity of anxiety symptoms. However, in an attempt to incorporate individual interpretations of anxiety (i.e., viewing anxiety as either facilitative or debilitative), some researchers utilize an amended version of the CSAI-2, which includes a directional scale (CSAI-2D; see Jones & Swain, 1992).
The CSAI-2D adds a facilitative-debilitative directional continuum scale to each of the items in the CSAI-2, thus allowing the assessment of both anxiety intensity and its interpretations. A wide range of research in sport and performance psychology has adopted such a directional approach of anxiety (see Wagstaff, Neil, Mellalieu, & Hanton, 2012). However, while some studies (e.g., Jones, Smith, & Holmes, 2004; Jones, Swain, & Hardy, 1993) demonstrated the association between anxiety interpretation and previous or predicted Page 4 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance performance, most of the work investigating directional interpretations has focused on antecedents or mechanisms of anxiety interpretation as opposed to the relationship between anxiety interpretation and performance. More recently, Cheng et al.
(2009) developed the Three-Factor Anxiety Inventory (TFAI) comprising cognitive anxiety, physiological anxiety, and the regulatory function of anxiety. According to Cheng et al., anxious performers evaluate not only environmental and internal threats but also their capacity to control these threats, which results in voluntary coping (regulatory dimension). By acknowledging the regulatory dimension of anxiety, Cheng et al.
argued that the TFAI would facilitate a better understanding of the complex anxiety-performance relationship. There is some support for this perspective (Cheng, Hardy, & Woodman, 2011; Otten, 2009). Theories and Models of Anxiety and Performance Skill-Focused Versus Distraction Theories Skill-focused (or self-focused) theories and distraction theories are the two classes of theories that have received the most research attention in the anxiety-performance literature.
Both theories focus on the detrimental effect of anxiety on cognitive processing as a critical mechanism but provide different explanations for how anxiety affects performance. The Reinvestment Perspective Skill-focused theories emphasize the role of self-consciousness in the skilled performance process. The explanation of how anxiety affects performance is closely linked to Fitts and Posner’s (1967) stages of skill learning.
According to Fitts and Posner, people learn skills through explicit encoding of the required knowledge. That is, in the early stages of learning, people explicitly and consciously focus on how they should behave in order to perform a skill. Such an explicit and conscious focus on each component of the skill leads to an awkward and jagged performance.
This is akin to a baby learning to feed itself. As we become more proficient with the skill, our specific knowledge base regarding what needs to be done in order to perform the skill becomes gradually more subconscious, and the skill becomes smooth and efficient. This is akin to an adult eating with a knife and fork (there is no conscious effort).
According to the skill-focused account of anxiety- induced performance breakdown, a skilled performer has reached automaticity and is thus able to perform skills subconsciously and smoothly (Anderson, 1982; Masters, 1992). However, when skilled performers are anxious, they reinvest attention on (consciously Page 5 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance monitor) their skill by using step-by-step “rules,” which regresses skilled performance to a novel level and leads to performance impairments. The reinvestment effect as proposed in the skill-focused theories has been well tested. Masters (1992) first proposed the Conscious Processing Hypothesis (CPH), positing that performers, when experiencing anxiety, attempt to use explicit “rules” in task execution, rather than perform the task “automatically” as they would normally.
According to the CPH, using explicit knowledge to break down well-established “automatic” task execution harms performance. To test the CPH, Masters assigned a sample of novice golfers to either an explicit learning group (i.e., who used detailed technical instructions when practicing putting) or an implicit learning group (i.e., to perform a random letter generation when practicing putting, without access to technical instructions). After an intensive practice session, both groups putted under a high-anxiety condition.
In line with CPH, if the performance decrement under high anxiety is due to conscious processing, only the explicit learning group (i.e., those with access to detailed knowledge) would suffer impaired performance. Results showed that the implicit learning group continued to improve, but the explicit learning group failed to do so, supporting the notion that the use of explicit “rules” when feeling anxious is comparatively detrimental to performance (see also Hardy, Mullen, & Jones, 1996). Another skill-focused perspective stems from Baumeister’s (1984) seminal work on testing the effect of explicit monitoring, the Explicit Monitoring Hypothesis (EMH; Beilock & Carr, 2001).
Similar to the CPH, the EMH proposes that when performers experience anxiety, they tend to monitor their performance throughout task execution in an attempt to ensure excellent performance; such monitoring disrupts well-established routines and makes performance vulnerable. To test the EMH, Beilock and Carr trained a sample of novice golfers to a high skill level in either a single-task group, a distraction group (i.e., performing a secondary task when practicing putting), or a self-consciousness group (i.e., using video recording to induce self-monitoring when practicing putting). After intensive training, these golfers performed a putting transfer task in a high-anxiety condition.
Anxiety harmed the performance of the control and distraction groups. Only the performance of the self-consciousness group did not suffer in the high anxiety condition. This maintenance in performance of the self-consciousness group was expected because explicit monitoring was present in both low- (i.e., manipulation-induced) and high-anxiety condition (i.e., anxiety-induced) for this group.
Considering that both conscious processing (i.e., the use of explicit rules) and explicit monitoring (i.e., the act of monitoring the process of performance) describe the reinvestment of attention during task execution, Masters and Maxwell (2008) united the CPH and the EMH under a single umbrella: the Theory of Reinvestment (TOR). Evidence for the TOR has emerged in different performance domains (e.g., Gray, 2004; Jackson, Ashford, & Norsworthy, 2006; Kinrade, Jackson, & Ashford, 2015). Psychophysiological research has also provided some neuroscientific evidence to support the TOR.
For instance, in a pressurized putting task, Cooke et al. (2015) found that pre-movement electroencephalographic (EEG) high-alpha power reduced when a previous putt was Page 6 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance missed compared to when it was holed, and this effect was greater in expert than in novice golfers. Since the reduced EEG high-alpha power reflects an increase in the resources allocated to adjust putting (Cooke et al., 2014), Cooke et al.’s (2015) findings show that experts, compared to novices, reinvested greater resources when there was a need to correct for previous errors (i.e., a missed putt), which is in line with the TOR prediction that experts have more resources (e.g., explicit knowledge) to reinvest. Further, Gallicchio, Cooke, and Ring (2016) identified the T7-Fz of lower left temporal- frontal connectivity as a neurophysiological marker of movement-specific conscious processing.
Gallicchio et al. found that T7-Fz connectivity successfully distinguished missed and holed putts, supporting the key prediction of the TOR that conscious processing impairs performance (see also Dyke et al., 2014). The Distraction Perspective Distraction theories propose that worry will induce cognitive interference, which shifts the performer’s attention from the task to task-irrelevant thoughts.
Developed in cognitive psychology, the two main theories of distraction are Processing Efficiency Theory (PET; Eysenck & Calvo, 1992) and Attentional Control Theory (ACT; Eysenck, Derakshan, Santos, & Calvo, 2007). PET incorporated the critical assumption of Cognitive Interference Theory (CIT; Sarason, 1984). That is, while creating high cognitive demands, anxiety in the form of worry pre- empts the resources of working memory thus leading to impaired performance.
However, based on a collection of initial works (Eysenck, 1979; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985; Eysenck, Macleod, & Mathews, 1987), Eysenck and colleagues argued that the CIT exaggerates the role that worry plays in impairing performance. Providing different evidence that increasing anxiety does not always undermine cognitive performance, Eysenck and Calvo (1992) proposed that worry serves two principal functions. On the one hand, worry distracts cognitive processing by pre-empting working memory, which shifts attention to task-irrelevant thoughts and is detrimental to performance.
On the other hand, worry also serves a motivational function, whereby the worry about performing poorly may lead to the reallocation of additional cognitive resources (i.e., trying harder) and thus the maintenance of optimal performance when anxious. The two principal roles of anxiety as proposed in the PET point to its two main predictions. First, the detrimental role of anxiety predicts that high trait anxious performers will be more vulnerable than low trait anxious performers to the adverse effect of anxiety, and these adverse performance effects will increase as the cognitive demands of the task increase.
Second, anxiety impairs performance efficiency (e.g., longer processing time, greater effort) more than performance effectiveness (i.e., the quality of performance). As such, it is only when there are no extra resources available to buffer anxiety that performance decrements occur. Although initial support for these predictions was from cognitive psychology (see Eysenck & Calvo, 1992), an impressive body of research within sport psychology has also evidenced these predictions.
For example, Smith, Bellamy, Collins, and Newell (2001) Page 7 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance followed a sample of elite volleyball players throughout a competitive season.
These authors reported findings consistent with the PET that high trait anxious players reported higher anxiety and greater mental effort compared to low trait anxiety players when performance was equivalent to each other (see also Wilson & Smith, 2007). The impairment in performance efficiency may also appear in the form of increased processing time (rather than simply in increased effort). For example, Murray and Janelle (2003) tested a sample of participants in the context of a dual-task racing simulation.
The authors instructed participants that both the driving task and the secondary task were equally important for the purposes of competition. Results indicated that although driving performance was similar in the baseline and the competition, high trait anxious participants spent more time responding to the secondary task in the competition condition. There were no such differences at baseline (see also Wilson, Smith, & Holmes, 2007).
Evidence from eye gaze research has also supported anxiety-induced impairments in performance efficiency and effectiveness. Williams, Vickers, and Rodriguez (2002) asked a sample of experienced table tennis players to perform serves that require either a low cognitive demand (i.e., follow simple patterns) or a high cognitive demand (i.e., follow complex patterns) under low- and high-anxiety conditions. There was an increase in visual search rates with the use of foveal fixations rather than peripheral vision in both groups.
The increase of visual search using foveal instead of peripheral fixations reflects a decrease in efficiency because foveal vision processes provide less task-relevant information compared to peripheral vision so more fixations are necessary to glean the same information. Also, although efficiency decreased (i.e., less efficient gaze behavior) under high anxiety in both low and high cognitively demanding tasks, decrements in performance effectiveness only occurred in the highly cognitively demanding task, thus supporting the predictions of the PET. Despite support for PET, it is unclear in PET which function of working memory is impaired by anxiety, and why anxiety diverts attention from task-relevant to task- irrelevant stimuli.
To bridge these limitations, Eysenck et al. (2007) modified PET to ACT. Adopting the predictions of PET, ACT proposes that the detrimental effects of anxiety on attentional processes are fundamental to how anxiety exerts its influence on performance.
Specifically, Eysenck et al. suggested that when experiencing increasing anxiety in performance settings, performers will allocate resources to detect the source of related threats. Such acts divert resources from a goal-directed (top-down) attentional system to a stimulus-driven (bottom-up) attentional system, thus increasing task- irrelevant thoughts and disrupting attentional control.
Moreover, Eysenck et al. also made a precise prediction regarding the adverse effect of anxiety on working memory. Drawing on Miyake et al.’s (2000) work on working memory, ACT predicts that anxiety will impair the inhibition (i.e., resisting disruption or interference from task-irrelevant stimuli) and the shifting functions (i.e., reallocating attention to task-relevant stimuli) of working memory.
In particular, when a performer experiences anxiety, the anxious feeling will make the performer less resistant to task-irrelevant stimuli such as worry (impairing the Page 8 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance inhibition function).
Simultaneously, the anxious feeling will prevent the performer from reallocating attention to the task, and will keep directing the performer’s attention to excessive worry (impairing the shifting function). The impaired inhibition and shifting functions account for the cognitive interference induced by anxiety. The ACT has received support in sport psychology.
For example, Wilson, Vine, and Wood (2009) asked a group of experienced basketball players to perform free throw shooting while tracking their eye gaze fixations. There was a significant reduction in eye gaze duration on the target (i.e., the restraint of the goal-directed attentional system) and more fixations of short duration on various targets (i.e., the overactivation of the stimulus-driven attentional system), which accompanied the reduced performance. In another study of football penalty kicks, Wilson, Wood, and Vine (2009) found that football players fixated longer on the goalkeeper (i.e., participants were stimulus-driven) in a high- compared to a low-anxiety condition, which was responsible for decreased shooting accuracy and supported the debilitating effect of anxiety on the attentional system.
Bridging Skill-Focused and Distraction Theories From a theoretical perspective, skill-focused theories and distraction theories are fundamentally different. However, since effort plays a role in both the skill-focused perspective and the distraction perspective, it is possible that reinvestment in the skill- focused perspective reflects a maladaptive use of effort whereas attentional control in the distraction perspective reflects an adaptive use of effort (Woodman & Hardy, 2001). In other words, sometimes performers try harder (but ineffectively; reinvestment) and sometimes performers try smarter (attentional control).
Anxiety can lead to an increase in on-task effort, and such effort can result in performance breakdowns (i.e., reinvestment), maintained performance (i.e., attentional control), or even increased performance (e.g., via greater effort). For example, Mullen and Hardy (2000) found experienced golfers managed to maintain performance across low and high anxiety in either control or task-irrelevant conditions (i.e., dual-task distractions) but not in task-relevant conditions (i.e., reinvestment through conscious processing). Since effort increased similarly in all these three conditions, it is possible that the failure to maintain performance in the task-relevant conditions was due to the inappropriate use of effort as a result of accessing unnecessary technical instructions.
Lam, Maxwell, and Masters (2009) also demonstrated similar findings. In their study, novice female basketball players were trained in either an explicit or an implicit (analogy) learning group, and they were asked to perform a basketball shooting task while concurrently responding to the same auditory tone. While the increased effort in the explicit and implicit learning groups was comparable, only the performance of the explicit group suffered.
Wilson et al. (2007) also found some indirect evidence to support the coexisting phenomena of reinvestment and attentional control. These researchers found that high trait anxiety golfers increased mental effort and took more time to initiate a putt, but performed poorly under high pressure (i.e., reflecting the possible use of maladaptive effort through reinvestment).
In contrast, low trait anxiety golfers managed Page 9 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance to maintain their normal performance under high pressure despite increased mental effort and pre-putting time (i.e., reflecting the possible use of adaptive effort through attentional control).
An increase in effort under high anxiety can lead to both reinvestment and attentional control. However, apart from different training methods (e.g., explicit versus implicit training) and personality traits (e.g., low versus high trait anxiety), less is known about the circumstances under which anxiety may increase the likelihood of reinvestment or attentional control. Theory of Ironic Processes of Mental Control While attempting to explain the anxiety-performance relationship, researchers mostly refer to the aforementioned skill-focused and distraction theories.
Nonetheless, theories and models have also suggested other potential mechanisms via which anxiety may impair performance. One such candidate for providing an alternative explanation for anxiety-induced performance failure is the Theory of Ironic Processes of Mental Control (TIP; Wegner, 1994, 2009). Central to the TIP is a dual-control cognitive feedback system that leads to both intentional (e.g., to achieve good performance) and counter-intentional effects (e.g., to avoid bad performance).
Such effects are achieved by two cognitive processes: the operating process and the monitoring process. According to the TIP, the intentional operating process is consciously guided to search for information consistent with intended goals. Conversely, the counter-intentional monitoring process is autonomously activated to search for information of undesirable states.
The TIP suggests that the breakdown of this dual-control system under high cognitive load (e.g., anxiety) accounts for the ironic effect. Specifically, since the monitoring process identifies lapses in mental control, it keeps the mind sensitive to conditions indicating any failure of intentional control. When cognitive load (e.g., anxiety) is low, the availability of conscious resources will allow the monitoring process to reactivate the operating process to retain intentional control toward one’s desirable states.
In other words, under low cognitive load, we can largely do what we want to do. However, a high cognitive load occupies a large proportion of the limited conscious resources, which suppresses the operating process such that one then has limited access to information regarding the desirable state. Under these circumstances, the autonomous monitoring process becomes prevalent —by keeping the mind sensitive to the failure of intentional control, the monitoring process makes unwanted thoughts dominate one’s cognitive process, increasing accessibility to the states that one typically wants to avoid.
The increase in the awareness of the to-be-avoided states leads to a greater likelihood to do specifically what one wants not to do. This outcome is ironic because the monitoring process, which is normally responsible for ensuring successful execution of tasks, is directly responsible for the breakdown of these tasks. Page 10 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance There is support for TIP in the context of performance. For example, Wegner, Ansfield, and Pilloff (1998) demonstrated that when instructing participants not to over putt in golf or not to move a pendulum in a particular direction, the likelihood of performing the to- be-avoided actions increased under high cognitive load.
However, the cognitive loads in Wegner et al.’s studies (e.g., reduced visibility, the dual-task condition) were not directly related to anxiety in performance settings. To test the ironic effect in a performance anxiety environment, Woodman and colleagues (Woodman & Davis, 2008; Woodman et al., 2015) used competition and monetary rewards (i.e., up to £100) to manipulate performance anxiety. When they asked golfers to putt toward a target, but to be particularly careful not to hit the ball past the target, participants overshot the target more times in a high- compared to a low-anxiety condition (Woodman & Davis, 2008).
Similarly, when given precise instructions to aim for specific areas and to avoid other specific areas, hockey players and darts players hit specifically more into the to-be- avoided zones when anxious (Woodman et al., 2015; see also Barlow et al., 2016). The unwanted consequences of ironic processing are not limited to performing what one wants to avoid. For example, Binsch, Oudejans, Bakker, and Savelsbergh (2009) demonstrated that anxious performers might overcompensate at times.
In other words, in an effort not to putt long, the golfer might tend to putt too short, rather than putt too long. Indeed, Wegner’s conceptualization of the TIP leaves room for possible overcompensation. Specifically, the key to ironic processing is the dysfunctioning operating process and the overly active monitoring process under high cognitive load.
When breakdown of the dual-control system occurs under high cognitive load, it is possible that the performer may reallocate extra cognitive resources to redirect control to avoid the undesirable states. Such attempt to redirect control to prevent the unwanted states may fail (i.e., and produce an ironic effect) or be overly adjusted (i.e., overcompensation) due to the failure of precise control as a result of the dysfunctioning operating process. Therefore, both ironic effect and overcompensation are possible unwanted consequences that anxiety might induce.
Multidimensional Anxiety Theory So far, the discussion in this chapter on anxiety-performance theories has focused mainly on the cognitive component of anxiety (i.e., worry). However, competitive anxiety has both cognitive and somatic components (Liebert & Morris, 1967). An early theory that incorporated the influences of both cognitive and somatic anxiety on performance is Multidimensional Anxiety Theory (MAT; Martens et al., 1990).
MAT states that: (1) the relationship between cognitive anxiety and performance is negative and linear; and (2) the relationship between somatic anxiety and performance follows an inverted-U shape. However, the predictions of MAT have received considerable criticism, with only limited support (see Woodman & Hardy, 2001). Page 11 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance MAT’s sole focus on the negative effects of competitive anxiety on performance led Jones (1995) to propose that performers’ interpretation of anxiety-related symptoms (i.e., viewing anxiety as facilitative or debilitative) will determine how anxiety exerts its influence on performance. A large body of research supports the facilitative-debilitative distinction of anxiety interpretation by examining its correlates such as level of expertise (Jones, Hanton, & Swain, 1994; Jones & Swain, 1992), locus of control (Ntoumanis & Jones, 1998), perception of goal attainment (Jones & Hanton, 1996; O’Brien, Hanton, & Mellalieu, 2005), hardiness (Hanton, Evans, & Neil, 2003; Hanton, Neil, & Evans, 2013), coping strategies (Eubank & Collins, 2000; Jerome & Williams, 2000; Ntoumanis & Biddle, 1998), and psychological skills (Fletcher & Hanton, 2001; Neil, Mellalieu, & Hanton, 2006).
However, the influence of anxiety interpretation on performance, and any associated mechanism(s), are less understood (Wagstaff et al., 2012). Catastrophe Models of Anxiety and Performance Dissatisfied with the rather simplistic predictions of MAT, Hardy (1990) proposed two catastrophe models of anxiety and performance. Adapting Zeeman’s (1976) catastrophe theory to anxiety and performance, Hardy (1996A, 1996B) proposed that performance catastrophe models would overcome the limitations of MAT and provide more in-depth insight into how cognitive and somatic anxiety interactively affect performance.
The Cusp Catastrophe Model of Anxiety and Performance (CCM; Hardy, 1990) was the initial catastrophe model that proposes the interactive effects of cognitive anxiety and physiological arousal (somatic anxiety) on performance. Specifically, the CCM predicts that cognitive anxiety will be facilitative to performance when physiological arousal is low and detrimental when physiological arousal is high. More importantly, changes in performance as a result of changes in physiological arousal can follow either a continuous or a discontinuous path, depending on the level of cognitive anxiety.
Specifically, when cognitive anxiety is low, increases in physiological arousal lead to minor performance fluctuations following a mild inverted-U shape. Under these circumstances, the initial increase in physiological arousal results in a small increase in performance to an optimal point, beyond which any further increase in physiological arousal results in slight decreases in performance. Conversely, when cognitive anxiety is high, increases in physiological arousal lead to dramatic and discontinuous performance fluctuations.
Under such circumstances (high cognitive anxiety), as physiological arousal increases so too does performance to an optimal performance point (i.e., the cusp), beyond which any further increase in physiological arousal leads to a drop in performance that is immediate, dramatic, and irreversible—a performance catastrophe. Once the catastrophe takes place, performance cannot simply bounce back to the optimal level. Indeed, performance can only be recovered once physiological arousal is reduced to a level that is considerably lower than where the catastrophe occurs (i.e., the hysteresis).
Page 12 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance To test the CCM, Hardy and Parfitt (1991) asked a group of basketball players to perform set shots on one day before an important match (i.e., high cognitive anxiety) and one day after a critical game (i.e., low cognitive anxiety).
On each of these days, Hardy and Parfitt used the shuttle run task to work up participants’ heart rate to the target zones prior to performing the set shots. Results demonstrated that as physiological arousal increased to an optimal point, an immediate and dramatic performance drop only occurred when cognitive anxiety was high (supporting the catastrophe hypothesis), and performance recovered gradually only when physiological arousal reduced to a lower level than where performance had collapsed (supporting the hysteresis hypothesis). Moreover, results revealed that players achieved both their highest and their lowest levels of performance in the high cognitive anxiety condition, which supports the catastrophe model’s central feature that cognitive anxiety can both facilitate and harm performance—in other words, cognitive anxiety rarely has an indifferent effect on performance.
Further support for the CCM has also been provided in a number of other studies (e.g., Edwards, Kingston, Hardy, & Gould, 2002; Hardy, Parfitt, & Pates, 1994; Woodman, Albinson, & Hardy, 1997). Hardy (1990, 1996A) also proposed the Butterfly Catastrophe Model of Anxiety and Performance (BCM) to acknowledge the essential role that self-confidence plays in the anxiety-performance relationship. In Hardy’s BCM, self-confidence is a bias factor that moderates the interaction between cognitive anxiety and physiological arousal on performance.
Specifically, high self-confidence swings the typical performance fold, or the “cusp” point under high cognitive anxiety, to a higher level of physiological arousal. In other words, when cognitively anxious, confident performers can tolerate greater physiological arousal before suffering a dramatic performance drop (i.e., a performance catastrophe). To test the BCM, Hardy, Woodman, and Carrington (2004) employed an innovative segmental quadrant analysis, examining the maximum interaction effect between cognitive and somatic anxiety at different levels of somatic anxiety for different levels of self-confidence.
Since the catastrophe phenomenon features the performance increase before the “cusp” and the sudden performance decrease beyond the “cusp,” the “cusp” should lie where the maximum interaction effect of cognitive and somatic anxiety takes place. Considering the potential moderating effect of self-confidence, Hardy et al. argued that the maximum interaction effect should lie at a lower level of somatic anxiety when self-confidence is low and at a higher level of somatic anxiety when self-confidence is high.
After collecting data from a group of golfers throughout a tournament, Hardy et al. found that confidence shifted the maximum interaction effect size to a higher level of physiological arousal. This result supports the moderating effect of self-confidence on the interaction between cognitive and somatic anxiety, such that confident golfers were able to withstand higher levels of somatic anxiety before suffering from performance breakdown (see also Woodman & Hardy, 2005).
In summary, existing theories and models have helped us to understand how anxiety may exert its influence on performance. Although anxiety is widely considered a negative emotion that individuals typically seek to avoid, it is noteworthy that in certain Page 13 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance circumstances individuals appear motivated to approach anxiety-inducing situations, or more precisely fear-inducing situations. A typical context that will facilitate the understanding of why some people are prone to approach fear-inducing situations is high- risk sports. Approaching Fear: Lessons From High-Risk Sports High-risk sports refer to sports where participants have to reckon with the possibility of severe injury or death (Barlow et al., 2015; Breivik, 1999).
Despite, or perhaps because of, the possible fatal consequences of participating in high-risk sports, individuals are drawn to the movement toward and away from danger. That is, individuals fear losing their life in high-risk sports and thus strive to return to safety, but then reasonably rapidly seek to return to the fear-provoking environment once more (Woodman, Hardy, & Barlow, 2018; Woodman, Hardy, Barlow, & Le Scanff, 2010). Thus, in the high-risk sport domain, fear is no longer what individuals want to avoid but is the emotion that they pursue.
Early research suggested that sensation seeking may be the critical motive that underpins individuals’ engagement in high-risk sport. In his Theory of Sensation Seeking, Zuckerman (1969, 1979, 1994) proposed that individuals have optimal levels of arousal (OLA) for cognitive activity, motoric activity, and positive affective tone. As such, sensation seekers (i.e., individuals who have a high OLA) would feel stressed under sensory deprivation situations because they need greater stimulation to achieve their OLA.
According to Zuckerman, the willingness to seek intense sensations to satisfy one’s need contributes to risk-taking behaviors. Using the Sensation Seeking Scale (SSS-V; Zuckerman, Eysenck, & Eysenck, 1978) to assess the motives in the high-risk sport, early evidence seemed to suggest that high-risk sports participants might be a homogenous group of sensation seekers (see Zuckerman, 2007). This indiscriminate view was comprehensively challenged and rebutted by Barlow, Woodman, and Hardy (2013; see also Woodman et al., 2018).
Barlow et al. (2013) found strong evidence that some high-risk sport participants (e.g., skydivers) are motivated by a drive for thrills and novel sensations, but that other participants (e.g., mountaineers, ocean rowers) are driven by a need to regulate their emotions and to derive a sense of agency. In the development of Agentic Emotion Regulation Theory, Woodman et al.
(2010) argued that not all individuals engaging in high-risk sports are sensation seekers, and they provided initial support for emotion regulation and agency as the motives for participating in high-risk expeditionary activities. Notably, compared to control groups, transatlantic rowers and mountaineers had greater difficulty describing their feelings regarding their loving relationships. However, after the challenging crossing and the mountaineering expedition, transatlantic rowers and mountaineers reported feeling more Page 14 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance able to identify and express their emotions in the interpersonal settings in which they usually have difficulty. The basic premise to agentic emotion regulation is that the fear and hardship that are experienced in extreme conditions (e.g., roaring waves, stormy and cold conditions) are more identifiable than the underlying anxiety regarding domestic life (e.g., maintaining loving relationships).
By approaching hazardous environments, individuals who suffer from emotional difficulties (an underlying anxiety) in daily life gain the opportunity to identify momentarily the source of their unpleasant nebulous states—namely fear. In this sense, engaging in a high-risk sport enables individuals to compensate for their low efficacy in exercising control over their emotional life events by coping successfully with the fear in other perceived emotionally extreme environments. Barlow et al.
(2013) also found that individuals participating in high-risk expeditionary sports have higher expectations regarding emotional regulation and agency, and can transfer the coping skills learnt from threatening events back into their daily life. In addition, Woodman, MacGregor, and Hardy (2018) reported that the need for emotion regulation and agency discriminated individuals engaging in high-risk sports from individuals who participate in other low-risk sports. Furthermore, these agentic emotion regulation difficulties accounted for the self-esteem benefits that are derived from successful engagement with high-risk domains.
In general, the lesson from high-risk sports appears to be that fear-provoking situations are not necessarily what all individuals want to avoid; some individuals appear to approach anxiety-inducing situations in order to gain an intra- and interpersonal regulatory benefit. This regulatory process may be of particular relevance to competitive sports. Indeed, the ultimate goal for sport competitors is to strive for peak performance.
However, the ego-threatening competitive arena can induce high levels of fear and anxiety (e.g., fear of failure). As such, it would confer a competitive advantage if a competitor chose to compete precisely because of the anxiety that competition generates, in contrast to the competitor who competes while having to overcome troublesome anxiety (see also Neil & Woodman, 2017; Roberts & Woodman, 2017). Future Directions While a large body of literature provides insight into how anxiety affects performance, several issues warrant further research.
First, the extant literature has focused primarily on the effect of anxiety on performance outcomes rather than on the processes that underpin performance. Thus, it is unclear whether anxiety affects performance planning (e.g., offline movement planning), performance execution (e.g., online movement control), or both; and if both are affected, to what degree they are each affected (see Allsop, Lawrence, Gray, & Khan, 2017; Lawrence, Khan, & Hardy, 2013). This avenue of research is important because it will help to point to where performance is breaking down in the Page 15 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance skill process, and thus where interventions might be best targeted. Research suggests that anxiety affects performance execution more than it affects performance planning (e.g., Allsop et al., 2017; Lawrence et al., 2013).
However, these laboratory-based studies have only utilized simple aiming tasks of which the ecological validity is limited. Indeed, sport performance tasks can be very complex and anxiety may not exert the same influence on the planning and execution of all performance tasks. Future research should consider using real or ecological valid performance tasks to quantify precisely the influence of anxiety on performance planning and execution rather than solely targeting performance outcomes.
Second, while different theories are in agreement regarding the debilitative effect of anxiety on cognitive function and subsequently on performance, the cognitive functions conceptualized in different theories are rarely tested. For example, although Eysenck et al.’s (2007) ACT predicts that anxiety impairs the inhibition and shifting functions of the central executive, which is what contributes to performance failures, little work has tested the core functions of the central executive in a performance setting (see Wilson, Vine et al., 2009, for an exception). A possible reason for the lack of direct tests on these theoretically conceptualized functions is the limited knowledge of the markers of these functions.
As such, future research should consider investigating these important functions and their markers to allow for more direct tests of these theories. Furthermore, none of the existing theories and models on its own perfectly explains how anxiety affects performance. Bridging or uniting existing theories and models may contribute to a better understanding of the “whole picture.” Two research avenues may emerge from this position.
One possible avenue advocates a situation-specific approach such that different theories may be more pertinent and applicable under different conditions. For example, Gray, Orn, and Woodman (2017) tested ironic and reinvestment effects in baseball pitching following different instructions. They assigned experienced pitchers to either a target-only group (i.e., showing only the pitching target zone) or the ironic group (i.e., showing both the target zone and the to-be-avoided zones) and measured the expertise-related kinematic variables throughout their performance under low- and high-pressure conditions.
Although both groups hit fewer targets in the high- pressure condition, the process by which they did so was different. The target-only group had significant reductions in expertise-related kinematic variables, which reflects a reinvestment effect such that pitching execution became less smooth. Conversely the ironic group had no significant change in expertise-related kinematic variables, which reflects the maintenance of expert movement control.
Importantly, despite maintaining good movement control, the ironic group initiated more specifically ironic hits in the to- be-avoided zones. The findings demonstrate that reinvestment and ironic effects manifest in different situations during baseball pitching. More research would do well to adopt this situation-specific approach to improve our understanding of the effects of anxiety as proposed in different theories.
Page 16 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance The other possible avenue different to the situation-specific approach would be an integrative approach such that the mechanisms underlying the anxiety-performance relationship as proposed in different theories and models might interactively account for performance effects.
For instance, anxiety-induced reinvestment and distraction may together account for performance failure. Specifically, since reinvestment (e.g., step-by- step monitoring) requires cognitive resources, the extent to which distraction pre-empts working memory may determine the degree of adverse effect of reinvestment on performance. When distraction is high, increases in reinvestment may be particularly problematic for performance because no extra resources are available to allow for a smooth performance execution in addition to such reinvestment.
However, when distraction is low, an increase in reinvestment may not necessarily lead to the breakdown of performance automaticity due to the possible compensatory function of extra resources. This position has yet to be tested directly but there is some indirect support from literature. Specifically, Gucciardi and Dimmock (2008) asked participants to generate three technique cues (i.e., arm, weight, and head) during a golf putting task and found such reinvestment impaired performance under pressure, whereas Wilson, Chattington, Marple-Horvat, and Smith (2007) asked participants to generate the position of their left hand compared to right hand (i.e., high, low, same) during a simulated rally driving task and found such reinvestment did not impair performance.
Such discrepancies may be due to the monitoring hand position during driving being less resource-consuming (i.e., less distractive) than monitoring technique cues during putting. The availability of extra resources may thus compensate for the negative influence of reinvestment in Wilson et al.’s driving task, which is not the case in Gucciardi and Dimmock’s (2008) putting task. Nonetheless, the potential interaction between reinvestment and distraction is worthy of further testing by manipulating the levels of both reinvestment and distraction using the same performance task.
Future research would do well to consider adopting an integrative approach to bridge different theories and models. Finally, individual differences, typically personality traits, have yet to receive much research attention in the anxiety-performance literature (see also Roberts & Woodman, 2015, 2016, 2017). However, a wide range of personality traits may play vital roles in performance settings.
For example, optimism (e.g., Scheier & Carver, 1992), perfectionistic striving (e.g., Gaudreau, 2015), and mental toughness (e.g., Hardy, Bell, & Beattie, 2013) or hardiness (e.g., Hanton et al., 2013) or resilience (e.g., Sarkar & Fletcher, 2014), are traits that are thought to benefit performance. Research on serial gold medal winners (Hardy et al., 2017; Rees et al., 2016) demonstrated that these traits successfully distinguished world-leading serial medaling athletes from their less successful (non-medaling) counterparts. Nonetheless, the literature has yet to see a significant amount of research testing these traits in relation to different anxiety- performance theories.
Also, although existing evidence and theory suggests that individuals high in these traits should perform well, they are unlikely to perform well always. As such, it would be worthwhile to investigate the conditions under which individuals high in these traits may or may not perform well under high anxiety. Page 17 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Also, while many individuals may view anxiety-inducing or fear-provoking situations apprehensively, individuals high in either narcissism (Wallace & Baumeister, 2002; Woodman, Roberts, Hardy, Callow, & Rogers, 2011) or alexithymia (Roberts & Woodman, 2015; Woodman, Cazenave, & Le Scanff, 2008; Woodman et al., 2010; Woodman, Huggins, Le Scanff, & Cazenave, 2009) might be rather attracted to high-pressure environments. Typically, anxiety-inducing and fear-provoking situations offer opportunities for glory/admiration (e.g., to perform at one’s best under stress, to demonstrate an ability to do what others cannot do) and for agentic emotion regulation (e.g., to regulate one’s emotions in an easily identifiable fashion).
These opportunities satisfy narcissists’ need for self-enhancement (Roberts, Woodman, & Sedikides, 2017) and the alexithymic need of intra- and interpersonal regulation (Woodman et al., 2018). Therefore, individuals high in either narcissism or alexithymia are thought to be more capable of performing well in anxiety-inducing or fear-provoking situations compared to those low in these traits. However, research is unclear as to whether possessing traits such as narcissism and alexithymia would make individuals experience fewer unpleasant states (e.g., experience less anxiety and thus perform well) or tolerate more readily unpleasant states (e.g., experience high anxiety and still perform well).
Future research should consider testing the role of narcissism and alexithymia in these high-pressure performance settings. While research has generally treated personality traits as moderators of the anxiety- performance relationship, this approach is lacking in its applied value because personality traits are difficult to change. For example, although research is fairly conclusive that the performance of individuals high in certain traits such as neuroticism (John & Srivastava, 1999) tends to suffer (e.g., Barlow et al., 2016), from an applied perspective it is difficult to make individuals less neurotic with a view to optimizing performance under pressure.
To provide valuable applied implications, it would be worth exploring potential moderators of the relationship between certain personality traits and performance. For instance, Roberts, Callow, Hardy, Woodman, and Thomas (2010) assessed participants’ narcissistic traits and assigned them to either an internal imagery group (i.e., imagining looking out through one’s own eyes) or an external imagery group (i.e., imagining watching themselves from a third-person perspective) to perform in a low- anxiety setting followed by a high-anxiety competition. Individuals high in narcissism improved performance only when they used external imagery but individuals low in narcissism remained consistent in different conditions regardless of different imagery perspectives.
The findings suggest that external imagery perspective is a tailored strategy that is particularly beneficial to individuals high in narcissism in anxiety- inducing performance settings (e.g., competition; see also Roberts, Woodman, Hardy, Davis, & Wallace, 2013). However, literature has yet to see a significant amount of research exploring the moderators of the effect of personality on performance in high- anxiety settings. Future research in the field of individual differences in performance psychology should move forward to investigate the precise strategies tailored for different individuals to cope better with performance anxiety.
Page 18 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Conclusion Anxiety and fear have dominated the attention of performance-focused psychology researchers.
Research has revealed how anxiety may exert its influence on performance, and more recently how and why individuals may be prone to suffer or to thrive in high- pressure environments. Although researchers have made much progress in understanding the mechanisms that might underlie the anxiety-performance relationship, future research will benefit from conducting more experimental work and exploring the largely overlooked field of individual differences in the context of performance psychology. References Allsop, J.
E., Lawrence, G. P., Gray, R., & Khan, M. A.
(2017). The interaction between practice and performance pressure on the planning and control of fast target directed movement. Psychological Research, 81, 1004–1019.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. Anderson, J. R.
(1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369– 406.
Anton, J. P. (1957).
Aristotle’s theory of contrariety. New York, NY: Humanities Press. Barlow, M., Woodman, T., Chapman, C., Milton, M., Stone, D., Dodds, T., & Allen, B.
(2015). Who Takes Risks in High-Risk Sport?: The Role of Alexithymia. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 37(1), 83–96.
Barlow, M., Woodman, T., Gorgulu, R., & Voyzey, R. (2016). Ironic effects of performance are worse for neurotics.
Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 24, 27–37. Barlow, M., Woodman, T., & Hardy, L. (2013).
Great expectations: Different high-risk activities satisfy different motives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105(3), 458–475. Baumeister, R.
F. (1984). Choking under pressure: Self-consciousness and paradoxical effects of incentives on skillful performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 610–620. Beilock, S. L., & Carr, T.
H. (2001). On the fragility of skilled performance: What governs choking under pressure?
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 130, 701–725. Page 19 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Bellomo, E., Cooke, A., & Hardy, J. (2017). Reinvestment theory: Assembling the puzzle.
Motor chunks, conscious processing, and EEG activity during sequence acquisition and performance under pressure. Psychophysiology, 54(S1), S174. Binsch, O., Oudejans, R.
R. D., Bakker, F. C., & Savelsbergh, G.
J. P. (2009).
Unwanted effects in aiming actions: The relationship between gaze behavior and performance in a golf putting task. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 10, 628–635. Breivik, G.
(1999). Empirical studies of risk sport. Oslo, Norway: Norges idrettshøgskole, Institutt for samfunnsfag.
Bywater, I. (Ed.). (1894).
Aristotelis Ethica Nicomachea, Oxonii: E Typographeo Clarendoniano. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Cattell, R.
B., & Scheier, I. H. (1960).
Stimuli related to stress, neuroticism, excitation, and anxiety response patterns: Illustrating a new multivariate experimental design. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 60, 195–204. Cheng, W.
N. K., Hardy, L., & Markland, D. (2009).
Toward a three-dimensional conceptualization of performance anxiety: Rationale and initial measurement development. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 10, 271–278. Cheng, W.
N. K., Hardy, L., & Woodman, T. (2011).
Predictive validity of a three- dimensional model of performance anxiety in the context of tae-kwon-do. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 33, 40–53. Cooke, A., Gallicchio, G., Kavussanu, M., Willoughby, A., Intyre, D.
M. C., & Ring, C. (2015).
Premovement high-alpha power is modulated by previous movement errors: Indirect evidence to endorse high-alpha power as a marker of resource allocation during motor programming. Psychophysiology, 52, 977–981. Cooke, A., Kavussanu, M., Gallicchio, G., Willoughby, A., Mcintyre, D., & Ring, C.
(2014). Preparation for action: Psychophysiological activity preceding a motor skill as a function of expertise, performance outcome, and psychological pressure. Psychophysiology, 51, 374–384.
Cox, R., Martens, M., & Russell, W. (2003). Measuring anxiety in athletics: The revised competitive state anxiety inventory—2.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 25, 519–533. Dyke, F., Godwin, M. M., Goel, P., Rehm, J., Rietschel, J.
C., Hunt, C. A., & Miller, M. W.
(2014). Cerebral cortical activity associated with non-experts’ most accurate motor performance. Human Movement Science, 37, 21–31.
Edwards, T., Kingston, K., Hardy, L., & Gould, D. (2002). A qualitative analysis of catastrophic performances and the associated thoughts, feelings, and emotions.
The Sport Psychologist, 16, 1–19. Page 20 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Eubank, M., & Collins, D. (2000). Coping with pre- and in-event fluctuations in competitive state anxiety: A longitudinal approach.
Journal of Sports Sciences, 18, 121–131. Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, M.
W. (1985). Personality and individual differences: A natural science approach.
New York, NY: Plenum. Eysenck, M. W.
(1979). Anxiety, learning, and memory: A reconceptualization. Journal of Research in Personality, 13, 363–385.
Eysenck, M. W., & Calvo, M. G.
(1992). Anxiety and performance: The processing efficiency theory. Cognition and Emotion, 6, 409–434.
Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G.
(2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional control theory. Emotion, 7, 336–353.
Eysenck, M. W., Macleod, C., & Mathews, A. (1987).
Cognitive functioning and anxiety. Psychological Research, 49, 189–195. Fitts, P.
M., & Posner, M. I. (1967).
Human performance. Belmont, CA: Brooke/Cole. Fletcher, D., & Hanton, S.
(2001). The relationship between psychological skills usage and competitive anxiety responses. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 2, 89– 101.
Freud, S. (1920). A general introduction to psychoanalysis.
New York, NY: Boni & Liveright. Gallicchio, G., Cooke, A., & Ring, C. (2016).
Lower left temporal-frontal connectivity characterizes expert and accurate performance: High-alpha T7-Fz connectivity as a marker of conscious processing during movement. Sport, Exercise, and Performance Psychology, 5, 14–24. Gaudreau, P.
(2015). Self-assessment of the four subtypes of perfectionism in the 2×2 model of perfectionism. Personality and Individual Differences, 84, 52–62.
Gray, J. A. (1982).
The neuropsychology of anxiety. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Gray, R.
(2004). Attending to the execution of a complex sensorimotor skill: Expertise differences, choking, and slumps. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 10, 42–54.
Gray, R., Orn, A., & Woodman, T. (2017). Ironic and reinvestment effects in baseball pitching: How information about an opponent can influence performance under pressure.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 39, 3–12. Page 21 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018.
All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice).
Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Gucciardi, D. F., & Dimmock, J. A.
(2008). Choking under pressure in sensorimotor skills: Conscious processing or depleted attentional resources? Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 9, 45–59.
Hall, S. (1974). Greek medical and philosophical interpretations of fear.
Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, 50, 821–836. Hanton, S., Evans, L., & Neil, R. (2003).
Hardiness and the competitive trait anxiety response. Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 16, 167–184. Hanton, S., Neil, R., & Evans, L.
(2013). Hardiness and anxiety interpretation: An investigation into coping usage and effectiveness. European Journal of Sport Science, 13, 96–104.
Hardy, L. (1990). A catastrophe model of anxiety and performance.
In J. G. Jones & L.
Hardy (Eds.), Stress and performance in sport (pp. 81–106). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Hardy, L. (1996a). A test of catastrophe models of anxiety and sports performance against multidimensional anxiety theory models using the method of dynamic differences.
Anxiety, Stress, & Coping, 9, 69–86. Hardy, L. (1996b).
Testing the predictions of the cusp catastrophe model of anxiety and performance. The Sport Psychologist, 10, 140–156. Hardy, L.
(1997). The Coleman Roberts Griffith address: Three myths about applied consultancy work. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 9, 277–294.
Hardy, L., Barlow, M., Evans, L., Rees, T., Woodman, T., & Warr, C. (2017). Great British medalists: Psychosocial biographies of super-elite and elite athletes from Olympic sports.
In M. Wilson, V. Walsh, & B.
R. Parkin (Eds.), Sport and the brain: The science of preparing, enduring and winning, part A (pp. 1–119).
Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, Elsevier. Hardy, L., Bell, J., & Beattie, S. (2013).
A neuropsychological model of mentally tough behavior. Journal of Personality, 82, 69–81. Hardy, L., & Hutchinson, A.
(2007). Effects of performance anxiety on effort and performance in rock climbing: A test of processing efficiency theory. Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 20, 147–161.
Hardy, L., Mullen, R., & Jones, G. (1996). Knowledge and conscious control of motor actions under stress.
British Journal of Psychology, 87, 621–636. Hardy, L., & Parfitt, G. (1991).
A catastrophe model of anxiety and performance. British Journal of Psychology, 82, 163–178. Page 22 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Hardy, L., Parfitt, G., & Pates, J. (1994).
Performance catastrophes in sport: A test of the hysteresis hypothesis. Journal of Sports Sciences, 12, 327–334. Hardy, L., Woodman, T., & Carrington, S.
(2004). Is self-confidence a bias factor in higher-order catastrophe models? An exploratory analysis.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 26, 359–368. Irwin, J. R.
(1947). Galen on the temperaments. Journal of General Psychology, 36, 45– 64.
Jackson, R. C., Ashford, K. J., & Norsworthy, G.
(2006). Attentional focus, dispositional reinvestment, and skilled motor performance under pressure. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 28, 49–68.
Jerome, G. J., & Williams, J. M.
(2000). Intensity and interpretation of competitive state anxiety: Relationship to performance and repressive coping. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 12, 236–250.
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999).
The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoretical perspectives. In L. Pervin & O.
P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 102–138).
New York, NY: Guilford. Jones, G. (1995).
More than just a game: Research developments and issues in competitive anxiety in sport. British Journal of Psychology, 86, 449–478. Jones, G., & Hanton, S.
(1996). Interpretation of competitive anxiety symptoms and goal attainment expectancies. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 18, 144–157.
Jones, G., Hanton, S., & Swain, A. (1994). Intensity and interpretation of anxiety symptoms in elite and non-elite sports performers.
Personality and Individual Differences, 17, 657–663. Jones, G., & Swain, A. (1992).
Intensity and direction as dimensions of competitive state anxiety and relationships with competitiveness. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 74, 467–472. Jones, G., Swain, A., & Hardy, L.
(1993). Intensity and direction dimensions of competitive state anxiety and relationships with performance. Journal of Sports Sciences, 11, 525–532.
Jones, K. A., Smith, N. C., & Holmes, P.
S. (2004). Anxiety symptom interpretation in high-anxious, defensive high-anxious, low-anxious and repressor sport performers.
Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 22, 91–100. Cicero, M. T.
(1927). Tusculan disputations. In J.
E. King (Ed.), Cicero: Volume XVIII. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Page 23 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Kinrade, N.
P., Jackson, R. C., & Ashford, K. J.
(2015). Reinvestment, task complexity and decision making under pressure in basketball. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 20, 11–19.
Krane, V. (1994). The mental readiness form as a measure of competitive state anxiety.
The Sport Psychologist, 8, 189–202. Laërtius, D. (1925).
Epicurus (R. D. Hicks, Trans.).
In R. D. Hicks (Ed.), Lives and opinions of eminent philosophers, volume II: Book 6–10 (pp.
528–678). Loeb Classical Library 185. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lam, W. K., Maxwell, J. P., & Masters, R.
(2009). Analogy learning and the performance of motor skills under pressure. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 31, 337–357.
Lawrence, G. P., Khan, M. A., & Hardy, L.
(2013). The effect of state anxiety on the online and offline control of fast target-directed movements. Psychological Research, 77, 422–433.
Lazarus, R. S. (1982).
Thoughts on the relations between emotions and cognition. American Psychologist, 37, 1019–1024. Lévy-Valensi, J.
(1948). Précis de Psychiatrie. Paris, France: Baillière.
Liebert, R. M., & Morris, L. M.
(1967). Cognitive and emotional components of test anxiety: A distinction and some initial data. Psychological Reports, 20, 975–978.
Martens, R., Burton, D., Rivkin, F., & Simon, J. (1980). Reliability and validity of the competitive state anxiety inventory (CSAI).
In C. H. Nadeau, W.
C. Halliwell, K. M.
Newell, & G. C. Roberts (Eds.), Psychology of motor behavior and sport (pp.
91–99). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. Martens, R., Burton, D., Vealey, R.
S., Bump, L. A., & Smith, D. E.
(1990). Development and validation of the competitive state anxiety inventory-2. In R.
Martens, R. S. Vealey, & D.
Burton (Eds.), Competitive anxiety in sport (pp. 117–190). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Masters, R., & Maxwell, J. (2008). The theory of reinvestment.
International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 1, 160–183. Masters, R. S.
W. (1992). Knowledge, knerves and know-how: The role of explicit versus implicit knowledge in the breakdown of a complex motor skill under pressure.
British Journal of Psychology, 83, 343–358. Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M.
J., Witzki, A. H., Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D.
(2000). The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “frontal lobe” tasks : A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49–100.
Page 24 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Mobbs, D., Marchant, J.
L., Hassabis, D., Seymour, B., Tan, G., Gray, M., . . .
Frith, C. D. (2009).
From threat to fear: The neural organization of defensive fear systems in humans. Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 29, 12236–12243. Mullen, R., & Hardy, L.
(2000). State anxiety and motor performance: Testing the conscious processing hypothesis. Journal of Sports Sciences, 18, 785–799.
Murray, N. P., & Janelle, C. M.
(2003). Anxiety and performance: A visual search examination of the processing efficiency theory. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 25, 171–187.
Neil, R., Mellalieu, S. D., & Hanton, S. (2006).
Psychological skills usage and the competitive anxiety response as a function of skill level in rugby union. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 5, 415–423. Neil, R., & Woodman, T.
(2017). Performance anxiety, arousal, and coping in sport. In T.
Horn & A. Smith (Eds.), Advances in sport and exercise psychology (4th ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Ntoumanis, N., & Biddle, S. (1998). The relationship between competitive anxiety, achievement goals, and motivational climates.
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69, 176–187. Ntoumanis, N., & Jones, G. (1998).
Interpretation of competitive trait anxiety symptoms as a function of locus of control beliefs. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 29, 99– 114. O’Brien, M., Hanton, S., & Mellalieu, S.
D. (2005). Intensity and direction of competitive anxiety as a function of goal attainment expectation and competition goal generation.
Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport/Sports Medicine Australia, 8, 423–432. Otten, M. (2009).
Choking vs. clutch performance: a study of sport performance under pressure. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 31, 583–601.
Perusini, J. N., & Fanselow, M. S.
(2015). Neurobehavioral perspectives on the distinction between fear and anxiety. Learning and Memory, 22, 417–425.
Price, J. L. (2005).
Free will versus survival: Brain systems that underlie intrinsic constraints on behavior. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493, 132–139. Rees, T., Hardy, L., Güllich, A., Abernethy, B., Côté, J., Woodman, T., .
. . Warr, C.
(2016). The Great British Medalists Project: A review of current knowledge on the development of the world’s best sporting talent. Sports Medicine, 46, 1041–1058.
Page 25 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Roberts, R., Callow, N., Hardy, L., Woodman, T., & Thomas, L.
(2010). Interactive effects of different visual imagery perspectives and narcissism on motor performance. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 32, 499–517.
Roberts, R., & Woodman, T. (2015). Contemporary personality perspectives in sport psychology.
In S. D. Mellalieu & S.
Hanton (Eds.), Contemporary advances in sport psychology: A review (pp. 1–27). London: Routledge.
Roberts, R., & Woodman, T. (2016). Personality and performance: Beyond the big 5.
In R. Schinke, K. R.
McGannon, & B. Smith (Eds.), Routledge international handbook of sport psychology (pp. 401–411).
London, UK: Routledge. Roberts, R., & Woodman, T. (2017).
Personality and performance: moving beyond the Big 5. Current Opinion in Psychology, 16, 104–108. Roberts, R., Woodman, T., Hardy, L., Davis, L., & Wallace, H.
M. (2013). Psychological skills do not always help performance: The moderating role of narcissism.
Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 25, 316–325. Roberts, R., Woodman, T., & Sedikides, C. (2017).
Pass me the ball: Narcissism in performance settings. International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 11, 1–24. Sarason, I.
G. (1984). Stress, anxiety, and cognitive interference: Reactions to tests.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 929–938. Sarkar, M., & Fletcher, D. (2014).
Psychological resilience in sport performers: A review of stressors and protective factors. Journal of Sports Sciences, 32, 1419–1432. Scheier, M.
F., & Carver, C. S. (1992).
Effects of optimism on psychological and physical well-being: Theoretical overview and empirical update. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 16, 201–228. Smith, N.
C., Bellamy, M., Collins, D. J., & Newell, D. (2001).
A test of processing efficiency theory in a team sport context. Journal of Sports Sciences, 19, 321–332. Smith, R.
E., Smoll, F. L., Cumming, S. P., & Grossbard, J.
R. (2006). Measurement of multidimensional sport performance trait anxiety in children and adults: The sport anxiety scale-2.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 28, 479–501. Smith, R. E., Smoll, F.
L., & Schutz, R. W. (1990).
Measurement and correlates of sport-specific cognitive and somatic trait anxiety: The sport anxiety scale. Anxiety Research, 2, 263–280. Spielberger, C.
D. (1966). Anxiety and behavior.
New York, NY: Academic Press. Wagstaff, C., Neil, R., Mellalieu, S., & Hanton, S. (2012).
Key movements in directional research in competitive anxiety. Routledge Online Studies on the Olympic and Paralympic Games, 1, 143–166. Page 26 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Wallace, H. M., & Baumeister, R.
F. (2002). The performance of narcissists rises and falls with perceived opportunity for glory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 819–834. Wegner, D. M.
(1984). White bears and other unwanted thoughts. New York, NY: Viking/ Penguin.
Wegner, D. M. (1994).
Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological Review, 101, 34–52. Wegner, D.
M. (2009). How to think, say, or do precisely the worst thing for any occasion.
Science, 325, 48–50. Wegner, D. M., Ansfield, M., & Pilloff, D.
(1998). The putt and the pendulum: Ironic effects of the mental control of action. Psychological Science, 9, 196–199.
Williams, A. M., Vickers, J., & Rodriguez, S. (2002).
The effects of anxiety on visual search, movement kinematics, and performance in table tennis: A test of Eysenck and Calvo’s processing efficiency theory. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 24, 438–455. Wilson, M., Chattington, M., Marple-Horvat, D.
E., & Smith, N. C. (2007).
A comparison of self-focus versus attentional explanations of choking. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 29, 439–456. Wilson, M., & Smith, N.
C. (2007). A test of the predictions of processing efficiency theory during elite team competition using the Thought Occurrence Questionnaire for Sport.
International Journal of Sport Psychology, 38, 1–18. Wilson, M., Smith, N. C., & Holmes, P.
S. (2007). The role of effort in influencing the effect of anxiety on performance: Testing the conflicting predictions of processing efficiency theory and the conscious processing hypothesis.
British Journal of Psychology, 98, 411–428. Wilson, M. R., Vine, S.
J., & Wood, G. (2009). The influence of anxiety on visual attentional control in basketball free throw shooting.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 31, 152–168. Wilson, M. R., Wood, G., & Vine, S.
J. (2009). Anxiety, attentional control, and performance impairment in penalty kicks.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 31, 761–775. Wine, J. (1971).
Test anxiety and direction of attention. Psychological Bulletin, 76, 92– 104. Woodman, T., Albinson, J., & Hardy, L.
(1997). An investigation of the zones of optimal functioning hypothesis within a multidimensional framework. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 19, 131–141.
Page 27 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology). (c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved.
Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Woodman, T., Barlow, M., & Gorgulu, R.
(2015). Don’t miss, don’t miss, d’oh! Performance when anxious suffers specifically where least desired.
Sport Psychologist, 29, 213–223. Woodman, T., Cazenave, N., & Le Scanff, C. (2008).
Skydiving as emotion regulation: The rise and fall of anxiety is moderated by alexithymia. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 30, 424–433. Woodman, T., & Davis, P.
A. (2008). The role of repression in the incidence of ironic errors.
The Sport Psychologist, 22, 183–196. Woodman, T., & Hardy, L. (2001).
Stress and anxiety. In R. N.
Singer, H. A. Hausenblas, & C.
M. Janelle (Eds.), Handbook of sport psychology (2nd ed., pp. 290–318).
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. Woodman, T., & Hardy, L. (2005).
Tenenbaum and Becker’s critique: Much ado about nothing. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 27, 382–392. Woodman, T., Hardy, L., & Barlow, M.
(2019). High-risk sports. In G.
Tenenbaum & R. Eklund (Eds.), Handbook of sport and exercise psychology (4th ed.). Woodman, T., Hardy, L., Barlow, M., & Le Scanff, C.
(2010). Motives for participation in prolonged engagement high-risk sports: An agentic emotion regulation perspective. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 11(5), 345–352.
Woodman, T., Huggins, M., Le Scanff, C., & Cazenave, N. (2009). Alexithymia determines the anxiety experienced in skydiving.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 116, 134–138. Woodman, T., MacGregor, A. L., & Hardy, L.
(2018). Risk is good for self-esteem: Beyond self-determination theory. Personality and Individual Differences (under second review).
Woodman, T., Roberts, R., Hardy, L., Callow, N., & Rogers, C. H. (2011).
There is an “I” in TEAM: Narcissism and social loafing. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82, 285– 290. Zajonc, R.
B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences.
American Psychologist, 35, 151–175. Zajonc, R. B.
(1984). On the primacy of affect. American Psychologist, 39, 117–123.
Zeeman, E. C. (1976).
Catastrophe theory. Scientific American, 273, 78–83. Zuckerman, M.
(1969). Theoretical formulations. In J.
P. Zubek (Ed.), Sensory deprivation: Fifteen years of research (pp. 407–432).
New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts. Zuckerman, M. (1979).
Sensation seeking: Beyond the optimal level of arousal. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Page 28 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018Anxiety and Fear in Sport and Performance Zuckerman, M. (1994).
Behavioral expressions and biosocial bases of sensation seeking. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Zuckerman, M.
(2007). Sensation seeking and risky behavior. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Zuckerman, M., Eysenck, S., & Eysenck, H. J. (1978).
Sensation seeking in England and America: Cross-cultural, age, and sex comparisons. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 4, 139–149. Shuge Zhang Institute for the Psychology of Elite Performance, School of Sport, Health, and Exercise Sciences, Bangor University Tim Woodman Institute for the Psychology of Elite Performance, School of Sport, Health, and Exercise Sciences, Bangor University Ross Roberts Institute for the Psychology of Elite Performance, School of Sport, Health, and Exercise Sciences, Bangor University Page 29 of 29 PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, PSYCHOLOGY (oxfordre.com/psychology).
(c) Oxford University Press USA, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited.
Please see applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: OUP-Reference Gratis Access; date: 23 December 2018 VViieeww ppuubblliiccaattiioonn ssttaattss
Applied Sport Psychology Motivation, Feedback and Goal Setting for your Athletes Ciara Losty Lecturer in Sport and Exercise Psychology, Department of Health, Sport and Exercise Science• Why discuss these topics? • Firstly there is concern with trying to foster long term motivation in sport. • A high proportion of adults lead a sedentary life and research has shown that when children have positive experiences with sport when they are young, the will be more likely to be active adults• Secondly, there is a desire by coaches and parents to set the stage for athletic excellence.
• Long term perspective • Many talented children seem to suffer the effects of burnout before they have the opportunity to develop their potential abilityHow can we encourage athletes to try different sports, to work hard when they play, to enjoy their sports and have positive experiences?• The aim of this session is to educate on how to use applied psychology (positive reinforcement and correct motivational techniques) for long term athletic motivationMotivating Your Athletes (and Yourself) Motivate Yourself First How Do You Expect to Motivate Others If You Can’t Motivate Yourself First? Motivation is Contagious Focused Motivation You Have to Control The Things YOU Have Control Over -- Nothing ElseActivity A Quick Check of YOUR Motivation... Ask the coach beside you Why Did You Play Sports?
Why Do You Coach?Always Remember…Our Players Come To Us Already Highly Motivated Therefore… It’s Our Job To Maintain Our Players’ Natural Motivation To Play Our Sport The $1,000,000 Question Is … What Can We, As Coaches, Do To Help Our Players Maintain Their Natural Motivation For Sport?Always Remember…Our Players Come To Us Already Highly Motivated The $1,000,000 Answer Is … We Need To Learn Some Of The Basic Principles Of Motivation and FeedbackFeedback - A Positive Approach to Coaching • The primary function of a coach is to somehow alter existing sporting behavior - could be a technique, tactics, skills or behaviour • We, as coaches, must make a conscious decision as to whether we will use a POSITIVE or NEGATIVE approach when we attempt to make these changesUsing a Negative Approach (shouting, fear, negative feedback) to Change Behavior One Single “Advantage”… It often works -- can eliminate undesirable behavior. But only in the short run and only when we are present and only when we’re willing to punishUsing a Negative Approach to Change Behavior Disadvantages (page 1) (cid:190)Can be very unpleasant -- reduce enjoyment and MOTIVATION (may increase likelihood of athletes quitting the team) (cid:190)Increases ANXIETY (and error rate) (cid:190)Produces “fear of failure”Using a Negative Approach to Change Behavior Disadvantages (page 2) (cid:190)Reduces “risk-taking” (cid:190)Can actually reinforce some undesirable behaviors and thus, actually increase your discipline problems (cid:190)Wastes valuable practice timeDisadvantages (page 3) (cid:190)We often use physical activity as punishment (cid:190)Running Laps (cid:190)Running Sprints (cid:190)Push-ups (cid:190)Sit-upsWhy Would You Ever Use Physical Activity As Punishment?
You (like it or not) are a Physical Educator One of the “benefits” of sport is that it promotes lifelong physical activity (health benefits) Why would you ever use what you want to promote as punishment?Negative and Positive Approaches to Changing Behavior Major Assumption of Negative Approach to Coaching… We can somehow “scare” a bad performance right out of the athleteIf Using a Negative Coaching Style Is So Bad… How Do We Make Those Necessary Changes?A Positive Approach: Using the “Feedback Sandwich” The Feedback Sandwich (or “Big Mac” Attack) Reinforcement Instruction EncouragementThree Steps in The “Feedback Sandwich” Step 1: Start by reinforcing (praising) your athlete for ANYTHING he/she has done correctly -- regardless of how smallStep 1: Reinforce Something They’ve Done Right Why? 1 min go!
List all benefits you can think of for starting your “error correction” process by reinforcing something your learners have done correctly.Step 1: Reinforce Something They’ve Done Right (cid:190)It forces you to recognize that most of the performance was actually done correctly (cid:190)It raises their self-esteem and confidence (cid:190)It reinforces correct elements of the performance (cid:190)It’s the best way to get their attention (cid:190)Praise the Effort!Step 2: Provide Future-Oriented Instruction Follow the positive reinforcement (now that you have their attention) with FUTURE-ORIENTED instruction Don’t dwell on the mistakes -- there is nothing the athlete can do to correct a mistake made in the past -- they can only change what they do in the future -- tell next time” them what to do “Future-Oriented Instruction (cid:190) Don’t tell them what they already know -- tell them something they don’t know ‘You did receive the serve well’ (cid:190) Don’t simply tell them that they’ve made a mistake -- let them know why they made the mistake ‘Your body was in the wrong position to receive the serve’Step 3: End with General Praise and Encouragement Why? (cid:190)Encourages them to try again (cid:190)Lets them know you have confidence in their ability to perform the skill correctly (Do You Really?) (cid:190)Non verbal communicationFive Things You Can Do To Motivate Your Athletes, Lets discuss this! #1 You Can...
Identify why athletes participate and why they drop out #2 You Can... Identify what is motivating each of your athletes: PERFORMANCE or OUTCOME#3 You Can... Help your athletes set “S.M.A.R.T.” goals to improve their skills and learn new skills #4 You Can… Make their athletic experience enjoyable and exciting #5 You Can...
Reduce competitive stressGuideline #1 What Does The Research Say? Athletes Participate in Youth Sports… 1. To Have Fun 2.
To Improve Skills 3. To Stay in Shape 4. To Do Something They’re “Good At” 5.
For the Excitement of CompetitionWhat Does The Research Say? Athletes Participate in Youth Sports… 6. To Get Exercise 7.
To Play as Part of a Team 8. For the Challenge of Competition 9. To Learn New Skills 10.
To WinWhat Does The Research Say? Would you rather play on a regular basis for a poor team or “sit the bench” for a championship team? Between 78-90% would rather play on a poor team than sit on the bench for the champs!What Does The Research Say?
Children Drop Out Because of... (cid:190)Other interests (cid:190)Work (cid:190)Lack of interest (cid:190)Did not play enough (cid:190)Skills were not improving (cid:190)Did not like the coachGuideline #2: Help your athletes set “S.M.A.R.T.” goals to improve their skills and learn new skills (cid:190)Help Everyone on Your Team Set Individual Goals (cid:190)As Goals Are Attained, They Help Motivate! Athletes See Themselves ImprovingPerformance Goals • Athletes judge success or failure based performance.
Not whether on their they won or lost Outcome Goals • Athletes judge success or failure based on the outcome regardless how how they playedGuideline #3: Make the whole experience enjoyable and exciting (cid:190)Keep practices and games fun (cid:190)Encourage athletes to be with, and make friends (cid:190)Let all athletes participate (cid:190)Avoid boredom by varying routinesGuideline #3: Make the whole experience enjoyable and exciting (cid:190)Use simple, active drills (no standing around) and short practices (cid:190)Use change of pace activities (cid:190)Allow athletes to try out leadership roles, new positions, and make decisions -- after all, it’s their game isn’t it?Guideline #4: Reduce Competitive Stress Competitive Stress Occurs: (cid:190)When an athlete believes that a competitive situation, especially one perceived as highly important, threatens his/her self-esteem (cid:190)When an athlete believes that his/her capabilities are not good enough to meet the competitive demandGuideline #4: Reduce Competitive Stress Remember, YOU might be part of the “competitive demand”Guideline #5: Teach An Appropriate View of Success Encourage athletes to believe that real success means (notice the link to goal-setting): (cid:190)Improving oneself (which ultimately enables winning) (cid:190)Who are your athletes comparing their performance to? (cid:190)Achieving realistic goals for improvement (not just the outcomes of competitions)Guideline #5: Teach An Appropriate View of Success (cid:190)Giving one’s best effort to improve at all times (the athlete can control effort but not outcome)Some Wisdom from John Wooden • Wooden concluded his 40 years as a head coach and his 885-203 overall career win-loss record A large part of that success was at UCLA. In 27 years as coach, his teams registered 620 wins, and only 147 losses while earning far more national honours than any other university.
• Under Wooden, UCLA won an unprecedented 10 NCAA championships, including seven consecutive (1966-73).Some Final Thoughts From Coach Wooden... Motivation: “Enthusiasm brushes off on those with whom you come into contact, those you work with and for. You must have enthusiasm, especially if you’re a leader or if you wish to be a leader”Some Final Thoughts From Coach Wooden...
Goals: “I never mentioned victory or winning to my players. I never referred to ‘beating’ an opponent. Instead I constantly urged them to strive to do the best of which they were capable.
That was the measurement I used -- not the final score”Some Final Thoughts From Coach Wooden... Motivation: “I wasn’t much for giving speeches to stir up emotions before a game… Mistakes occur when your thinking is tainted by excessive emotion… Unless you’re attempting to run through a brick wall, excessive emotion is counterproductive.”Thank You for The Opportunity To Talk With You This Afternoon I wish you good luck and if you need to contact me… Ciara Losty, Waterford Institute of Technology, closty@wit.ie
SPECIAL OLYMPICS SPORTS SCIENCES: SPORT PSYCHOLOGY FOR COACHESAcknowledgements The Special Olympics movement is profoundly grateful for the support of the Annenberg Foundation which has underwritten the production of this guide and resource, supporting our global goals for coaches’ excellence. Special Olympics would also like to thank the professionals, volunteers, coaches and athletes who helped in the production of the Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches. They have helped fulfill the mission of Special Olympics: to provide year-round sports training and athletic competition in a variety of Olympic-type sports for people 8 years of age and older with intellectual disabilities, giving them continuing opportunities to develop physical fitness, demonstrate courage, experience joy and participate in a sharing of gifts, skills and friendship with their families, other Special Olympics athletes and the community.
Special Olympics welcomes your ideas and comments for future revisions of this guide. We apologize if, for any reason, an acknowledgement has been inadvertently omitted. Contributing Authors Jeff Martin Special Thanks To the Following for All of Your Help and Support Aldis Berzins, Special Olympics Inc.
Paul Whichard, Special Olympics Inc. Paola Quijano, Special Olympics Editor Mary Pittaway, MS, RD Special Olympics Inc. Global Clinical Advisor Health Promotion Annette Codd, Special Olympics Ireland Carol Farrell, Special Olympics Ireland Mariusz Damentko, Regional Sports Director, Special Olympics Europe EurasiaSpecial Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Table of Contents Table of Contents Coaching Special Olympics Athletes 4 Coaching and Teaching Basic Sport Skills 5 How Athletes Learn 5 Motor Program 5 Stages of Learning 5 Learning Models 6 Teaching Skills 6 Levels of Instruction 7 Coach as the Model 8 Intellectual Disability and Other Closely Related Developmental Disabilities 9 Athlete’s Behavior Characteristics and Strategies to Improve Learning 10 Understanding and Utilizing Sport Psychology 12 Psychological Considerations 12 Athlete Readiness 12 Developing Communications Skills 13 The Communication Flow 13 What Makes Communication Ineffective 14 Developing Credibility When You Communicate 14 Learning How to Listen 15 Information and Problem Solving 16 Oral Expression 16 Listening Comprehension 17 Attention Skills 18 Social Perception 19 Positive Reinforcement and Rewards 20 Communicating and Correcting Errors 20 Using Rewards 20 Misbehavior 21 Motivation 22 Athletes’ needs and intrinsic motivation 22 Developing Sport Confidence 26 Developing Self-Confidence through Goal Setting 26 Performance Goals versus Outcome Goals 27 Motivation through Goal Setting 28 Winning and Losing 30 Handling Grief 31 Anxiety and Stress Management 31 Positive self-talk and imagery 31 Taking Athletes to Competition 32 Athlete Flow (define flow earlier as being “in the zone” at Competitions 32 Before the Game/Meet/Match 32 At the Game/Meet/Match 32 After the Game/Meet/Match 33 Reference Section 34 3 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sport Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Coaching Special Olympics Athletes Coaching Special Olympics Athletes Special Olympics is committed to coaching excellence.
The most important thing to know as a coach in Special Olympics is that athletes are individuals, and coaching them is just like coaching any other youth or community sports team. But we recognize that there are some situations that make Special Olympics coaching unique, Athletes are people who have been identified as slow learners; beyond that, they are just like everyone else, individuals with unique challenges, talents, abilities and interests. People with an intellectual disability learn just like everyone else, they use different strategies and strengths to help them understand.
Some learn best through seeing things, others through hearing things, some need to feel what it is like to do something before they can learn it. There are three main considerations to take into account that will affect your coaching 1. Learning Considerations (Motivation; Perception; Comprehension; Memory) 2.
Medical Considerations (Intellectual Disability and other related developmental disabilities section) The most important things to remember regarding these issues are safety, dignity and expectations.  Safety is dealt with by talking to parents, guardians and athletes themselves about what coaches should be aware of. They are not expected to be a physician, but must be aware of any restriction on activity (Medical Release Form).
 Dignity is an easy thing to deny or to give. The best gauge of ability comes from talking to athletes about what they like, how they feel during a workout or what they want to accomplish in this sport.  Expectations come from many sources.
Coaches will set expectations for their athletes and for themselves in order to challenge and push the Athletes, designing workouts to help them meet those expectations. Athlete’s families may have expectations about what they can or cannot do. 3.
Social Considerations (Social Skills; Physical recreation at home; Economic status) The role of the Special Olympics coach is much the same as any other volunteer coach in the community. There is an expectation that the coach will know something about the sport and how to teach it. This expectation varies with the skill level of the athletes and the environments in which the coaching takes place.
These expectations will: 1. Help athletes select appropriate sport(s) and levels of participation 2. Offer a range of activities/events for all ability levels 3.
Provide safe training and competition opportunities 4. Conduct high quality training and competition 5. Involve families and/or other support groups 6.
Assist athletes to becoming integrated into the overall community Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 4Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Coaching and Teaching Basic Sport Skills Coaching and Teaching Basic Sport Skills The main objectives of coaching and teaching basic sport skills are:  Move athletes from being coach dependent to being independent and self-monitoring  Teach athletes sports skills and to know when and how to use them One of the primary roles of the coach is teaching. Teaching means helping athletes learn physical skills and improve their athletic performance. The coach has the responsibility to develop athletes from the beginning stage of learning to becoming skilled athletes.
Like all training, the process of learning skills is a long-term process. Teaching techniques is a fundamental skill in successful coaching. Techniques are the building blocks of skilled performance.
A skilled athlete has good consistent technique and knows when and how to use technique to produce the best results. How Athletes Learn Techniques are the basic building blocks of skilled performance. Techniques are learned skills that allow athletes to compete most efficiently within the rules of sport.
Skill has two meanings: a task and/or performance; the observable behavior that demonstrates a skill. Learning is the relative improvement in performance through practice. Skill learning is an invisible process.
Because other factors can impact changes in performance, it is not always easy to know if an athlete has learned a skill. An athlete’s consistent performance of a skill is the key to knowing if the skill has been learned. Motor Program As athletes continue to practice, feedback and instruction are the basic pieces of information used to create a sequence of the athlete’s movement (motor program).
The motor program is developed whenever we practice a skill. The memory of the previous attempts is used to physically perform the action again. With practice, a clear and precise memory of the skill is formed.
The development of an athlete’s motor skills is what allows him/her to master a skill. As a coach, one of your major responsibilities is to help athletes develop good motor skills. Many factors impact the learning of motor skills: your coaching ability, the environment, and the athlete’s physical and cognitive ability to name a few.
Most importantly, your athletes will be influenced greatly by what you do: how you teach, organize practice and give feedback. Stages of Learning Beginning Stage The beginning stage of learning is the thinking stage. This is where the athlete is working out in his mind what to do.
As the coach, first you must explain very clearly to athletes the skills they are to learn. It is imperative to be very patient in this stage. The athlete can get easily overwhelmed when he or she is given too many tasks to learn at one time or if you put a lot of pressure on the athlete too quickly.
The stage is complete when the athlete can perform the skill, even though he or she may not perform it perfectly. Intermediate Stage The intermediate stage is the next level in learning. This stage invokes the motor program that was started in the beginning stage.
The athlete needs to be motivated and given feedback on his/her skill development. The emphasis is now on the quality of practice to refine skills. The shift is from mental activity to learning the sequence of movements to master the skill.
Athletes work on refining their timing and coordination. They need to know what they are doing incorrectly and how they can make corrections. Feedback is vitally important at this stage.
As the skill becomes more automatic, the athlete has entered the advanced stage. 5 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Coaching and Teaching Basic Sport Skills Advanced Stage The advanced stage is when the athlete is performing the skill. The control of the movement becomes more automatic.
The athlete is not thinking about the movement as much. The athlete can now focus on more critical skills and applying strategy of the new skill to his/her sport. It is important to note that improvement in this area is smaller and may require more motivation for the athlete to practice.
Coaching Tips  An athlete may be at the advanced stage for one skill and at the beginning or intermediate stage for another skill. Your success is in being able to determine where your athlete is at various learning stages and provide the best instruction, motivation and feedback for each one’s success. Learning Models There is more to coaching than knowing sport specific skills.
Successful coaches must properly teach skills and mentally prepare athletes for competition. Regardless of physical, mental, social and emotional well– being, all students learn differently. Coaches must be aware of the learning process in order to create an improved learning experience for the athlete.
Coaches must honor the athletes learning style; sensory mode and reasons for participation when assessing and selecting athletes’ levels of competition.  Athletes may tend to process visually  Athletes may tend to process auditorily.  Athletes may tend to process kinesthetically.
 Athletes may tend to process using a blend of all of the above. Coaches must take notice of how an athlete processes the information he or she receives. After you have identified how an athlete processes information, it is your job to help athletes set goals that will allow them to maximize participation and potential and simultaneously develop their own goal setting skills.
Teaching Skills There are two basic types of skills: simple and complex. Learning simple skills typically require little practice. However, they are only considered simple if the athlete can learn them quickly.
What is simple for one athlete may not be as simple for another. Simple Skills Simple skills are most easily mastered from seeing them performed. It is generally considered that 80 percent of learning takes place through what is seen.
The basic methods in teaching simple skills are imitation and demonstration. Basically, athletes copy what you show them (“Watch this ... Try it.”).
If the imitation is accurate, immediate and specific positive feedback is a good way to confirm this to the athlete (“Yes, you got it. Good job as you followed through with your wrist. Now, let’s practice it a couple more times to make sure we remember it.”).
Coaches should strive to identify specific behaviors to notice and provide positive feedback on as this confirms to athletes what they did correctly and increases the odds that they will repeat the correct skill/behavior. Complex Skills Complex skills require a little more effort on the part of the coach. First, learn to break down complex skills into smaller tasks to assist athletes in learning the skill.
Some coaches and educators call this shaping. How do I break down complex skills into smaller tasks? Your sport specific coaching guide will go into greater detail and illustrate actual teaching progressions.
Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 6Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Coaching and Teaching Basic Sport Skills Levels of Instruction Regardless of the type of skill, the basic levels of instruction are verbal, demonstration, physical prompting and physical assistance. Athletes may require a single method or a combination of these methods to learn a sport skill. It is important to identify the methods that work best for your athletes.
For example, one athlete may require only verbal instruction to learn skills; another athlete may require both demonstration and physical assistance. Verbal Instruction Verbal instruction is the most common form of teaching and should be used first when presenting new skills. Be conscious of presenting the task in one or two-part directions.
All language should be clear and consistent throughout the lesson. Using simple key words is essential. For example, a “lay-up” should always be a “lay-up” and not a “toss” or a “shot.” Be clear, concise, consistent and command-oriented.
Demonstration This level of teaching is universal and can be used by the coach to assist with the verbal instruction of a skill. When a skill becomes too difficult for the athlete to verbally comprehend, demonstration should be used. For new skills, linking demonstration with verbal instruction is most effective.
Physical Prompting Physical prompting is best used when verbal and demonstration methods are not working. Guidance by touch to prompt an athlete into proper position is an example of a physical prompt. Verbal and demonstration instruction is also good to use during physical prompting.
Physical Assistance Physical assistance is used when all other levels of instruction have been exhausted. This level requires the coach to physically move the athlete into position and to physically assist the athlete to complete the skill. This method should be used with caution, especially if the athlete functions at a lower level and/or does not like to be touched.
Levels of Instruction PPhhyyssiiccaall AAssssiissttaannccee PPhhyyssiiccaall PPrroommpptt DDeemmoonnssttrraattiioonn VVeerrbbaall 7 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Coaching and Teaching Basic Sport Skills Below are general guidelines to help Coaches teach sport skills more effectively.  Briefly explain the skill.  Break the skills into smaller, simpler steps so that the athlete can be successful.
 Briefly demonstrate the skill.  Let the athletes practice the simpler skills.  Gradually combine steps so that the entire skill is shaped into the desired performance.
Watch athletes carefully during practice so that you can provide positive feedback and reinforcement. Allow athletes to continue practicing once you have given feedback and corrected errors. It is important to make sure that athletes complete the practice feeling successful and good about themselves.
Coaching Tips  Develop one component of a skill at a time.  Learning is a long-term process. Patience is required.
Coach as the Model Your every action as a coach on and off the playing field is a form of nonverbal communication. One of the most important things you communicate by your actions is respect or the lack of it. How you walk, approach others, your gestures and what you say and how you say it convey your attitudes about sportsmanship, other coaches and athletes.
Athletes can be highly impressionable, and they hold their coach in high esteem. Your actions can teach athletes much more than sport skills and rules of your sport. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 8Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Intellectual Disability and Other Closely Related Developmental Disabilities Intellectual Disability and Other Closely Related Developmental Disabilities At times, you may see or hear the following terms to describe something about an athlete.
These terms describe traits, or conditions, but they do not describe the person. There are very few traits or characteristics that are true for all people with any label. Disability Characteristics Best 3 Strategies to Affect Learning  Information processing and learning  Train for short periods of time Intellectual occurs at a slower rate; attention  Provide repetition (key to athlete Disability span is short gaining new skill development) (General)  This was noticed for the first time  When training, think of athletes as before the person turned 18.
literal thinkers  Craves established routines  Communication difficulties  Signal transition, change, loud noises, Autism  “In their own world,” but frequently etc. aware and bright  Provide highly structured and least distracting environment  Poor muscle control  Work on strengthening muscles Cerebral  Does not necessarily indicate  Teach skills in isolation to help build Palsy intellectual disability muscles  Difficulty with speech articulation  Develop gross motor skills  Anywhere from moderate to significant intellectual disability  Genetic cause  Set clear expectations and limits  Make sure you know about atlanto- Down axial instability before you do a drill  Use eye contact when talking; work Syndrome that puts pressure on the neck or one-on-one to demonstrate new skill head. About 10 percent of people (gain full attention) with Down syndrome have  Use repetition and review weakened vertebrae.
The information will be on the medical release.  Tends to have attention and memory deficits.  Create routine Fetal Alcohol  Finds it difficult to stay on task.
 Set rules and limits Syndrome  Has difficulty in remembering what  Reinforce acceptable behaviors was previously learned  Provide structured and predictable  Elongated face activities Fragile X  Prone to seizures  Provide minimal auditory and visual stimulations  Coordination difficulties  Establish routine and structure  Sleep disturbance  Signal and practice transition Prader Willi  Compulsive eating  Set firm rules and expectations  Skin picking  Establish routine and structure 9 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Athlete’s Behavior Characteristics and Strategies to Improve Learning Athlete’s Behavior Characteristics and Strategies to Improve Learning The goal of this chart is to provide coaches with information about Special Olympics athletes with different functional and learning characteristics (not labels) so that coaches can teach and coach Special Olympics athletes more effectively. When an athlete exhibits what is generally perceived as inappropriate behaviors, those behaviors may simply be a reflection or part of the person. Inappropriate behaviors that will not be tolerated include defiance, acting out or silliness.
When possible, talk with parents, providers, teachers, former coaches, etc., about an athlete’s common characteristics and the successful strategies used to affect learning. Use the characteristics as a checklist. Ensure that one or more of the strategies opposite the respective characteristics are employed in each practice.
Finally, be aware that not all athletes will demonstrate these characteristics. Athlete Characteristics Strategies to Improve Learning 1. Provide structure Learning occurs at a slower rate 2.
Provide repetition and review 3. Break down skills into smaller parts 4. Train for short periods of time Short attention span 5.
Provide repetition and review (key to gaining new skill) 6. Work one-on-one (gain full attention) 7. Provide clear and continuous transitions Resistance to change 8.
Establish routines (enforce concept of flexibility) 9. Build on successes 10. Set clear rules, expectations and limits Stubborn/Behavior problems 11.
Enforce rules but provide conditions for coming back 12. Reinforce acceptable behaviors 13. Allow for additional time to express thoughts Verbal communication 14.
Use picture boards/other assistive devices difficulties or not all 15. Ask him or her to demonstrate or show what he/she means 16. Know signs and symptoms Prone to seizures 17.
Control atmosphere (heat, sun, sugar, etc.) 18. Inform and assure teammates when they occur 19. Provide specific exercise and strengthening programs Poor muscle tone 20.
Stretch safely; do not allow athletes to stretch beyond normal joint range of motion 21. Establish eye contact when talking Lower pain threshold; sensitive 22. Use softer/adaptive equipment to touch 23.
Forewarn if any touch is necessary 24. Work in small groups Failure to form social bonds 25. Have athletes work in pairs (same pairs for several weeks) 26.
Provide highly structured and least distracting environment 27. Remove or lessen stimuli (dim lights; soften sound; remove unnecessary objects) Over-stimulated easily 28. Train in separate room or smaller group; gradually add people Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 10Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Athlete’s Behavior Characteristics and Strategies to Improve Learning Athlete Characteristics Strategies to Improve Learning 29.
Provide additional assistance Difficulty with balance or 30. If stretching, sit down, lean against wall or hold on to partner stability 31. Allow for extra time to complete a task 32.
Remove food from practice/competition sites Compulsive eating 33. Provide structure and routine for eating 34. Break down drills to easier movements Coordination problems 35.
Allow additional time with one-on-one support 36. Progress according to athlete’s ability 37. Provide structured and predictable activities Mood swings (frequency and 38.
Set clear expectations, limits and conditions intensity) 39. Separate from group when necessary, but allow back 40. Provide adaptive equipment or modifications Physical limitations or 41.
Provide exercises that strengthen and stretch muscles impairments 42. Develop gross motor and stability skills 43. Use many verbal cues Blind 44.
Provide action-specific feedback 45. Hand-over-hand demonstration may be needed 46. Establish eye contact when talking Deaf 47.
Use signs or pictures or American Sign Language 48. demonstrate what is desired 11 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Understanding and Utilizing Sport Psychology Understanding and Utilizing Sport Psychology Psychological Considerations Coaching goes well beyond teaching fundamental skills. Once the athlete has learned the basic skills of the game, they must then learn how to apply their skills, knowledge of the rules and etiquette of the game in preparation for competition.
Before any of that can happen, the athlete must enjoy the sport and want to play it. Establishing that from the outset will give the coach an immediate platform for learning. When the going gets tough, the coach can remind athletes that it is meant to be challenging and that sport is an activity they really want to be able to do.
Without setting that groundwork, the concept of quitting becomes an option—the worst possible scenario in sport. Tasks  Skills  Application  Competition Special Olympics athletes have been given the tasks or elements required to perform a skill. Skills are the fundamental abilities required for application to sport.
They have developed a combination of skills to apply in preparation for competition. They are now ready for competition according to the rules and guidelines of the sport. Athletes will develop sport confidence by following a simple to more complex skills training progression that allows the athlete to experience successful athletic achievement through repetition in settings similar to the competitive environment.
Athlete Readiness Readiness of the athlete means being focused and it must be determined in preparation for competition.  Mental Readiness: Being a contender in the event, showing confidence and understanding strategy  Physical Readiness: Being physically conditioned and trained in the skills required for competition Physical Readiness + Mental Readiness = Competition Readiness The Special Olympics Sports Skills Assessment and Daily Performance sheets are excellent resources for measurement of skill and competition readiness. These tools will help the Coach determine the athlete’s appropriate events.
For example in Athletics, Special Olympics offers many disciplines - sprints, long-distance running, jumps, throws and race walking and wheelchair events. Athletes must not only be placed in a level of competition that will challenge their skills and keep them motivated to continue their effort to surpass their personal bests, but they must also be placed in events that they like and enjoy. Positive motivation and participation can inspire the athlete to excel and gain sport confidence.
Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 12Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Developing Communications Skills Developing Communications Skills There are many aspects of sport psychology, however none will be more important to coaching than learning how to communicate with your athletes and understanding what motivates them to train and compete in sports. By default, successful coaches are good sport psychologists – skillful communicators and motivators. Coaching is communication.
Every act of coaching requires you to communicate. As a coach you must be able to communicate effectively in countless situations 1. Teaching athletes how to do certain skills, run plays 2.
Talking to an official who you believe has made an incorrect call 3. Talking to parents or caregivers about their family member Communication is more than a two-way process; it is dimensional. Communication encompasses sending and receiving messages, verbal and nonverbal language and emotions and feelings involved in the content of the message.
 Coaches must be as skillful in receiving messages as they are in giving clear understandable messages. Successful coaches need to be sharp, active listeners so they can understand their athletes.  It is also essential that coaches be aware of nonverbal communication.
It is estimated that over 70 percent of communication is nonverbal. Therefore, coaches must be aware that their athletes are constantly observing and modeling their actions.  Content is the substance of the message and emotions and feelings pack the content.
Coaching Tips  Communicate unto others as you wish them to communicate unto you. The Communication Flow 1. The coach has a thought that he/she wants to tell the athlete.
2. The coach translates the thought into a message. 3.
The coach conveys the message – verbally or nonverbally. 4. The athlete receives the message.
5. The athlete interprets the meaning of the message. 6.
The athlete responds inwardly and/or outwardly to the message. 7. Much of communication is non-verbal so it is important to watch facial expressions as well as other physical gestures Sometimes this flow is smooth and sometimes it is not.
It is based on the clarity of the message and the athlete’s understanding of the message. 13 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Developing Communications Skills What Makes Communication Ineffective  The content of the message may not fit the situation.  The message does not adequately communicate your intentions.
 The athlete does not receive the message.  The athlete does not understand the message.  The athlete misinterprets the content of the message.
 The message itself is inconsistent. Ineffective communication is not about finding fault. Poor communication can be a result of many factors as noted above.
Finding where the communication flow stopped is the key to building successful communication between coach and athletes. Developing Credibility When You Communicate Your credibility is the single most important element in communicating effectively with athletes. Your credibility is reflected in the trust athletes place in you as a coach.
Athletes give you initial credibility because you are the coach. You also have the ability to maintain and build upon this place of trust or to lose it. Once lost, it is tough to get back.
How can you build credibility as a coach? 1. Be an emotionally balanced coach 2.
Know your sport, be willing to learn more and be honest about what you do not know 3. Be reliable, consistent and fair 4. Express empathy, warmth and acceptance of your athletes and where they are in their development 5.
Be positive Coaching Tips  It is natural for athletes to play and joke around.  If athletes behaved perfectly, they would not need a coach. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 14Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Learning How to Listen Learning How to Listen Statistics show that untrained listeners hear less than 20 percent of a conversation.
The majority of us fall within this category. Poor listening skills cause a breakdown in the communication process. If an athlete continually fails in getting you to listen, he/she will simply stop talking with you.
Coaches who are poor listeners often have more discipline problems; athletes stop listening to their coach because he/she is not listening to them. Athletes may make a drastic attempt to get you to listen by misbehaving or acting out. Your response to athletes’ views and thoughts is important as you begin teaching and training them in their sport.
Improving Your Listening Skills 1. Recognize the need to listen. 2.
Concentrate on listening by giving your undivided attention to what is being said. 3. Search for the meaning behind what is being communicated to you.
4. Avoid interrupting athletes as they are talking with you. 5.
Respond constructively to athletes emotions. 6. Respect the rights of athletes to share their views with you.
Listen to their fears, joys, problems and accomplishments. Coaching Tips  Emphasize praise and rewards to strengthen desired behaviors.  Positive communication helps athlete value themselves as individuals, athletes.
 Be aware of the emotion expressed in your messages to athletes.  Set realistic goals about athletes’ athletic performance abilities as well as their emotional and social behavior.  Be consistent.
 Keep your word.  Be as good as your word. 15 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Information and Problem Solving Information and Problem Solving Description of Common Behaviors and Recommended Accommodations Oral Expression Athletes may Accommodations Speak only in single word statements or If you understand what they mean - great!
If you do phrases not understand, ask them to say it differently Exhibit word retrieval problems and  Help them calm down and relax so they can find substitute words for words they are having the words they want trouble retrieving  Come up with “signs” for common requests or concerns Exhibit bizarre patterns of language usage  It may be bizarre to you but make perfect sense to the athlete.  Explain that you are having trouble understanding what they mean. Get a conversation going - the give and take should make their intent more clear Imitate or repeat words incorrectly  The accommodation is only necessary if you do not understand.
 If that is the case, ask them to pick a different word to tell you what they mean. Use gestures as a substitute for a word Learn what the signs or gestures mean. Have difficulty relating ideas in sequence Break down sequences into steps and learn them individually; then put them together after the steps have been mastered.
Have difficulty making themselves If one peer does not understand, ask others if they understood to peers understand and would they be willing to help “translate.” Contribute to discussion with off-task  Again, it may seem “off task” to you but very on comments task to the athlete.  Ask them how their comment fits the discussion. They will explain it, give insight into their thinking or realize that they were off the topic.
Confuse words  Help them use the correct term.  Be patient; give them an opportunity to formalize ideas. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 16Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Information and Problem Solving Listening Comprehension Athletes may Accommodations Ask that questions be repeated Repeat them.
If it starts to take too much time, pair the athlete with another athlete who can provide assistance. Often say “what,” or “huh,” etc.  Check for hearing issues.
 Switch from verbal instruction to visual demonstration of the task. Confuse the meaning of similar sounding Explain the difference between the words and try visual words techniques instead of auditory. Fail to follow verbal directions  Have them repeat directions back to you to verify understanding.
 If failure to follow directions creates distractions for other athletes, have the athlete sit out or work with an assistant coach until you can determine the reason for not following original directions. Do the opposite of the given instructions  Have them repeat directions back to you to verify understanding.  If failure to follow directions creates distractions for other athletes, have the athlete sit out or work with an assistant coach until you can determine the reason for not following original directions.
 Make sure you are stating the direction as a “positive” statement, such as, “Dribble all the way to the basket and shoot a lay-up,” as opposed to, “Never dribble all the way to the basket and then NOT shoot a lay-up!” Have difficulty locating the direction of  Switch to visual cues sounds  Set up a physical reaction to the sound no matter where it comes from. For example, “When you hear my whistle, stop and look at the sideline.” Answer questions inappropriately Establish that they understood the question by restating the question with their answer and then asking if that was what they meant to say. Confuse time concepts (before/after) Switch to physical (Kinesthetic) mode so that the end of one action leads to the next and will “feel” right.
Like what is supposed to happen next. Confuse direction words (front/back) Instead of saying, “Go to the top of the key,” say, “Come and stand right here,” so they have a visual and physical way to remember. Ask irrelevant questions Make sure you understood the question, or what they were really asking.
You may not understand at first, so ask them to help you understand the question. Show increased difficulty in any of the Make a rule that it must be quiet when you are talking, and above areas when noise increases explain that it is because some athletes won’t be able to understand if it is noisy. “Let’s all help each other have the best chance to learn this skill!” 17 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Information and Problem Solving Attention Skills Athletes may Accommodations Fail to finish Provide reward via praise or the right to move on once a task is completed.
Seem easily distracted  Keep them busy using a variety of short tasks.  Be quick with praise and give it often. Appear not to listen Touch on arm, forearm, or get down to athlete level and ask if they understand what to do.
Have difficulty concentrating on tasks requiring  Break skills down into smaller tasks, and sustained attention  Keep instruction time limited so they move more quickly from one activity to the next.  Teach as you do it with them. Appear to act before thinking (impulse control  Pair them with another athlete who can act as a issue) screener for the impulse.
 Deep breaths help them slow down to focus and help you calm down as well! Shift excessively from one activity to another  Set up rewards for mastering a skill before moving on.  Ask them to teach the skill to another athlete who is having trouble.
This keeps them focused on someone else’s action and not on their desire to move on. Have difficulty waiting for their turns in Teach Athletes patience waiting in line and waiting games/drills their turn being a team player. Excessively run about to climb on things Help organize activities/limit materials if feasible.
Have difficulty staying seated  There should not be a lot of sitting during a sports practice.  Have activities set up so that the minute they arrive they have something to start on. “The first thing you should do when you get to practice is get a ball and shoot five baskets from each of these blue Xs.” Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 18Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Information and Problem Solving Social Perception Athletes may Accommodations Make inappropriate comments Depends on the nature of the comments.
If it is disruptive or makes other athletes uncomfortable, have them sit out or move to work with an assistant until you can explain that this is hurting their teammates. Make inappropriate use of personal space  Do a warm up drill that establishes an arm’s length; talk about giving everyone space.  Have partners shake hands and remind everyone that hand-shake distance is usually best for talking.
Any closer and people get nervous and can’t focus on what you are saying. Have difficulty anticipating behavior in Repetition via drills will help in learning patterns of others actions. Have difficulty in changing behavior Reward and praise positive behavior and changes.
Notice and comment on improvements no matter how slight. Appear to be inflexible Make every action a choice. Say, “Do you want to join the group over here or do you want to join the group over there?” Try to avoid “or else” comments.
Difficulty responding to non-verbal cues, Experiment with different cues and have them decide hand gestures, facial expressions which ones work best for them. 19 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Positive Reinforcement and Rewards Positive Reinforcement and Rewards When used appropriately, reinforcement is one of the primary communication tools of a successful coach. Reinforcement is used to praise an athlete when he/she does well or to get an athlete to stop undesirable behavior.
Reinforcement is relative and not absolute. For reinforcement to work, a coach must be consistent and systematic in its use. If you are not consistent, your athletes will behave erratically, like the coach.
If you are not systematic, you will send confusing messages to your athletes. Communicating and Correcting Errors 1. One skill at a time.
Correct only one behavior or movement at a time. 2. Ask before giving correction.
Allow the chance to explain what they believe they did. This lets them feel they are a part of the process. 3.
Find the cause. The cause of an error may be something that you may not see. Again, ask the athlete what they believe they are doing.
4. Provide constructive instruction. Avoid too much of “what’s not right” by focusing on “how to do it right.” Always build up the athlete; do not tear them down.
5. Praise before correction. Begin with a positive comment about something that the athlete is doing well.
Now they are attuned to you. You have gained their attention and trust. Follow up with constructive instruction.
Be concise and to the point. Remember to send another message of praise and encouragement. The “Sandwich approach” is an effective way to provide both positive reinforcement and corrective feedback.
Start off with a compliment such as “Great effort on the backcheck and not letting up and then identify what they need to improve on such as, “but when backchecking stay on her inside shoulder” followed by encouragement and a positive outcome, “Staying on her inside shoulder will insure she cannot cut to the basket” Using Rewards Coaches should observe and know their athletes to determine why they participate in Special Olympics and reward them accordingly. Rewarding athletes is not always as easy as it sounds. Below are a few tips on rewarding athletes.
 Reward the performance, not the outcome.  Reward athletes just as much for their effort as you do for the desired outcome.  Reward little accomplishments on the way to learning an entire skill.
 Reward the learning and performance of desired emotional and social skills too.  Reward frequently, especially when new skills are being learned.  Reward as soon as possible when new skills are learned.
 Reward an athlete when they have earned it. Types of Rewards  Intrinsic: Athlete competes for the thrill and joy of the sport  Extrinsic: Athlete competes for the reward Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 20Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Positive Reinforcement and Rewards Misbehavior Although coaches should reinforce what athletes do correctly it is not uncommon for athletes to misbehave. One approach is to ignore the bad behavior.
This approach can prove successful in certain situations because punishing the athlete’s misbehavior encourages them to act out more. Ignoring misbehavior does not work when the athlete causes danger to himself/herself or other teammates and coaches. In that case, immediate action is necessary.
Sometimes ignoring misbehavior if it is not habitual can be successful. Punishment delivered calmly and matter of factly can also correct an athlete’s misbehavior. Below are a few suggestions for appropriate use of punishment.
 Have athletes discuss and decide on appropriate team rules and the consequences for violating them so that your punishment reflects what the athletes decided upon. Coaches will need to set some guidelines so the team rules and consequences are reasonable and not trivial.  When possible, give a warning before using punishment.
 Reducing playing time is often an effective punishment.  Deliver punishment in a calm and rationale manner.  Be consistent when administering punishment.
 Never use exercise as punishment and never engage in physical punishment.  Do not choose a punishment that causes you to feel guilty or upset.  Once a punishment has been given, do not make the athlete feel like they are still in trouble.
 Punish sparingly, only when absolutely necessary. Some examples other than excessive exercise might be; putting away equipment at the end of practice such as picking up all of the balls, retrieving balls from a player practicing free throws, sitting out and missing practice/game time (although this obviously is counterproductive for learning), maybe having a starter NOT start for 5 minutes. 21 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Motivation Motivation According to Burton, Damon and Thomas Raedeke in Sport Psychology for Coaches (2008), motivation is reflected in three behaviors:  Choice: Motivation shows in the choices athletes make—choosing to play sport, to practice, to set challenging goals, and to train even in the off-season.
 Effort: Motivation is also reflected in how much effort athletes give—how intensely they train, compete, and strive to achieve their goals.  Persistence: Motivation level can be seen in how long athletes persist at striving to attain their goals, even in the face of adversity and obstacles. Motivation is better understood by debunking some myths.
Motivation Myth 1: Athletes are either motivated or not motivated Some coaches believe that motivation is simply a personality trait, a static internal characteristic. They believe that an athlete either has motivation or doesn’t. They don’t believe motivation is something coaches can develop.
For these coaches, the key to having a motivated team is to find and recruit athletes who have the right personality. However, while some athletes are, in fact, more motivated than others, this view does not provide any direction or guidance on how coaches can help develop and sustain athletes’ motivation. The fact is, coaches can help athletes develop motivation.
Motivation Myth 2: Coaches give athletes motivation Other coaches view motivation as something they can inject into their athletes on demand, like a flu shot, by means of inspirational pep talks or gimmicks. They may use slogans, posters, and bulletin board quotes from upcoming opponents. These strategies may be helpful, but they are only a small piece of the motivation puzzle.
There is much more to the story—motivation is not something coaches can simply give their athletes. Motivation Myth 3: Motivation means sticks and carrots Some experts suggest that effective motivation means using carrots (rewards) and sticks (punishments) to drive athletes to do things they would not do on their own. This may seem innocuous, but think about it on a deeper level.
It assumes that athletes don’t want to do something, so the coach will provide motivation to make them do it through punishments or rewards. Coaches who emphasize the stick, in the form of chastising, criticizing, yelling, coercing, and creating guilt, often find themselves swimming upstream. No matter what they try, they meet resistance and negative attitudes.
Not only is this approach ineffective, it saps the enjoyment out of sport. Coaches must understand athletes’ needs in order to create a team culture that naturally motivates them. Athletes’ needs and intrinsic motivation According to Burton and Raedeke in Sport Psychology for Coaches (2008), great coaches know that they don’t give athletes motivation.
Rather, they create the conditions or team climate in which athletes motivate themselves. Coaches do this by recognizing the importance of intrinsic motivation, which stems from the sheer pleasure and inner satisfaction athletes experience from participating in sport. Intrinsically motivated athletes play for the love of the game.
They enjoy the process of learning and mastering difficult sport skills and play for the pride they feel when working hard toward accomplishing a challenging goal. They also find sport stimulating and feel exhilarated when engaged in it. The secret to cultivate athletes’ intrinsic motivation is to understand what athletes need from the sport.
Structuring sport in a way that meets athletes’ needs fosters intrinsic motivation, and failure to meet athletes’ needs lowers it. What do athletes need from sport? Evidence from a variety of sources suggests that athletes seek to fulfill four primary needs Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 22Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Motivation 1.
The need for fun and stimulation) In a survey done to 10,000 former athletes (Ewing & Seefeldt 1990; Seefeldt, Ewing, & Walk 1992), was found that having fun and developing skills were the most common reason why athletes participate in sports, even more important than winning When they were asked why they quit, they typically answered something along these lines:  “I found other activities more interesting.”  “I would rather do other things than play sport.”  “Sport was no longer fun.”  “I burnt out on sport.” It was found that the connection between the reasons athletes play sport and the reasons they drop out was motivation, which comes naturally and easily when athletes are having fun. Lack of fun makes sport seem like a boring job, lowers motivation, and even causes athletes to drop out. If sport is not fun, coaches find that motivating athletes is difficult, if not impossible.
Sport is much more enjoyable when athletes find practice activities stimulating, challenging, and exciting. One of the greatest challenges as a coach is to avoid destroying the athletes’ intrinsic motivation to play sport. Some coaches erroneously believe that fun means easy workouts, frivolous games, and countless team parties.
But challenging practices, intense workouts, and focusing on skill development can be fun. In fact, fun is maximized when athletes experience optimal stimulation and excitement. No one finds it fun to lose or fail constantly, so build in some success.
Most athletes are also bored by being underchallenged while performing tedious drills. Thus coaches should strive to fit the difficulty of the skill to the ability of the athletes. Coached this way, athletes feel challenged but not overwhelmed, because they have the ability to meet the challenge.
Coaching Tips  Coaches must understand athletes’ needs in order to create a team culture that naturally motivates them. Wise coaches have long known that meeting athletes’ need for fun enhances motivation. Yet they also know that athletes must practice to learn and improve skills.
The creative coach can find ways to facilitate skill development in a way that is fun for athletes. Here are a few examples:  Use developmental progressions to create an optimal skill–challenge balance.  Keep practices stimulating by varying the activities.
 Teach fundamentals by means of action-packed, gamelike activities that use the targeted skills.  Keep everyone active. Don’t give players time to get bored by having them stand in long lines.
 Set aside time in each practice when athletes can just play the game, without receiving evaluation or feedback from the coach. Structuring sport to be fun is key not only to motivation but also to helping athletes develop their skills. If athletes enjoy sport, they become more motivated and are less likely to drop out.
If they are more motivated, they improve. As they improve, they enjoy sport more. And so it goes.
Athletes who are motivated primarily by their need to have fun may present discipline problems for coaches who have sapped the fun out of sport. As these athletes try to find creative ways to have fun, they may be seen as goof-offs or discipline problems. Some coaches assume that athletes are not motivated when they balk at doing everything the coach’s way.
In reality, such players are often highly motivated to play—just not according to the structure and methods dictated by the coach. 23 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Motivation 2. The need for acceptance and belonging The second basic need athletes strive to fill through sport is for acceptance and belonging.
This need can be met if athletes feel they fit in and are accepted by others on the team. In fact, some athletes play sport primarily because they enjoy being with their friends and being part of a team, and coaches can use this need as a powerful motivator. Here are some guidelines: Many children with various disabilities are often teased or ignored.
Being a member of team that includes similar other peers can be a tremendously gratifying social experience. Hence coaches should not underestimate the value of the social benefits that the athletes will derive from their sport experience. In fact being with their friends may be a more powerful motivation than playing the sport.
 Recognize that these athletes are usually responsive to team goals. Although performing well and winning may not be as significant to them as is identifying with the team, they will internalize team goals because of their desire to be part of the group.  Arrange activities that allow athletes to get to know each other and spend time together.
Social activities are a good way to help fulfill the need for acceptance and belonging.  Include team building activities to help build cohesion. By working together toward a common goal that is not directly related to sport, athletes can learn to appreciate previously overlooked strengths in themselves and their teammates.
 Create an atmosphere on the team where athletes feel they are playing with each other rather than against one another.  Have returning athletes serve as mentors to new athletes  Ensure that all athletes feel they are important members of the team and that their roles are important and valued. 3.
The need for control and autonomy This need is important but easily overlooked. In fact, one of the most basic human needs is to develop autonomy, and this is especially true among adolescents on their journey to adulthood. Filling this need requires that athletes have control over their own lives and determine their own course of behavior.
Once they choose to participate in a sport, they need to have ownership and feel they have a say in decisions affecting their involvement. Otherwise, they feel pressured or obligated to act, think, or feel a certain way. High autonomy encourages wanting to participate, whereas low autonomy means having to participate.
You can use several strategies to help athletes develop a sense of ownership and responsibility. When appropriate, involve athletes in decision making, provide choice, and request their input. You can do this, for example, by giving them a say in their training regimen.
You can teach athletes how to develop their own training program, giving them more and more responsibility as they learn more about effective training principles. Encourage athletes to take as much responsibility as you judge they have the maturity to handle. Provide structure and guidance, giving more control as athletes demonstrate the wise use of responsibility.
When athletes err in using their responsibility, constructively help them better understand how to act responsibly. Athletes should neither expect nor be given free rein, but they should be given choices within a structured environment. The coach who facilitates this type of graduated responsibility development is not necessarily a democratic coach in every respect.
Not all decisions are voted on—many are the sole responsibility of the coach. But by shifting some control to athletes, it is possible to develop a disciplined team where athletes feel a strong sense of ownership. In summary, to meet athletes’ need for control and autonomy, you should make sure they feel a sense of ownership over their sport involvement.
Ways to do this include the following:  Provide a rationale for your decisions.  Ensure that athletes feel they are responsible for their own fate and are not merely pawns. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 24Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Motivation  Solicit athletes’ input and provide choices whenever possible.
 Involve athletes in developing practice plans and game strategies, evaluating practices and competitions, developing team rules and a team covenant or mission, and selecting captains. 4. The need to feel competent and successful The need to feel competent is one of the most important components of motivation.
Perceived competence means having positive perceptions of one’s skills and abilities and feeling capable of succeeding in sport. It is doubtful that athletes will work hard, or even stay in sport, if they feel like failures. Athletes use many sources to judge their skill and success at sport.
Even the simple act of choosing up sides can influence athletes’ feelings of competence. Always getting picked first by one’s peers contributes to feeling competent, thus enhancing motivation, whereas routinely getting picked last may cause an athlete to feel incompetent and walk away from sport. Athletes’ perceived competence can be raised through success at challenging tasks, positive feedback from a coach, and approval from parents.
Effective coaches spend a lot of time and energy structuring sport in a way that makes each athlete feel competent. Although experiencing success is central to feeling competent, experiencing failure is inevitable in the sport world, as in life. All athletes, no matter how talented, experience failure, adversity, and setbacks at some point.
How athletes respond to failure has a huge effect on long-term motivation. Many athletes will equate winning and losing with success and failure. This is often a self-defeating perspective as athletes only partly control the outcome of competition and often winning is unrealistic.
Coaches should almost always focus on individual effort, self-improvement and learning as barometers of success. 25 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Developing Sport Confidence Developing Sport Confidence Sport confidence is gained through experiencing success, time and time again, in the same or similar situation. Sport confidence is one of the most important predictors of athletic achievement.
Your coaching strategies should be devised around repetition in settings similar to the competitive environment. 1. Developing sport confidence in athletes helps to make participation fun and is critical to the athlete’s motivation.
2. A considerable amount of anxiety is eliminated when athletes know what is expected of them and when they have to be prepared. 3.
Mental preparation is just as important as skills training. 4. Progressing to more difficult skills increases the challenge.
5. Dropping back into easier skills increases one’s confidence. Place emphasis on the importance of improving a personal best and giving maximum effort at all times during training and competition.
 Reward the athletes when goals are achieved (verbal, nonverbal, and tangible).  Motivate and challenge the athlete through well-planned training sessions.  Establish guidelines for acceptable behavior and expectations by creating positive cues and reinforcements.
Coaching Tips  The only things an athlete can control are: Attitude and Effort Developing Self-Confidence through Goal Setting Realistic yet challenging goals for each athlete are important to the motivation of the athlete both at training and during competition. Accomplishing goals at practice through repetition in settings similar to the competition environment will instill confidence. Sport confidence in athletes helps make participation fun and is critical to the athlete’s motivation.
Setting goals is a joint effort between athletes and coaches. The main features of goal setting are: 1. Goals need to be structured as short-term, intermediate and long-term.
2. Goals need to be viewed as stepping stones to success. 3.
Goals must be accepted by the athlete. 4. Goals need to vary in difficulty— from easily attainable to challenging.
5. Goals must be measurable. 6.
Goals need to be used to establish the athlete’s training and competition plan. 7. Goals need to be flexible 8.
Goals need to be written down 9. Goals need to be identified as either performance goals or practice goals 10. Sometimes athletes will need to seek support to accomplish their goals Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 26Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Developing Sport Confidence Athletes with or without an intellectual disability may be more motivated by accomplishing short-term goals than long-term goals; however, do not be afraid to challenge athletes.
Include athletes in setting their personal goals. For example, ask the athlete, “How far do you want to jump today? Let’s see how far you jumped at the last practice.
What is your personal best? What do YOU think you can do?” Awareness of why the athlete is participating is also important when setting goals. There are participation factors, which may influence motivation and goal setting: Age appropriateness Ability level Readiness level Athlete performance Family influence Peer influence Athlete preference Performance Goals versus Outcome Goals Effective goals focus on performance, not outcome.
Performance is what the athlete controls. Outcomes are frequently controlled by others. An athlete may have an outstanding performance and not win a contest because other athletes have performed even better.
Conversely, an athlete may perform poorly and still win if all other athletes perform at a lower level. If an athlete’s goal is to run 12.10 seconds in the 100m, the athlete has greater control in achieving this goal than winning. However, the athlete has even greater control of achieving a goal if the goal is to run using the correct form, driving the knees through the entire race.
This performance goal ultimately gives the athlete more control over his/her performance. Performance Goal Outcome Goal Athletics Run in lane the entire race, completing event Run race hitting split goals Basketball Make contact with opponent and block out after Get the rebound the shot Football Sprint after balls coming into play Get to the ball first and control it 27 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Developing Sport Confidence Motivation through Goal Setting Goal setting has proved to be one of the most simple and effective motivational devices developed for sports. .
While the concept is not new, today the techniques for effective goal setting have been refined and clarified. Motivation is all about having needs and striving to have those needs met. How can you enhance an athlete’s motivation?
1. Provide more time and attention to an athlete when he/she is having difficulty learning a skill. 2.
Reward small gains of achievement in skill level 3. Develop other measures of achievement outside of winning 4. Show your athletes that they are important to you 5.
Show your athletes that you are proud of them and excited about what they are doing 6. Fill your athletes with self-worth Goals give direction. They tell us what needs to be accomplished.
They increase effort, persistence and the quality of performance. Establishing goals also requires that the athlete and coach determine techniques for how to achieve those goals. Measurable and Specific Effective goals are very specific and measurable.
Goals stated in the form of “I want to be the best that I can be!” or “I want to improve my performance!” are vague and difficult to measure. It is positive sounding but difficult, if not impossible, to assess whether they have been reached. Measurable goals must establish a baseline of performance recorded during the past one or two weeks for them to be realistic.
Difficult, but Realistic Effective goals are perceived as challenging, not threatening. A challenging goal is one perceived as difficult but attainable within a reasonable amount of time and with a reasonable amount of effort or ability. A threatening goal is one perceived as being beyond one’s current capacity.
Realistic implies that judgment is involved. Goals based upon a baseline of performance recorded during the past one or two weeks are likely to be realistic. Long- versus Short-Term Goals Both long and short-term goals provide direction, but short-term goals appear to have the greatest motivational effects.
Short-term goals are more readily attainable and are stepping stones to more distant long-term goals. Unrealistic short-term goals are easier to recognize than unrealistic long-term goals. Unrealistic goals can then be modified before valuable practice time has been lost.
Positive versus Negative Goal Setting Positive goals direct what to do rather than what not to do. Negative goals direct our attention to the errors we wish to avoid or eliminate. Positive goals also require coaches and athletes to decide how they will reach those specific goals.
Once the goal is decided, the athlete and coach must determine specific strategies and techniques which allow that goal to be successfully attained. Set Priorities Effective goals are limited in number and meaningful to the athlete. Setting a limited number of goals requires that athletes and coaches decide what is important and fundamental for continued development.
Establishing a few, carefully selected goals also allow athletes and coaches to keep accurate records without becoming overwhelmed with record keeping. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 28Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Developing Sport Confidence Mutual Goal Setting Goal setting becomes an effective motivational device when athletes are committed to achieving those goals. When goals are imposed or established without significant input from the athletes, motivation is unlikely to be enhanced.
Set Specific Time Lines Target dates provide urgency to an athlete’s efforts. Specific target dates tend to eliminate wishful thinking and clarify what goals are realistic and which are not. Timelines are especially valuable in high-risk sports where fear often promotes procrastination in learning new skills.
Formal versus Informal Goal Setting Some coaches and athletes think that goals must be set in formal meetings outside of practice and require long periods of thoughtful evaluation before they are decided upon. Goals are literally progressions which coaches have been using for years but are now expressed in measurable, performance terms rather than as vague, generalized outcomes. Team versus Individual Goals While team goals appear to have great importance for team sports, the reality is that most team goals can be broken down into individual roles or responsibilities.
Each player must achieve these individual roles or responsibilities for the team to function effectively. Goal Setting Domains When asked to set goals, athletes typically focus on the learning of new skills or performances in competitions. A major role of the coach is to broaden the athlete’s perception of those areas, and goal setting can be an effective tool.
Goals can be set to enhance fitness, improve attendance, increase intensity, promote sportsmanship, develop team spirit, find more free time, or establish consistency. Coaching Tips  Ask yourself “What motivates me to be the best coach that I can be.” 29 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Winning and Losing Winning and Losing Many coaches face the issue of winning when developing their coaching objectives. Society clearly places great emphasis on winning.
However, society also looks to sport as a means to help young and old athletes alike build character and develop leadership skills. The balance is in not evaluating yourself or your athletes on the win-loss record. You, the coach, must resist trying to win and encouraging your athletes to win at all costs.
How do you overcome this temptation? Place your athletes first—athletes first at practice; athletes first at competition. Striving to Win Placing athletes first does not mean that winning is not important.
Striving to win within the rules of sport and the competition is an important objective for both athlete and coach. Striving to win is essential for an enjoyable competition. The emphasis should not be on winning itself but on striving to win.
It is the pursuit of victory, the dream of achieving the goal that matters most. Keeping Winning in Perspective Striving to win is important in sport. The process of winning can bring out the best in people— performance, attitude and approach to life.
As coach, it is imperative that you not lose sight of the long- term objectives: helping athletes to develop and improve sports skills, have fun, and do well in sport competition—to win. Winning or striving to win is never more important than your athletes’ well-being. Keep winning in perspective - there is room for fun too.
Coaches and athletes must remind themselves that winning is measured by how well they apply all their effort and maintain self-control in pressure situations. Winning means more than where you place at the finish line. An athlete is never a loser if he/she gives maximum effort.
To that end, the first question a coach needs to ask before a competition is  “Are you ready to give it everything you’ve got?” The first questions after a competition needs to be  “How did that feel?”  “Do you feel like you did your best?” Coaching Tip  Remember, positive thoughts yield positive results. Well-prepared athletes will handle their performance and the performance of their competitors in a positive and sportsmanlike manner in accordance to the Athlete’s Code of Conduct and the Official Sports Rules for your sport. A losing outcome does not negatively impact the athletes’ confidence if the coach and athletes have been successful in developing a winning attitude.
The athlete’s effort, attitude and personal skills attainment must be rewarded and positively reinforced. It is also important to remind athletes that the point of competing in Special Olympics is to prove to themselves and the rest of the world what they can do. The award ceremony is a chance for the world to see a group of skilled athletes celebrating their sport skills and enjoyment of competition.
Athletes of all ages, regardless of intellectual ability, enter competitions to do their best and hopefully to win. Is it all right to be disappointed when you do not win? Of course it is.
But also, it is a chance to evaluate your performance and make a training commitment that will help you perform better next time. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 30Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Winning and Losing Handling Grief Communication strategies by the coach, fellow athletes, families and friends will help an athlete handle grief or disappointment. Listen to what the athlete says and why he/she may be experiencing the grief.
Offer positive switches – positive comment – correction – positive comment to take the athlete’s attention away from his/her disappointment. Again, the athlete’s effort, attitude and preparation should be emphasized, not the result of the competition. It is important to not discount feelings of disappointment.
It is appropriate to be disappointed when we lose a game or match. The challenge of the coach is to redirect that disappointment into a renewed commitment to training for the next competition or season. Becoming obsessed with losing is not a healthy or natural reaction for anyone.
Anxiety and Stress Management Anxiety and stress can be controlled through proper preparation. A winning attitude and confidence will equip an athlete with coping skills to handle his/her emotions when confronted with a stressful or anxious moment. Below are a few hints a well-prepared coach might consider to better prepare his athlete for competition.
 Repetition in a familiar environment can help alleviate a lot of stress when preparing the athlete for competition. Include mini meets in practice that simulate the competition.  Provide athletes with additional competition opportunities at as many local-level meets as possible.
 Have athletes perform in front of spectators and peers.  Make sure athletes are in proper events that they like and can display their talents and skills.  Also, to reinterpret “arousal” as excitement and not anxiety.
 Visit the track or stadium prior to competition. When possible, practice on the track or in the stadium before competition.  Teach your athletes visual imagery to help them practice the event in their mind before competition.
 Review the rules of competition and event calls and strategies with your athletes. Positive self-talk and imagery Self-talk represents the things you say in your head about yourself and is often negative (e.g., that team is much better than ours). Positive self-talk involves repeating a helpful and positive word or phrase such as “I am fit and ready to play” Imagery or visualization is using the “mind’s eye” to recreate a past great performance or to create a future correct play or movement.
Imagery is also much more than seeing yourself as it also involves “feeling” a correct movement and incorporating all of the senses (i.e., smell, sound, even taste) to most accurately capture reality in your head. Positive self-talk and imagery can promote confidence and success. Hence, coaches can help educate their athletes on the value of positive self-talk and imagery.
One thing coaches can do is help athletes set up a pre-performance routine. At the start of a competition athletes can very briefly (10-15 seconds) do four helpful behaviors: Close their eyes, take a few deep calming breathes, repeat a positive phrase “I am ready” and picture themselves successfully making a shot, or running strongly, depending on their sport. 31 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Taking Athletes to Competition Taking Athletes to Competition It is the coach’s responsibility to have the athletes prepared physically and mentally for the competition.
This involves ensuring that all uniforms are ready, all athletes have proper footwear, all equipment is present, meals and transportation are available and all entries are correct. Below are a few tips for coaches to follow before, during and after the game/meet/match. Athlete Flow at Competitions Coaches do not determine flow of athletes.
Coaches have to know the athlete flow of a specific competition to ensure that athletes are where they need to be at the time that they need to be there. Coaching Tip  Athlete flow process is designed to make the athlete experience as smooth as possible from arriving at the competition to receiving awards to leaving the competition. Before the Game/Meet/Match  Make final check of all equipment and athlete needs.
 Be confident and relaxed.  Be sure your athletes are warmed up, stretched and ready to compete.  Be sure to have the proper equipment for each event.
 Be positive and upbeat but do not over excite.  Make sure that the athletes have plenty of fluids. At the Game/Meet/Match  Encourage and support your athletes, but do not yell and scream.
Keep calm and offer positive reinforcement at the competition.  Restrict coaching from the bench to positive comments that athletes can use at the time of competition.  Tell parents to be supportive but not to coach athletes.
 Keep substitutions simple. Have substitutes ready in case of injuries or no-shows.  Commit yourself to equal participation throughout the season.
 Give different athletes the chance to compete in new events for which they have trained. Be a coach who allows the athlete to progress to new levels.  Make sure that the athletes have plenty of fluids.
When to Drink Water How Much Water to Drink Night before practice or competition Glass of water (8 oz./250ml) Four hours before event Glass of water (8 oz./250ml) 15 minutes before event One-half glass of water (4 oz./125 ml) During event of less than one hour One water break During event of more than one hour One-half glass of water (4 oz./125 ml) After event Glass of water every three hours until next day Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 32Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Taking Athletes to Competition After the Game/Meet/Match  Say “well done” or “good effort” to all your athletes when appropriate. Good effort when you……. But eliminate “Well done” as not specific enough.
 Feedback is usually best (not always) done right after the behavior.  Be sure to collect all the equipment from each athlete.  Cool down after competition to prevent soreness.
 Spend time reviewing the athletes’ performances and prepare some useful comments for the beginning of the next practice.  Somewhere a mention of keeping a training log for a: to build confidence by revisiting good workouts and b) to know what workouts were effective at getting athletes in really good condition.  Make sure that the athletes have plenty of fluids.
33 Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches Reference Section References Brustad, R. J., Babkes, M. L., & Smith, A.
L. (2001). Youth in sport: Psychological considerations.
In R. N.Singer, H.A. Hausenblas, & C.
M. Janelle (Eds.), Handbook of sport psychology (pp. 604-635).
New York:Wiley. Horn, Thelma Sternberg, Curt Lox, and Francisco Labrador. "The self-fulfilling prophecy theory: When coaches’ expectations become reality." Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to peak performance (2001): 68-81 Burton, Damon and Thomas Raedeke.
Sport Psychology for Coaches, 2008. Special Olympics North America online resources, 11 Nov 13. http://www.asep.com/Administrators/Understanding_Motivation.pdf.
Goals for team building, Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, Volume 9, Issue 1, 1997 Team building through team goal setting, DOI:10.1080/10413209708415386, W. Neil Widmeyera & Kimberly Ducharmebc , pages 97-113 Sport psychologists recognize performance, outcome and process goals, Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, Volume 11, Issue 2, 1999 The effect of multiple-goal strategies on performance outcomes in training and competition, DOI: 10.1080/10413209908404202, William C. D.
Filbya, Ian W. Maynarda & Jan K. Graydona , pages 230- 246 Anderson, Andy (01/1997).
"Learning Strategies in Physical Education: Self-Talk, Imagery, and Goal- Setting". Journal of physical education, recreation & dance (0730-3084), 68 (1), p. 30.
Williams, J. M. (2009).
Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to peak performance (6th Ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. Special Olympics Sports Sciences: Sport Psychology for Coaches – February 2014 34
Mental Fitness for long-term athlete Development Sport places both physical and mental demands on the athlete. In training and competition, the body is asked to push physical limits of endurance, power, speed, and strength. Similarly, the mind is asked to push mental barriers, such as focus, composure, and determination.
Being a top performer in any sport requires a combination of physical fitness, technical skills, tactical readiness, and mental fitness. Authors: Karen MacNeill, Ph.D; Lisa Benz, M.A.; Matt Brown, Ph.D; Danelle Kabush, Ph.D; Frank van den Berg, M.Sc. Expert Reviewers: Natalie Durand-Bush, Ph.D and Terry Orlick, Ph.DTable of Contents Mental Fitness 3 Mental Fitness, Attributes and Skills 5 Mental Fitness and Performance Phases 9 Active Start 10 FUNdamentals 12 Learn to Train 14 Train to Train 16 Train to Compete 18 Train to Win 20 Active for Life 22 Summary 22 References and Resources 23 2Mental Fitness Throughout an athlete’s lifespan, there is a heavy focus on physical and technical development; however, when pressure mounts, it is often the mental fitness factor that can have the biggest impact on performance outcomes.
Williams (2006) asserts that most athletes and coaches acknowledge that 40 to 90 per cent of success in high- performance sports is accounted for by mental factors, especially at elite levels of competition. Consequently, an athlete should develop and strengthen mental fitness throughout his or her long-term development. 3MenTal FiTness The term mental fitness will be used here as it promotes the idea of a dynamic concept, not a fixed outcome: it is in constant flux and development throughout an athlete’s lifecycle.
Although athletes can reach high levels of mental fitness as they progress through the Long-Term Athlete Development (LTAD) stages, their mental capabilities will constantly be challenged as the demands, conditions, and pressures they face continue to change. Expanded to the range of definitions for mental fitness presented in the cited literature (Gardner & Moore, 2007; Jones, Hanton and Connaughton, 2007; and Williams, 2005), mental fitness refers to an athlete’s ability to optimally regulate thoughts, feelings, and behaviours and act in a purposeful and consistent manner while coping with the many demands placed on him or her. In our view, the true aim of developing mental fitness is to • maximize performance; • engage in quality training; and • maintain a healthy level of mental well-being.
Athletes spend thousands of practice hours developing skills and strategies specific to their sports. Physical training focuses on aspects of performance such as endurance, speed, agility, strength, power, and technical skills. What athletes often neglect is to train their minds.
Like physical training, mental fitness requires lots of deliberate practice. Athletes develop mental fitness by being open to mistakes, learning from setbacks and successes, and setting goals just beyond their present abilities, sometimes fumbling and stumbling as you go, in addition to progressing in the direction intended. As Sharon Begley, author of Train Your Mind, Change Your Brain, states, “One can sculpt the brain’s emotional circuitry as profoundly as one can sculpt one’s pectoral muscles” (Begley, 2007, p.
231). Canadian sport for life (Cs4l) is a movement to improve the quality of sport and physical activity in Canada. CS4L links sport, education, recreation and health and aligns community, provincial and national programming.
long-term athlete Development (ltaD) is a seven-stage training, competition and recovery pathway guiding an individual’s experience in sport and physical activity from infancy through all phases of adulthood. CS4L, with LTAD, represents a paradigm shift in the way Canadians lead and deliver sport and physical activity in Canada. 4Mental Fitness, attributes, and skills MenTal FiTness, aTTribuTes, and skills When you think of a mentally fit athlete, who comes to mind?
Williams and Krane (2005) reviewed 20 years of research pertaining to the psychological attributes of top performers. Based on this research and observations from this field, common mental fitness attributes linked to elite performers include the following: • High self-confidence • Commitment and ability to set goals • Composure, motivation, having perspective • Positive attitude and mindset • Mindfulness, focused on task • Emotional control • Ability to manage stress and anxiety • Control of activation and relaxation levels • well-developed competitive plans • Ability to embrace and manage pressure • Adaptability and self-regulation • Passion and love for sport • Work-ethic • Responsibility • Ability to manage team environments and performance demands These attributes do not guarantee the highest levels of elite athletic performance, but they are consistent among top performers. Most elite athletes cultivate these attributes through intentional mental fitness development and years of learning from personal performance experiences.
5How do athletes develop mental fitness? the mental training process typically involves the following four steps: 1. Education: Providing foundational knowledge regarding mental fitness principles and strategies.
2. Awareness: Increasing athletes’ self-knowledge by helping them reflect on responses related to their best and less than best performance situations, experiences, and perspectives. 3.
Implementation: Challenging athletes to apply newly acquired knowledge of performance principles, strategies, and self-knowledge in performance situations. 4. Evaluation: Inviting athletes, and external observers, to evaluate mental fitness capacities and identify key lessons that can be applied to future performances.
6Mental Fitness, attributes, and skills 7throughout the ltaD stages, the mental attributes and skills being developed may stay the same, but the specific focus or next important step being emphasized varies. For example, in the early stages, there will be more emphasis on education and awareness creation, whereas in the later stages, more attention may be put on the implementation, evaluation, and refinement of mental skills and attributes. Mental fitness development involves building a mental skill set, typically through a mental training program.
Most comprehensive mental training programs emphasize the development of psychological skills, such as anxiety and stress management, imagery, relaxation and activation, goal-setting, focusing, distraction control, self-talk, self-awareness and reflection, pre-competition and pre-performance planning, and confidence building, to name a few (Orlick, 2008; Weinberg & Williams, 2005). Think of golf as a metaphor. Just as different clubs are used for the different kinds of shots taken in a round of golf, various mental skills are used to prepare for, and respond to, different situations.
Throughout the LTAD stages, athletes can develop different mental skills and attributes that will help them regulate their performance-enhancing thoughts, feelings, and behaviours in training and competition. Examples of mental skills and attributes that can help guide this regulation include: • What athletes say to themselves: Self-talk, keeping perspective and a positive attitude, focus, and reflection. • What athletes see in their minds: Imagery, self-awareness, focus, goal-setting, and the overall “mission,” or athletic pursuit.
• What athletes feel: Managing, acceptance or challenge of emotions and anxiety, adjusting arousal, maintaining composure, and passion and love for the sport. • How athletes act: Pre-competition routines, performance plans, confidence building, mindfulness, commitment, execution, effective communication, healthy team environment, and distraction management. Throughout the LTAD stages, athletes can learn, develop, and fine-tune these mental skills and attributes.
8Mental Fitness and Performance Phases MenTal FiTness and PerForM anCe Phases Each LTAD stage will focus on the mental skills and messages considered most important for each stage of sport development. Various skills and strategies can also be used throughout the different phases of performance. To illustrate this, the Integrated Model of Human Performance involves three broad, interactive phases (Gardner & Moore, 2007).
The Pre-Performance Phase involves preparation activities that promote readiness for performance. The Performance Phase involves skill execution and the regulation of thoughts, feelings, and behaviours during performance. Lastly, the Post- Performance Response Phase involves responses to performance outcomes and circumstances which can have a lasting impact on future performances if not debriefed.
sTruCTure oF arTiCle The remaining pages of this article will outline mental fitness development suggestions for each stage of the LTAD model. In providing recommendations as to how to develop mental fitness skills and attributes for each LTAD stage, the following structure will be used: • Core principles: The first section will highlight core principles and mental skills and attributes that will be emphasized and developed during the stage. • Mental fitness activities: This section will outline the key mental fitness messages and activities that are recommended to help promote the development of mental fitness skills and attributes during the stage.
• Key messages: The final section will provide recommendations as to how athletes, coaches, and parents can promote mental fitness development during the stage. 9active start (0-6 years) aCTive sTarT Before athletes develop a passion for their sport, they form an emotional association with physical activity. The goal in the Active Start stage is for young children to rack up positive experiences within sport activity; these can come from a coach that they like, a team or sport environment they find exciting and inclusive, or a chance to experience the freedom of play and to embrace small successes every day.
This positive emotional profile will energize and inspire whatever passion for sport an athlete may develop. The foundation of mental fitness is a set of beliefs that form in a young athlete’s mind and are reinforced and strengthened by a set of experiences in sport. Here are the seeds of that foundation: Core Principles: • Sport and physical activity are fun.
They provide an arena of release; play; and connection to oneself, one’s body, and others. • The sport environment is a safe, enjoyable, inclusive, and exciting place to be. The people in it will support the child in positive and respectful ways.
• Sport has a place for everyone. Each child can strive to grow and improve at his or her own level, and all successes can be celebrated and acknowledged. • Attitude – If the child has a positive attitude, he or she will have more fun, energy, courage, and success.
Modelling a positive attitude for the child will help support this principle. • Imagination – Children at this age excel in imaginative play. Encouraging children to imagine themselves positively in sport can make the experience fun and inspiring.
10Mental Fitness activities Mental Fitness activities These foundational beliefs can be best developed and maintained with consistent messaging to athletes, coaches, and parents. The following chart highlights key mental fitness activities to maximize optimal messaging to young athletes. Phase Mental Fitness activities Pre-Performance • Activities are for the child’s enjoyment and success.
• The focus is on feeling good, having fun, trying your best, and meeting new friends. • Everyone involved supports the child in achieving these goals. • The child’s attention is focused on the positives of sport participation.
They think things like, “Today will be fun” and, “You can do this.” • The children’s imaginations are nurtured by encouraging them to imagine themselves having fun. Performance Present key messages of success to the child throughout the performance, such as: • “You can do it.” • “Work hard and try your best.” • “Get back up when you fall.” • “Try again if you can’t do it the first time.” • “Laugh and have fun.” • “Have fun with your teammates and make new friends.” • “Work up a sweat.” • “Try something new.” Post-Performance • Help the child reflect on the following questions: Did you try your hardest? Did you have fun?
Did you feel good? What did you achieve? What did you do well?
What are the things you can’t wait to try next time? What are you most looking forward to? • Encourage the child to congratulate teammates, give them high-fives, and tell others, “Good job.” • Encourage the child to practice and play at home.
key Messages: Athletes Understand that success means giving your best effort and having fun. Coaches Make a personal connection with each child and stay focused on giving them a positive experience. The key is finding little successes in everything they do.
Bring everything back to fun and effort at this stage. Avoid reference to talent or outcome. Parents Positive, positive, positive.
Be your children’s biggest fan. Most importantly, tell them you love, support, and believe in them, regardless of how they perform. This will allow them to separate personal value from success and failure in sport.
11Fundamentals (Females 6-8 years, Males 6-9 years) FundaMenTals During the FUNdamentals stage, children are primarily motivated by the desire to have with their friends in a wide variety of enjoyable physical activities, sports, and games. Children can learn and explore different movements and skills through structured activities and participation in unstructured play. Their self-esteem starts developing at this stage and can be further nurtured by reinforcing their effort, creativity, enjoyment, and learning.
Additionally, children start developing a level of self-awareness in the way they perceive, think, feel and act. At this stage, basic concepts of ethics in sports (sportsmanship, fair play, teamwork) and rules of a game can be introduced. This helps with the development of decision-making, behavioural, and social skills.
Core Principles: • Children participate in different types of structured and unstructured physical activity, games, and play. They do not commit solely to any one activity or sport. • Rather than winning and outcomes, fun, creativity, and effort are at the centre of sport activity.
Every activity offers children the opportunity to learn something and have fun with friends. • Basic concepts of relaxation and imagery can be introduced in creative and fun ways. • Children’s experiences, perceptions, thoughts, and feelings from their participation in sport activities are acknowledged.
• Basic rules and ethics in sports activities can be introduced. 12Mental Fitness activities Phase Mental Fitness activities Pre-Performance • Talk about all different kinds of physical activities in positive ways. • Introduce simple relaxation and body-awareness exercises in creative ways, such as “spaghetti toes”: getting the child to imagine their body feels as light and loose as a noodle (Orlick, 2011).
• Introduce simple imagery exercises in creative ways, like visualizing the colour of grass on the field or pretending to be an arrow diving into the water. • Emphasize fun and enjoyment while children do activities together. • Explain basic rules in games and principles of fair play for each activity.
Performance • Give each child opportunities to participate in all activities, and encourage any effort and creativity they display. • Introduce positive self-talk and simple focusing activities. • Encourage children to try again after successes and mistakes, and introduce ways to help keep a positive perspective.
• Reinforce principles of teamwork and fair play (teammates celebrating together and encouraging each other). • Use teachable moments to reinforce sportsmanship, teamwork, and ethics. Post-Performance • Highlight and help the child reflect on the experience he or she got from the activity: Was it fun?
What was most fun about it? What did you learn today? What did the coach say?
What were the rules of the games? Reiterate any positive messages. • Stimulate creativity and imagery skills: e.g., When at home, use different modalities like drawing or painting to re-create the sporting activity and playing games with friends.
key Messages: Athletes Try balancing different activities. Have fun with them and your friends or teammates. Share and talk about your experiences with friends and family.
Coaches Create an environment in which children want to participate, can show their desire for physical activity, and can play with friends. Modify games and rules to maximize action for everyone, and reinforce any effort, progress and learning. Parents Offer different types of physical activity on a daily basis through organized sports in a club or community as well as through unstructured play and games.
Share your own happiness and support when children show their enjoyment, effort, and creativity. Listen to and acknowledge their experiences. 13learn to Train (Females 8-11 years; Males 9-12 years) learn To Train During this stage, athletes develop foundational skills that lead to success in sport.
They are introduced to foundational mental fitness concepts that complement their physical development and enhance their learning experience and self-awareness. Mental skills are introduced and taught on a basic level, and opportunities for testing out the new skills in training and performance settings are provided. Athletes should recognize the importance of developing a positive work ethic and responsibility in both practice and competition and enjoy this effort.
They start to learn how to accept mistakes and setbacks as learning opportunities while celebrating success resulting from their work ethic. Additionally, athletes continue to learn to work as a team, respect others, and develop a love and passion for sport. Core Principles: • Basic principles of goal-setting are reviewed and incorporated into training along with an emphasis on effort and responsibility.
• Basic awareness of responses to demands, pressure, and nervousness are cultivated as a precursor to the skill of mindfulness, and simple breathing techniques are introduced. • Athletes develop a basic understanding and awareness of focus that allows them to connect with what they are doing and get the most out of their training and performance. • Imagery and positive thinking are used to continue developing athletes’ confidence and motivation, while arousal control strategies such as relaxation and activation can be further developed to manage intensity and emotions.
• Athletes learn how to communicate, respect, and positively interact with their teammates. • Work ethic, responsibility, and passion for sport are developed as athletes begin recognizing that hard work and a good attitude lead to improvement. 14Mental Fitness activities Phase Mental Fitness activities Pre-Performance • Provide education on the basic principles of goal-setting and incorporate setting a few targets in daily training to allow athletes to maximize their time and effort.
• Teach basic arousal control (relaxation, activation) and imagery techniques to help athletes deal with pressure or nervousness and see themselves being successful. • Continue developing the concept of positive perspective and self-talk, and help athletes prioritize effort over results. Performance • Introduce the concept of focus and provide simple strategies to help athletes identify important cues to guide their attention.
• Create awareness of thoughts that may arise in different situations and introduce basic strategies athletes can use to develop positive thinking. • Introduce concepts of teamwork and encourage athletes to demonstrate team spirit and respect for others. Post-Performance • Encourage athletes to reflect on their performance, asking questions such as, What did I do well?
What can I improve on? What was most fun? • Encourage athletes to visualize at least one thing they did well.
This helps them reinforce imagery skill and build confidence. • Highlight examples of fair play and teamwork, and use teachable moments to reinforce sportsmanship. key Messages: Athletes Your effort in both physical and mental fitness skills will result in improved performance.
Understanding and beginning to apply your foundational mental fitness skills will help to guide the development of your physical and technical skills. Coaches Encourage holistic sport development, including the integration of mental fitness activities into training. Mental skills and attributes take time to develop, so allow time and opportunity to do this.
Emphasize effort, responsibility, fun and play, teamwork, and respect for others. Parents Continue to support and believe in your child. Emphasize effort, teamwork, and respect for others.
Acknowledge results, but reinforce factors related to the performance process. 15Train to Train (Females 11-15 years; Males 12-16 years) Train To Train During the Train to Train stage, the volume of training increases with emphasis on consolidating basic sport-specific skills and tactics. There is also an accelerated adaptation to aerobic, speed, and strength training.
Developing athletes become more engaged in competitions with peers, which can lead to an overemphasis on winning and outcomes. The focus still needs to be on learning, applying, testing and refining physical, technical, tactical, and mental skills/strategies, as well as how to use them in competitive settings. To help athletes learn to cope with physical and mental challenges in competition, a comprehensive mental training program should be introduced at this stage.
Taught in various settings, mental training programs can include goal-setting, relaxation, activation, focus, self-talk, imagery, confidence, and motivation- building techniques. In addition, athletes are encouraged to start developing pre-competition routines and mental preparation strategies to coincide with their physical preparations. To help facilitate learning from each competition, more formal debriefing strategies can also be introduced.
Athletic progress in this stage may differ from athlete to athlete because of differences in rates of development (such as growth spurts). Thus, individual support may be required to help athletes maintain motivation and self- confidence and cope with success and failure. Core Principles: • While training demands and competitive focus increase, emphasis should remain on learning, developing, testing, and refining all skills and strategies (e.g., physical, technical, tactical, and mental).
• A comprehensive mental training program, including mental skill development, can be incorporated. • Athletes are also introduced to pre-competition routines, mental preparation plans, and more formal performance-debriefing strategies. • Athletes’ awareness and mindfulness of mental, physical, and emotional responses to demands and pressure continues to grow.
• Athletes can become aware of a positive sport-life balance and start to monitor mental, emotional, and physical fatigue. • Continued development of teamwork and ethical play should be emphasized. 16Mental Fitness activities Phase Mental Fitness activities Pre-Performance • Teach and integrate different types of goal-setting strategies for training and competition.
• Teach athletes how to regulate arousal states for optimal performance in competition. • Emphasize positive self-talk and carrying a optimistic attitude to increase motivation and self-confidence. • Teach athletes to apply and maintain different types of focus to execute and respond to performance demands.
• Develop refocusing and distraction-control strategies. • Develop and implement personalized imagery “scripts” on a more regular basis to practise or refine different aspects of performance. • Develop and implement strategies to manage pressure, fear, and stress.
• Teach athletes how to plan and develop personalized mental preparation strategies and competition routines. • Apply, test, and refine athletes’ mental skills and attributes in both training and competitions. Performance • Develop and implement competition competition-focus plans and self-talk strategies.
• Develop and incorporate refocusing and distraction-control strategies. • Provide methods of monitoring performance and making adjustments as required. • Promote teamwork and fair-play; facilitate communication.
Post-Performance • Develop debriefing strategies that help athletes reflect on performance in training and competition, identify strengths and areas to improve, take responsibility, and celebrate accomplishments and efforts. • Introduce ways to monitor mental, emotional, and physical fatigue. • Put emphasis on athletes supporting and encouraging their teammates.
key messages: Athletes Be open to mental training and explore how it can help you in training and competition. Practise implementing mental skills in situations in which you face both minor and major challenges. Coaches Incorporate mental training into your yearly training plan and reinforce mental fitness principles in both training and competition.
Help facilitate access to sport psychology resources. Parents Help your child recognize the benefits of developing mental skills. Help him or her manage increasing competitive pressure by focusing on the process and de-emphasizing winning and outcomes.
Ask your child what he or she learned today, what he or she did well in training or competition, and what he or she would like to improve and try next time. Find at least one positive comment to share with your child. Be his or her greatest fan.
17Train to Compete (Females 15-21 years; Males 16-23 years) Train To CoMPeTe During the Train to Compete stage, athletes become more sport-, event-, and position-specific within their training regime. The brain is more developed, and critical thinking has become more established. Advanced mental preparation strategies are incorporated, and focus on mental skills needed for competition and quality training increases.
Coaches may begin educating athletes on the purpose of training and recovery and how it will prepare them to compete. With increased understanding of why they are doing what they are doing, athletes can develop greater intrinsic motivation, and confidence to compete. Athletes can also develop a greater self-awareness towards individual responses to competition stress, and the way they compete under and deal with pressure.
Key mental skills developed in this stage include pre-competition and competition planning, stress management, arousal and distraction control, focus, imagery, and competition evaluation. Increased training volume and commitment levels may make it difficult for athletes to maintain a well-rounded identity alongside sports; encourage a healthy sport-life balance and keep success and failure in perspective. A re-emphasis on fun and enjoyment is essential, as is the encouragement of non-athletic pursuits.
Core Principles: • Athletes develop awareness of how day-to-day training connects to competition readiness. • Education about individual responses to performance anxiety and strategies for managing and accepting responses takes place. • Athletes practise and refine pre-, post-, and in-competition routines and develop competition strategy planning and execution.
• Athletes practise focusing and refocusing plans and learn distraction-management skills needed for competition. • The practice and refinement of post-performance debriefing is further developed. 18Mental Fitness activities Phase Mental Fitness activities Pre-Performance • Set appropriate goals for training and competition, encompassing different types of goals (e.g., process, performance, outcome goals).
• Develop sound focus and refocus plans. • Use imagery to reinforce and correct key skills and desired outcomes for performance. • Refine pre-determined competitive routines/plans.
• Continue to develop and refine optimal activation level and arousal adjustment. Performance • Execute and test performance plans developed for competition. • Establish one or two simple cues to focus attention on important segments of the competition.
• Follow and refine pre-determined competition routines/plans. • Use positive reminders that maintain confidence and motivation. • Introduce and develop the practice of mindfulness.
• Normalize, accept, and regulate emotions such as anxiety, fear, and anger. Post-Performance • Debrief performances; highlight strengths and areas for improvement. • Focus on the positive lessons from each performance.
key Messages Athletes View every competition as a learning opportunity. Focus on the process and all the variables you can control prior to a competition. Practise readiness and flexibility for any competitive situation that may arise in your sport.
Continue to use focusing, positive self-talk, imagery, relaxation, and activation strategies at the appropriate times for you. Work with your coach to develop a competitive routine that gets you ready to compete. Coaches Focus on the positives and reinforce athletes’ readiness for competition.
Help athletes focus on a few simple process goals for the competition and critically debrief performance execution. Be strategic in helping athletes choose competitions that will maximize development while avoiding mental or emotional burnout from participating in too many competitions. Parents Continue to be a positive support for your competitive athlete.
Showing encouragement, enthusiasm, and excitement around a competition is good, but too much can add extra pressure for an athlete. Act your “normal” self prior to, during, and after a competition. Avoid statements such as, “I hope you win,” “Looking forward to seeing you on the podium,” and “How are you feeling?” prior to a competition.
Despite their good intentions, such statements can be distracting and take away from an athlete’s normal pre-competition routine. Communicate well with your athlete and give him or her space if needed before and during a competition. Celebrate together afterwards when possible.
19Train to Win (Females 18+ years; Males 19+ years) Train To Win During the Train to Win stage, athletes develop a much greater self-awareness of the competition routines and mental strategies that work for them individually. The Train to Win stage focuses on refining the mental skills more closely related to performance outcomes and achieving personal performance bests. Identifying and executing a specific focus during training, practising quality recovery, and managing distractions are key to performance consistency.
Athletes need to maintain and build on their strengths, focus on improving weaknesses, and be able to adapt to different performance environments. In addition, academic, financial, and relationship demands may be more prevalent, so athletes should continue to develop strategies to maintain a healthy sport-life balance. Finally, athletes at this stage can start to think about a plan for “retirement” from competing at the highest level.
At some point during this stage, athletes are encouraged to think proactively about life after competitive sport and begin working on a transition plan. Core Principles: • Athletes establish a high level of self-awareness and ability to listen to their bodies’ needs in relation to performance and recovery. • Athletes learn to manage and accept pre-performance anxiety in varying competitive situations; appropriate coping skills to meet excessive demands are developed.
• It is important to maintain a high degree of intrinsic or self-determined motivation. • Athletes should develop a yearly plan for mental training around their competition schedules. • Behaving like a role model and professional is expected.
• Discussing plans, support, and strategies helps athletes transition from high-level sport. • Athletes develop perspective and a well-rounded identity outside of simply being an athlete. 20Mental Fitness activities Phase Mental Fitness activities Pre-Performance • Continue to use and refine well-developed goal-setting, focusing, and imagery skills.
• Continue monitoring and adapting to mental, emotional, and physical fatigue. • Practise mindfulness (ability to stay in the present moment) regularly. • Practise accepting and/or regulating thoughts, emotions, and physical sensations prior to competition.
• Continue to refine pre-, during, and post-competition plans. Performance • Continue to execute performance plans in different environments. • Continue to adapt to varying environments and follow re-focussing plans when needed.
• Continue to focus on simple cues for each critical phase of the competition. • Continue to be aware of reactions and regulate emotions. • Highlight strengths and use of positive reminders that maintain confidence and motivation.
• Continue to develop teamwork and encourage positive rivalry. Post-Performance • Debrief performances and highlight key strengths and areas for improvement. • Practise maintaining a positive perspective on performance regardless of outcome or circumstance to preserve motivation.
• Understand impacts of positive and destructive team functioning, emphasizing the importance of teamwork. key Messages Athletes Maximize learning opportunities in training and competition, and build your belief in your ability to achieve goals. Practise mindfulness; develop your ability to accept the varying thoughts, feelings, and emotions that emerge; and train yourself to maintain optimal focus under any competition conditions.
Coaches Continue to focus on the positives and reinforce athletes’ readiness for competition. Help them focus on a few personalized process goals for the competition. Continue to be strategic in helping athletes choose competitions that will maximize performance.
Make sure athletes avoid mental and emotional burnout by monitoring their mental, emotional, and physical states. Ask them for feedback often, and continue to educate them on the purpose behind the training plan. This enhances their trust, sense of autonomy, and self-determined motivation.
Parents As in the previous stage, continue to support and show encouragement for your child. Be mindful of the way you show encouragement and the impact it may have on your child, such as adding performance pressure. Promote positive communication with your child and provide them with the space required before, during, and after a competition.
Enjoy celebrating with your child after the event. 21active for life (athletes and Participants 12+ years) aCTive For liFe Active for Life is the final stage in the LTAD framework. Remaining active in sport and physical activity for life is one of the key outcomes of CS4L.
In this stage, athletes and participants enjoy lifelong involvement in a variety of competitive and recreational settings. As these recreational athletes typically incorporate principles of physical literacy learned through prior sport participation, they can also adopt mental fitness principles and skills that have been developed throughout their sport experience. With varying levels of prior sport experience, competitiveness, and motives for participation, the mental fitness activities for this stage will fluctuate.
Athletes and participants in this stage can refer back to the recommendations provided in the previous stages depending on their needs. In general, we would like to emphasize two mental fitness principles: • Goals and perspective: Participants and athletes should reflect on their goals for participating (e.g. promoting a healthy lifestyle and, social activity, providing a new challenge, or finding an outlet for competitive needs).
Engaging in recreational activities can start with a particular goal in mind, but at times, it can morph into a critical evaluation about competence. Maintaining a healthy perspective about sport and physical activity can help promote performance execution, fun, and enjoyment. • Sportsmanship: In recreational sport activities, participants should be mindful of the importance of sportsmanship.
Typically, there are varying motives for participating, so it is important to respect individual differences, and not to impose personal agendas on the group. Active for life can be entered at any age from any stage of development, and can evolve to being Competitive for Life or Fit for Life through all phases of adulthood. Mental fitness principles and skills should continue to be incorporated to help promote a positive experience.
suMMarY Mental fitness concepts and strategies can be introduced to athletes at an early age. Initially, this involves instilling foundational principles of attitude, positive focus, and imagination, while emphasizing effort and fun. As athletes prog- ress through the various LTAD stages, mental skills and strategies are introduced and developed to help athletes handle the increasing pressures and demands of competitive sport.
The acquisition of mental fitness is a dynamic process that fluctuates depending on a) the time and effort put towards developing the mental skills and attributes, and b) the athletes openness to self-learning and reflecting on competitive experiences. In order to provide athletes with the opportunity to reach their personal performance potential, it is imperative that mental fitness be incorporated through their long-term development. 22references and resources reFerenCes Begley, S.
(2008). Train Your Mind, Change Your Brain: How a New Science Reveals Our Extraordinary Potential to Transform Ourselves. New York, NY: Random House Gardner, F.
& Moore, Z. (2007). The Psychology of Enhancing Human Performance: The Mindfulness-Acceptance-Commitment Approach.
New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company Jones, G., Hanton, S., & Connaughton, D. (2007). A framework of mental toughness in the world’s best performers.
The Sport Psychologist, 21, 243-264 Orlick, T., (2008). In Pursuit of Excellence: How to win in sport and life through mental training. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Weinberg, R.
& Williams, J. (2005). Integrating and implementing a psychological skills training program.
In J. Williams (Ed.), Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to peak performance. (5th ed.) Mountain View, CA: McGraw-Hill Humanities.
Williams, J. (2005.). Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to peak performance.
(5th ed.) Mountain View, CA: McGraw-Hill Humanities. Williams, J., & Krane, V. (2005).
Psychological characteristics of peak performers. In J. Williams (Ed.), Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to peak performance.
(5th ed.) Mountain View, CA: McGraw-Hill Humanities. resourCes Balyi, I., Way, R., Higgs, C., Norris, S. & Cardinal, C.
(2005). Canadian sport for life: Long-term athlete development [Resource Paper]. Vancouver, Canada: Canadian Sport Centres.
Côté, J., Baker, J. & Abernethy, B., Practice and Play in the Development of Sport Expertise, in Handbook of Sport Psychology, Third Edition (2007), Gershon Tenenbaum & Robert C. Eklund (Eds), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken NJ Durand-Bush, N., & Salmela, J.
H. (2002). The development and maintenance of expert athletic performance: Perceptions of world and Olympic champions.
Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 14, 154–171. Glynn C. Roberts, Darren C.
Treasure and David E. Conroy, Understanding the Dynamics of Motivation in Sport and Physical Activity, in Handbook of Sport Psychology, Third Edition (2007), Gershon Tenenbaum & Robert C. Eklund (Eds), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ Hogg, J.
(1997). Mental Skills for Young Athletes: A mental skills workbook for athletes 12 years and under. Edmonton, AB: Sport Excel Publishing.
Orlick, T, & Partington, J. (1988). Mental Links to Excellence.
The Sport Psychologist, 2, 105-130. Orlick, T., (2011). Positive Living Skills: Joy and Focus for Everyone.
Renfrew, ON: General Store Publishing House Partington, E. & Partington, S. (2005).
Mental skills coaching resource. Badminton Association of England, Northumbria University Vealey, Robin S., Mental Skills Training in Sport, in Handbook of Sport Psychology, Third Edition (2007), Gershon Tenenbaum & Robert C. Eklund (Eds), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken NJ 23other Canadian sport for life resources canadiansportforlife.ca/resources Canadian Sport for Life Resource Paper 2.0 A Sport Parent’s Guide Developing Physical Literacy No Accidental Champions 2nd Edition Sleep, Recovery, and Human Performance The Role of Monitoring Growth in Long-Term Athlete Development Competition is a Good Servant, but a Poor Master Linking Sport for Life with Management by Values Maximizing the Sport Experience for our Children Recovery and Regeneration for Long-Term Athlete Development The Female Athlete Perspective Published by Canadian Sport Institute - Pacific 2014 ISBN 978-1-927921-03-6 All rights reserved.
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form for commercial purposes, or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording or from any information stored in a retrieval system, without permission from the authors or Canadian Sport Institute - Pacific We acknowledge the financial support of the Government of Canada through Sport Canada, a branch of the Department of Canadian Heritage. canadiansportforlife.ca
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328415117 The historical evolution of Sport Psychology (with special reference to six eras) Article · January 2012 DOI: 10.1037/01/6F6RT8583987 CITATIONS READS 0 8,567 1 author: A A L Madhushani Sabaragamuwa University of Sri Lanka 27 PUBLICATIONS 9 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Olympic Studies View project Olympic values study among Sport sciences graduates:Comparative study.of Italy and Sri Lanka View project All content following this page was uploaded by A A L Madhushani on 21 October 2018. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.The historical evolution of Sport Psychology (With special reference to six eras) Madhushani A. A.
L, Jayantha k, Ubayachandra E. G E-mail – lakshikamadhushani@yahoo.com Abstract The title, Analyze in historical background of sport psychology through historical eras, was described specific objective such as to recognize the development of sport psychology and identify the trend of the sport psychology history. Especially this study was embossing the findings of each era.
In this sense noticeably six eras were highlighted. Thus the historical bench marks of sport psychology were discussed under those six eras. There are so many researches done regarding sport psychology in the world.
But there is lack of researches done so far the history of sport psychology. Especially in Sri Lanka there is lack of sport psychology history researches. Accordingly it seems that there is a vacuum to be filled up.
That vacuum was filled up by this study. Historical perspective and comparative analysis were used for this analytical study. As this study is analytical in nature as far as possible an attempt was made to collect secondary data.
The researcher carried out an extensive review of previous studies to provide a conceptual background of the study. Key word: - Sport psychology, Eras, Benchmarks, Comparative analysis, Analytical, Extensive Introduction A wide range of sports were already established by the time of Ancient Greece and the military culture and the development of sports in Greece influenced one another considerably. Sports became such a prominent part of their culture that the Greeks created the Olympic Games, which in ancient times were held every four years in a small village in the Peloponnesus called Olympia (Ulrich Sinn, 2000) Sports have been increasingly organized and regulated from the time of the ancient Olympics up to the present century.
Industrialization has brought increased leisure time to the citizens of developed and developing countries, leading to more time for citizens to attend and follow spectator sports, greater participation in athletic activities, and increased accessibility. These trends continued with the advent of mass media and global communication. Professionalism became prevalent, further adding to the increase in sport's popularity, as sports fans began following the exploits of professional athletes through radio, television, and the internet all while enjoying the exercise and competition associated with amateur participation in sports.
In the New Millennium, new sports have been going further from the physical aspect to the mental or psychological aspect of competing. Electronic sports organizations are becoming more and more popular. "Sport" comes from the Old French disport meaning "leisure".
American English uses the term "sports" to refer to this general type of recreational activity, whereas other regional dialects use the singular "sport". The French word for sport is based on the Persian word board, meaning "winning" or "win". The Chinese term for sport, tiyu (体育; 體育) connotes physical training.
The modern Greek term for sport is Αθλητισμός (athlitismos), directly cognate with the English terms "athlete" and "athleticism".The oldest definition of sport in English (1300) is of anythinghumans find amusing or entertaining (Harper, Douglas, 2008). Other meanings include gambling and events staged for the purpose of gambling; hunting; and games and diversions, including ones that require exercise. Roget's defines the noun sport as an "activity engaged in for relaxation and amusement" with synonyms including diversion and recreation (Rogets 1995).
The word psychology literally means, "the study of the soul" (ψυχή, psukhē, meaning "breath", "spirit", or "soul"; and -λογος -logos, translated as "study of" or "research" (Online Etymology Dictionary. 2001). The Latin word psychologia was first used by the Croatian humanist and Latinist Marko Marulić in his book, Psichiologia de ratione animae humanae in the late 15th century or early 16th century (K.
Krstic ,1964). The earliest known reference to the word psychology in English was by Steven Blankaart in 1694 in The Physical Dictionary which refers to "Anatomy, which treats of the Body, and Psychology, which treats of the Soul." (A Dictionary of Psychology). Psychology is the study of the mind, occurring partly via the study of behavior (APA, 2011).
Grounded in scientific method, psychology has the immediate goal of understanding individuals and groups by both establishing general principles and researching specific cases, and for many it ultimately aims to benefit society (O'Neil, H.F.; Coon, D.; Mitterer, J.O, 2008). Sport psychology is an interdisciplinary science that draws on knowledge from the fields of Kinesiology and Psychology. It involves the study of how psychological factors affect performance and how participation in sport and exercise affect psychological and physical factors (Weinberg, R.S.
& Gould, D,2010). In addition to instruction and training of psychological skills for performance improvement, applied sport psychology may include work with athletes, coaches, and parents regarding injury, rehabilitation, communication, team building, and career transitions. American Psychological Association define Exercise and Sport Psychology defines sport psychology as (a) the study of the psychological and mental factors that influence and are influenced by participation and performance in sport, exercise, and physical activity, and (b) the application of the knowledge gained through this study to everyday settings.
Sport psychology professionals are interested in how participation in sport, exercise, and physical activity may enhance personal development and well-being throughout the life span. Sport psychologists are also involved in assisting coaches in working with athletes as well as helping improve athletes' motivation. Sports psychology is essentially the study of how the mind affects physical activity and athletic performance.
According to the American Psychological Association, “sports psychology addresses the interactions between psychology and sport performance, including the psychological aspects of optimal athletic performance, the psychological care and well-being of athletes, coaches, and sport organizations, and the connection between physical and psychological functioning, Sports psychologist essentially the study of how the mind affects physical activity and athletic performance. The IAAF (International Association of Athletics Federations) states: Sports psychologists can teach skills to help athletes enhance their learning process and motor skills, cope with competitive pressures, fine-tune the level of awareness needed for optimal performance, and stay focused amid the many distractions of team travel and in the competitiveenvironment. Psychological training should be an integral part of an athlete’s holistic training process, carried out in conjunction with other training elements.
This is best accomplished by a collaborative effort among the coach, the sport psychologist, and the athlete; however, a knowledgeable and interested coach can learn basic psychological skills and impart them to the athlete, especially during actual practice. Sports psychologists traditionally approach the discipline from two points of view: (1) academic oriented and (2) practitioner oriented. When working from the academic perspective, sports psychologists focus on educational pursuits such as theoretical research and teaching.
When practitioner oriented, the emphasis is on applied work and research. Though the perspectives may differ, some sports psychologists are able to fill both roles comfortably (Horn, 2008). According to the American Psychological Association, “sports psychology addresses the interactions between psychology and sport performance, including the psychological aspects of optimal athletic performance, the psychological care and well-being of athletes, coaches, and sport organizations, and the connection between physical and psychological functioning”.“Describing the nature of sports psychology is difficult because many different perspectives on the field exist.
Differences are present not only in the definition of the term itself but also in the roles psychologists are presumed to play” (Horn, 2008), with some persons viewing the field as a branch of psychology, and others seeing it as a subfield of sport and exercise science. Previous research By the time of the ancient Greeks, things had progressed. Literature of this era is sprinkled with references to the use of the psychology of sport (see Gardiner, 1930; Sweet, 1987).
As one example, by AD200 the tetrad system had been established as the gold standard for optimizing athletic performance. According to this system, Day One should be devoted to ‘Preparation’, Day Two to ‘Concentration’, Day Three to ‘Moderation’ and Day Four to ‘Relaxation’. This approach actually represents a precursor to modern day ‘periodisation’, whereby training for major competition is varied in planned phases.
But, as psychologists know to their cost, over time ideas can be both used and misused at will. For example, exercise psychologists who promote the motto mens sana in corpore sano (‘A healthy mind in a healthy body’) may be surprised to learn that in its original context – the Roman author Juvenal’s 10th Satire, written in the first century AD – far from exhorting people to embrace physical activity, the phrase ponders the prospect of old age: orandum est ut sit mens sana in corpore sano (‘Your prayer must be that you may have a sound mind in a sound body’). The first documented pioneer in the field of sport psychology investigated the effect of social facilitation on athletes.
Dr. Norman Triplett, a psychology professor at Indiana University in the late 1800s, conducted research on how the presence of others impacted the performance of cyclists. Triplett's study supported his hypothesis that cyclists often performed better when riding in pairs or groups than when riding alone (Anshel, 2003; Weinberg & Gould, 2003).
Triplett's research titled "Dynamogenic Factors in Pacemaking and Competition" was published in 1898 in the American Journal of Psychology and provided the field with the first documented researchdiscussing how and why group dynamics impact athletic performance (Davis, S. F., Huss, M. T., & Becker, A.
H. 2009). While Triplett's work provided a foundation for sport psychology research, much of his work was conducted in the laboratory with no emphasis on the real-life application of his findings.
In the 1920s, another burgeoning sport psychologist from the University of Illinois, Coleman Griffith, began developing the first sport psychology laboratory where the findings of research conducted in laboratory settings could be applied to the real-life performance of athletes (Weinberg & Gould, 2003). Griffith worked directly with both the Chicago Cubs and with Knute Rockne and the University of Notre Dame (IN) football team to enhance the performance of athletes who played on these teams (Davis, S. F., Huss, M.
T., & Becker, A. H. 2009).
The life work and research of other sport and psychology professionals led to the further advancement of sport psychology as an academic discipline in the mid 1960s. Professionals such as Franklin Henry (University of California, Berkley) set the stage for sport psychology to be taught and researched in academic settings (Weinberg & Gould, 2003). “Describing the nature of sports psychology is difficult because many different perspectives on the field exist.
Differences are present not only in the definition of the term itself but also in the roles psychologists are presumed to play” (Horn, 2008), with some persons viewing the field as a Branch of psychology, and others seeing it as a subfield of sport and exercise science. Article of “A short history and overview of a field” was written by who is founder and CEO (Corporate Europe Observatory) of William B. Cole (2009) Consultants, a consulting firm that helps organizations and professionals achieve more success in business, life and sports.
He is also the Founder and President of the International Mental Game Coaching Association. This article gives you an overview of the field of sport psychology. This exciting field addresses critical sport learning and performance areas such as mental readiness, concentration, motivation, teamwork, communication, the zone and managing a sport career.
Discover ten ways sport psychology can help you as an athlete, as a parent of an athlete, or as a coach. Historical perspective of Sport Psychology Historical evolution of the sport psychology has been detail discussed in this paper by touching up different eras correspondently. In this sense noticeably six eras were highlighted.
Thus the historical bench mark of sport psychology was discussed under those six eras here. The history of sport psychology dates back to the late 1800s and from then it has grown into a scientific phenomenon to enhance the performance of individuals in the area of sport. The history of sport psychology falls into six Eras, they are; Era1: The Early years (1895-1920), Era 2: The Griffith Era (1921-1938), Era 3: Preparation for the Future (1939-1965), Era 4: the Establishment of Academic Sport psychology (1966-1977), Era 5: Multidisciplinary Science and Practice in Sport and Exercise Psychology (1978-2000), Era 6: Contemporary Sport and Exercise Psychology (2000-Present).
Those eras are detaily discussed below.The Early Years (1895-1920) The Early years, the first documented pioneer in the field of sport psychology investigated the effect of social facilitation on athletes. Dr. Norman Triplett, a psychology professor at Indiana University in the late 1800s, conducted research on how the presence of others impacted on the performance of cyclists.
Triplett's study supported his hypothesis that cyclists often performed better when riding in pairs or groups than when riding alone. Triplett's research titled "Dynamogenic Factors in Pace making and Competition" was published in 1898 in the American Journal of Psychology and provided the field with the first documented research discussing how and why group dynamics impact athletic performance (Davis, Huss, & Becker, 1995). Sport psychology in Europe was highlighted by the formation of the Deutsch Hochschule für Leibesübungen by Robert Werner Schulte in 1920.
The psychology lab measured physical abilities and aptitude in sport, and in 1921, Schulte published Body and Mind in Sport. Schulte later moved his study to aviators and parachutists, before he passed away prematurely at the age of thirty-five in 1933. In Russia, sport psychology experiments began as early as 1925 at institutes of physical culture in Moscow and Leningrad, and formal sport psychology departments were formed around 1930 (Baumler,2009).
Early years of sport psychology in North America include isolated study of motor behavior, habit formation, and social facilitation. During the 1890s, E. W.
Scripture conducted a range of behavioral experiments in his Yale laboratory, including measuring the reaction time of runners, thought time in varying ages of school children, and the accuracy of an orchestra conductor’s baton. Scripture studied with Wilhelm Wundt in Leipzig, Germany, and had a strong belief in the ability of experimental psychology to disprove many of the popular notions of traditional, philosophically driven psychology. Scripture’s strong dislike for “armchair psychologists” was apparent in his book, Thinking, Feeling, and Doing.
This publication had the effect of angering several established professionals in the field; it also plagiarized Wundt’s Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology. Given this effect, Scripture was released from Yale in1900(Goodwin,2009) Research by ornithologists Lashley and Watson (1916) on the learning curve for novice archers provided a robust template for future habit formation research, as these researchers argued that humans would have higher levels of motivation to achieve in a task like archery, and hence strive harder to achieve, when compared to being asked to perform a mundane task such as preventing the winking reflex. Lashley and Watson also speculated on the ideal distribution of practice sessions for skill acquisition, although their interpretations were inconclusive (Dewsbury, 2009).
Researchers Albert Johanson and Joseph Holmes, working at Columbia University in New York, tested baseball player Babe Ruth in 1921, as reported by sportswriter Hugh S. Fullerton. Ruth’s swing speed, his breathing right before hitting a baseball, his coordination and rapidity of wrist movement, and his reaction time were all measured, with the researchers concluding that Ruth’s talented could be attributed in part to motor skills and reflexes that were well above those of the average person.
The Griffith Era (1921-1938) The Griffith Era was started in 1921. The first individual to perform comprehensive research and applied sport psychology work in the United States was a professor of educational psychology at the Univeristy of Illinois named Coleman Roberts Griffith. Griffith began his work studying thepsychology of sport after the University Of Illinois Board Of Trustees, with the financial backing of the university athletic association, funded the Research in Athletics Laboratory in 1925.
The laboratory was the brainchild of George Huff, the chairman of the Department of Physical Welfare. Huff felt that the laboratory could study the unique psychological and physiological demands of athletic competition, passing along its findings not only to the profession of coaching, but to advance general knowledge of psychology and physiology (Gould and Pick, 1995). Griffith also published two major works during the operation of the laboratory, including The Psychology of Coaching (1926) and The Psychology of Athletics (1928).
This publications were the first sport psychology publications. Griffith’s interviews of prominent sporting figures of the era foreshadowed concepts that are currently part of the sport psychology knowledge base. For instance, in a 1925 interview with Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne on the pre-game pep-talk, Rockne illustrated his understanding that the pep-talk should not “over-motivate” the players or get them “too keyed up,” which integrates well with the current understanding of the arousal/performance relationship (Gould and Pick, 1995).
The Research in Athletics Laboratory closed in 1932, due to a lack of funding, and Griffith moved on to further his work in educational psychology, publishing several books along the way: An Introduction to Applied Psychology (1934); Introduction to Educational Psychology (1935); Psychology Applied to Teaching and Learning (1939); and Principles of Systematic Psychology(1943). In 1938, however, Coleman Griffith returned to the sporting world to serve as a sport psychology consultant for the Chicago Cubs baseball team. Hired by Philip Wrigley for $1,500, Griffith examined “player ability, baseball skill learning, personality, leadership, and social psychological factors influencing performance” (Gould and Pick, 1995).
Griffith made rigorous analyses of players and made multiple suggestions for improving practice effectiveness (Green, 2009). However, Griffith was quite pointed in his critique of 1938 managers Charlie Grimm and Gabby Hartnett. Grimm, for his part, was dismissive of Griffith, the “headshrinker from Urbana” (Green, 2009).
Griffith made several recommendations to Wrigley at the close of the 1938 season, and suggesting a “psychology clinic” for managers, coaches, and senior players to begin the 1939 season. Wrigley extended his offer to Griffith to serve as a full-time sport psychology consultant, but Griffith declined the offer so as not to disrupt his son’s high school education. Preparation for the future (1939-1965) Next era is Preparation for the future.
This period consists of the development of the scientific aspect of the sport psychology field; this was largely done by Franklin Henry at the University of California. Henry devoted his career to the study of the psychological aspects of sport and motor skill acquisition. Henry also devoted a large portion of his career to training and educating other enthusiastic physical educators who were to later become university professors and systematic researchers.
Other investigators in this period include Warren Johnson and Arthur Slatter- Hammel who helped lay the groundwork for future study of sport and leisure (Weinberg, R., & Gould, D 2003). 1938 Franklin Henry Assumes position in Department of Physical Education at the university of California, Berkeley, and establishes psychology of physical activity graduate programme. `1949: Warren Johnson assesses precompetitive emotions of athletes.
1951 JohnLawther writes Psychology of Coaching. In the 1960s, the Philadelphia Phillies teamed up with some University of Delaware professors to found a “Research Program for Baseball”. The rise of militarism between the United States and the Soviet Union in the Cold War period (1946-1989) is a well-worn narrative for framing the history of science within these nations and their affiliates during this time period.
Nonetheless, within the United States, disappointing performances relative to the Soviets in 1956 and 1960 spurred a greater interest and investment in practices that could improve the performance of American athletes. Arguably, the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc countries, most notably East Germany, advanced the science of sport psychology in a much more deliberate fashion, by creating institutes of sport in which sport psychologists figured a prominent role. Given the relatively free travel of information amongst European practitioners of sport psychology, as compared to the lack of information exchanged between European and American practitioners, it is perhaps unsurprising that the profession of sport psychology began to flourish first in Europe, where, in 1965, the First World Congress of Sport Psychology met in Rome, Italy.
This meeting, attended by some 450 professionals primarily from Europe, Australia, and the Americas, gave rise to the International Society for Sports Psychology (ISSP). The Establishment of Academic Sport Psychology (1966-1977) This era saw physical education become an academic discipline, and sport psychology became a separate component of physical education, distinct from motor learning. Motor learning specialist focused on the development of motor skills and on conditions of practice, feedback and timing.
On the other hand Sport psychologists studied how psychological factors such as personality, self-esteem, and anxiety influence motor skill performance. A group of sport psychologists met in Chicago to form the North American Society of Sport Psychology and Physical Activity (NASPSPA) in 1966. Clinical psychologists Bruce Olgilvie and Thomas Tutko write Problem Athletes and How to Handle them and begin to consult with athletes and teams.
In 1967 B. Cratty of UCLA writes Psychology of Physical Activity and First Annual North American Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity (NASPSPA) conference is held. 1974, Proceedings of NASPSPA conference are published for the first time (Weinberg, R., & Gould, D 2003).
The ISSP experienced some setbacks in its formation due to capitalist/socialist tensions that were inflamed by the 1968 invasion of Prague, Czechoslovakia by the USSR, but rebounded to become a prominent sport psychology organization after the Third World Congress of Sport Psychology in 1973. FEPSAC, the European Federation of Sport Psychology was founded in 1968. In North America, support for sport psychology grew out of physical educator’s interests in sport psychology.
NASPSPA (the North American Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity) grew from being an interest group amongst physical educators at AAHPERD (American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance), to a full-fledged organization whose mission includes promoting the research and teaching of motor behavior and the psychology of sport and exercise. NASPSPA has always been conceived as an organizationto promote research (NASPSPA Website), but after its formation, it served as the professional organization for both research-based and applied sport psychologists. In Canada, SCAPPS (the Canadian Society for Psychomotor Learning and Sport Psychology) was founded in 1977 to promote the study and exchange of ideas in the fields of motor behavior and sport psychology (SCAPPS website).
Multidisciplinary Science and Practice in Sport and Exercise Psychology (1978-2000) This era was the era of major growth and development in sport psychology. This growth was due to the ongoing acceptance and respect of the general public towards this area of study. This was also the time where a definitive line was drawn separating sport psychology from other psychologically related exercise and sport science specializations.
This era saw the publishing of numerous journals and books to accompany the subject of sport psychology. Training in the field took a more professional approach, rules and regulations were introduced to ensure not just anyone could administer sport psychology. 1979 Journal of Sport Psychology (now called Sport and Exercise Psychology) is established.
By 1984 sport psychologists were working with international teams at the Olympic games, and the United States Olympic Committee (USOC) hired its first full-time sport psychologist in 1985. 1986: The first applied scholarly journal. The Sport Psychologists were established 1986: The Association for the Advancement of Applied Sport Psychology (AAASP) is established.
In 1989 Journal of Applied Sport Psychology begins and 1991: AAASP establishes the "certified consultant" designation (Goodwin, C. J, Scripture E. W.
2009). By the 1996 Summer Olympics, more than 20 American sport psychologists were working with athletes. New journals and professional organizations were formed, textbooks and popular guides were published, and private consulting firms were set up.
The United States Olympic Committee (USOC) started a permanent sport psychology center in Colorado Springs. Today, the two largest sport psychology organizations in the United States (the Association for the Advancement of Applied Sport Psychology and the American Psychological Association Division 47) have about 3,000 members combined. Contemporary Sport and Exercise Psychology (2000-Present) Today, sport and exercise psychologists have begun to research and provide information in the ways that psychological well-being and vigorous physical activity are related.
This idea of psychophysiology, monitoring brain activity during exercise has aided in this research. Also, sport psychologists are beginning to consider exercise to be a therapeutic addition to healthy mental adjustment. Just recently sport psychologists have begun to recognized the valuable contributions made in assisting athletes and their coaches in improving performance during competitive situations, as well as understanding how physical exercise may contribute to the psychological well-being of non-athletes.
Many can benefit from sport psychologists: athletes who are trying to improve their performance, injured athletes who are looking for motivation, individuals looking to overcomethe pressure of competition, and young children involved in youth sports as well as their parents. Special focus is geared towards psychological assessment of athletes. Assessment can be both, focused on selection of athletes and the team set up of rosters as well as on professional guidance and counseling of single athletes.
Conclusion It is essential to know the historical background of an academic discipline in order to understand its current goals, purposes, and endeavors. Sport psychology in North America has a rich history that was born in the late 19th century. This section will introduce some of the pioneering educators and practitioners in the early days of sport psychology.
Historical investigations not only expand knowledge of the events that have shaped psychology; they are often opulently empathetic insights. Knowledge of the history of psychology enables us to make better informed decisions today. This section of The Psychologist is devoted to the promotion of historical exploration the history of psychology and the psychology of history.
It is looking for historical studies that reflect on and discuss personalities, events, apparatus, publications or concepts that have influenced the development of any aspect of psychology. Historical evolution of the sport psychology has been detaily discussed in this paper by toughing up different eras. In this sense noticeably six eras were highlighted.
Thus the historical bench marks of sport psychology were discussed above those six eras here. As pointed out in this text, it is noticeable that today the Sport psychology can provide athletes and performing artists with interventions and information that can lead to increases in performance, self-esteem, and self-confidence. By framing these interventions as mental training or performance enhancement, more athletes and performers may feel comfortable in seeking assistance from professionals and attain assistance in excelling during a confusing and important life transition.References A Dictionary of Psychology.
Edited by Andrew M. Colman. Oxford University Press 2009.
Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. oxfordreference.com Baumler, G.
(2009). The dawn of sport psychology in Europe, 1880-1930: Early pioneers of a new branch of applied science. In C.
D. Green & L. T.
Benjamin (Eds.), Psychology gets in the game (pp. 20-77). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Christopher D. G, (2000), Classics in the History of Psychology ,York University, Toronto, Ontario ISSN 1492-3713 Davis, S. F., Huss, M.
T., & Becker, A. H. (2009).
Norman Triplett: Recognizing the importance of competition. In C. D.
Green & L. T. Benjamin (Eds.), Psychology gets in the game (pp.
98- 115). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. Definition of "Psychology (APA's Index Page)", http://www.apa.org/about/index.aspx.
Retrieved 20 December 2011 Dewsbury, D. A. (2009).
Karl S. Lashley and John B. Watson: Early research on the acquisition of skill in archery.
In C. D. Green & L.
T. Benjamin (Eds.), Psychology gets in the game (pp. 116-143).
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. Goodwin, C. J.
(2009). E. W.
Scripture: The application of “new psychology” methodology to athletics. In C. D.
Green & L. T. Benjamin (Eds.), Psychology gets in the game (pp.
78-97). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. Gould, D., & Pick, S.
(1995). Sport Psychology : The Griffith Era, 1920-1940. The Sport Psychologist, 9, 391-405.
Retrieved June 20, 2011 Green, C. D. (2009).
Coleman Roberts Griffith: “Father” of North American sport psychology. In C. D.
Green & L. T. Benjamin (Eds.), Psychology gets in the game (pp.
202-229). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. Harper, Douglas.
"sport (n.)". Online Etymological Dictionary., 2008, http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?search=sport&searchmode=none. Horn, T.
S, (2008), Advances in sport psychology: Third edition. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Publishers. M,Marko; K.
Krstic, (1964), Term "Psychology" O'Neil, H.F.; cited in Coon, D.; Mitterer, J.O. (2008), Introduction to psychology: Gateways to mind and behavior (12th ed., pp. 15–16).
Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning. Online Etymology Dictionary. (2001), "Psychology"Roget's (1995), The New Thesaurus, Third Edition.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, http://thesaurus.reference.com/browse/sport. Sinn,U. (2000), Olympia, Culture, Sport, and Ancient Festival, First American edition , , Markus Wiener Publishers, Amazon.com Watson, J.
B., & Lashley, K. S. (1916).
Homing and related activities of birds. Washington, D. C.
Carnegie Institute of Washington. Retrieved from: http://books.google.com/books Weinberg, R., & Gould, D (2003). Foundations of Sport and Exercise Psychology, Third Edition (Chapter 1, pp.
3-23). ISBN 0471335495, pp. 31-41 Weinberg, R.S.
& Gould, D. (2010), Foundations of Sport and Exercise Psychology. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
VViieeww ppuubblliiccaattiioonn ssttaattss
Sport Psychology: the winning formula Tracey Veivers Sport Psychologist www.performanceperspectives.com.aupsychology (s -ko lo -j ): (n) The science that deals with mental processes and behaviour. The emotional and behavioural characteristics of an individual, group, or activity sport: (n) An activity involving skill that is governed by a set of rules or customs and often undertaken competitivelyThe role of sport psychology Provide World Class Sport Psychology Services to elite athletes and coaches, including: • Develop, assist and implement Screening and selection processes • Group/team CONSULTATIONS • Individual consultations • Performance enhancement • Personal WELLBEING MANAGEMENT • Psycho-educational programs (e.g., Coach Education) • Development of resources (e.g., tip-sheets, presentations, equipment, etc…) • COACH DEVELOPMENT • Multi-disciplinary approachWhy engage with a Sport Psych? Sport Psychologists can assist to further develop mental skills With regards to performance enhancement They can additionally help address any challenges outside of sport that may be impacting upon performanceAthlete development • Psychological changes typically the last to develop – The ‘engine’ is switched on but the ‘brakes’ are still developing • Common for difficulties to occur with: – Expressing thoughts & feelings – Planning ahead – Predicting consequences – Perspective taking – Grounding thinking in reality during times of stress • Compared to their peers, adolescent athletes are required to manage higher loads of stress while still developing important psychological capacities that help minimise stress....their environments are unique(cid:29).
Athletes have a unique mindset(cid:29)Pressures: Common Responses: • Expectations – • Difficulty concentrating Peers/coaches/parents/self • Difficulty sleeping • Workload – School/Training/Work • Lacking initiative or interest - procrastinating • Poor Performances • Difficulty communicating (or no communication/ withdrawal) with people – • Big decisions coach, family, friends • Injuries • Making mistakes • Easily angry/frustrated with self and others • Big competitions/intimidating opponents • Over-thinking things they have done or need to • Exams do • Lack of Balance life/sport/friends • Analysing self and abilities negatively • Relationships with coaches, team-mates • Angry at TIME – there is never enough • Romantic relationships • Feels scared about what will happen if can’t • Moving interstate meet everyone's expectations • Guilt over financial burden of sport • Unfavourable conditions/poor • Worried/pre-occupied with what others think of preparation/gear failure them • Substance misuse • Identity issues • Travel • Media harassment • DeselectionHealth & Wellbeing Personal issues Life balance Public expectation Other commitments Performance issuesWhat can coaches & others do • You are a model for your athlete’s thinking and behaviour – Work hard to ground your own thinking in reality • Consider how do you respond if your athlete doesn’t achieve? • Are you using evidence to guide your thinking? • Is your thinking based on the ‘big picture’?
– Promote flexibility in thinking (e.g., evaluating performances) – Reinforce and validate things done well (regardless of desired outcome) – Promoting the image of an ‘imperfect self’ • What does it mean if you make a mistake? • Michael Jordan shooting percentage = 30% approx.Responding to these issues …. (cid:1)(cid:1) TTaakkee aa wwhhoollee--ppeerrssoonn aapppprrooaacchh (cid:1)(cid:1) EEnnssuurree ssuuppppoorrtt (cid:1)(cid:1) TTeeaacchh ccooppiinngg ssttrraatteeggiieess (cid:1)(cid:1) GGrriieeff aanndd lloossss ccoouunnsseelllliinngg (cid:1)(cid:1) CCooggnniittiivvee rreessttrruuccttuurriinngg (cid:1)(cid:1) GGooaall sseettttiinngg//ppllaannnniinngg (cid:1)(cid:1) RReellaaxxaattiioonn (cid:1)(cid:1) RReessoouurrcceess//rreeffeerrrraall ooppttiioonnssWhat can parents & others do When asked what it is that they would most like from their parents in terms of support, most young athletes suggest encouragement and acceptance of their choices.
Australian Sports CommissionSports Psychologists can help you understand your role in the athlete-coach-parent team. Sports Psychologists can help you avoid the self-esteem- damaging mistakes made by well-meaning parents. Sports Psychologists are there to support the family networks as well as the athlete.Mental Toughness = Success The five C’s to Success : Commitment Concentration Communication Control ConfidenceCommitment - dedication and perseverance Ability Is What You Are Capable Of Doing Motivation Determines What You Do Attitude Determines How Well You Do It!Communication Verbal and non-verbal; listening; reading othersControl – focus on executing (which is controllable) and not the outcome (which is uncontrollable)Concentration – on the right thing at the right timeConfidence – your self-belief; more than just your abilitythank you!
Tracey Veivers Sport Psychologist www.performanceperspectives.com.au
ANXIETY AFFECTS SPORTS PERFORMANCE BY Shobha S Physical Education Director Bidadi, RamAnagara, Dist.Introduction: Anxiety is a mild fear reaction toward some stimulus. Anxiety is prevalent in even the best of athletes due to the immense pressures associated with professional sports.It is important to define certain terms related to the study of anxiety and performance. This is particularly important for studying anxiety because the stimulus is predictable and controlled in contrast to unpredictable and uncontrolled.
These operational definitions are important to note when reading studies that have been conducted (as you will see below) and when conducting your own studies. You should use these terms when writing about the studies you read about.Why do we get anxious/nervous? Why do we get nervous?
Everyone experiences anxiety and nervousness to some extent; however, this reaction is not always consistent with everyone. Essentially, when faced with this certain stimulus, the pituitary gland sends a signal to the adrenal gland on the kidney. Here, adrenaline is released.
Primarily, adrenaline will activate your fight or flight response increasing your heart rate, dilating your pupils, directing of blood and energy to the important organs of the body. There are degrees to which this response is activated. You can have minor fight or flight response (perhaps on a first date) or a more major one (from a attack).
This is the nervous feeling that we get.How Does Anxiety Affect Sports Performance? Performance anxiety is common in sports, as to some extent, fear of performance helps in achieving desired concentration. However, the excess will lead to a rush of adrenaline termed as anxiety.
Whenever athlet feel short of breath, sweating, shaking or high heart beat rate. will lose concentration, her/his actions become disjointed and athlet feel paralyzed at the beginning of an important sporting event. These are symptoms of performance anxiety athlet no longer feel confident in himself and do not believe that he will be able to accomplish anything successful.
To deal with such thoughts he must learn how to manage anxiety and to do so, it is imperative to understand how sports performance and anxiety are interrelated.Anxiety affects a sports players’ performance in physiological, cognitive and behavioral ways. If he suffer from anxiety before an important athletic competition, his sports performance will be affected. When athlet body is tense and blood pressure high, it is difficult for his body to move in a fluid and coordinated manner.
Athlet actions will be jerky and misplaced, affecting his performance in a negative manner. Listed below are the ways in which anxiety can affect sports performance.1. Fear When the athlet afraid of a certain situation, he may experience body paralysis once he find himself present in that situation.
This indicates severe anxiety. An example of this is when an athlete suffers from stage fright, which they may experience right before a large, public competition. When feeling overwhelming fear, the athlete may be unable to move, talk or act at all.2.
Unable to Concentrate Pre-competitive anxiety also develops as an inability to concentrate before an upcoming event or competition. The athlete is unable to concentrate on the task at hand and therefore cannot give their performance full attention. The root cause of the inability to concentrate is feelings of apprehension.
Apprehensions cause the individual to feel that they will fail or decrease their confidence in their ability.3. Sweating The anxiety makes the athlete over conscious of his situation and the apprehensions make him feel uneasy. As a result, the body may feel sudden bursts of heat and will release a lot of perspiration when the body receives signals from the brain.
Excessive sweating can occur anywhere on the body but mainly on the hands and the face. The individual will begin to feel uncomfortable and this merely reinforces the anxiety they are already feeling.4. Racing Heart As a result of anxiety the heart rate of an athlete may also increase manifold.
This may be due to the excessive release of adrenaline in the body. Increased heart rates are also related to panic. If the athletes become increasingly panicked, the heart rate will also increase.5.
Shortness of Breath Breathing very fast or panting(Breathless) is another symptom of anxiety. Sometimes the athletes experience a shortness of breath and struggle to take in oxygen. It is common for athletes to hyperventilate due to severe anxiety.
This in turn can deprive the brain of enough oxygen, which would lead to dizziness and/or fainting .6. Dizziness When an athlete is suffering from severe anxiety and is panicking, the brain may not receive as much blood and oxygen as it normally does. This results in dizziness, which if severe can result in the athlete fainting.
Feelings of dizziness can disable the athlete to such an extent that they may be unable to perform.7. Shaking Before a competition or important event, an athlete may experience severe shaking of the hands or knees. This is due to an increased spike of adrenaline in the body, which is brought on by severe anxiety.
If the anxiety persists, the body may collapse.How to Prevent Anxiety in Sports Performance: 1. Diaphragmatic Breathing The diaphragm is a muscle between the chest and the stomach cavity. The breathing done by contracting this muscle is known as diaphragmatic breathing.
It requires simple practice to learn and then it should be repeated several times daily. The link will guide you to learn the technique.2. Relaxation Technique When the athlete feels the symptoms of anxiety such as increased heart rate, increased blood pressure or difficult breathing, a relaxation technique can help in controlling the anxiety.
In one relaxation technique, the athlete is asked to lie down in a darkened room and think about relaxing his body from the outside inward. As a result, the blood pressure, breathing and hearth rate normalizes. If the anxiety attack is more severe, then massaging the body can relax the individual to a great extent .3.
Visualization Visualization is a technique, used by the athletes to control their anxiety. In this technique one visualizes himself in a situation similar to the actual event. The athlete visualizes himself winning in front of the entire crowd where the event is to take place.
Below are more ways you can use visualization to combat performance anxiety.Visualizing Yourself This is one of the exercises of visualization in which athlete visualizes themselves. The athlete is asked to visualize every physical aspect of their body with their eyes closed. While visualizing the body, the athlete tells himself that each of these body parts is fine and in good working condition.
Visualizing Game Another exercise requires the athlete to visualize the actual sport they are to play. The athlete visualizes the events starting from the preparations before going onto the field and the first move, and finally the victory.Visualizing Opponents So far, have visualized himself and game. In this exercise the athlete is now required to imagine how he sees his opponent playing.
While visualizing his opponent’s moves, he is supposed to tell himself that his moves are better than his opponent, and visualize how he should combat his opponents’ moves.4. Muscle Relaxation. Anxiety results in stiffness of the muscles.
Muscle relaxing practices are done to avoid this happening during the actual game. In this technique, the athlete tenses a particular muscle of the leg, abdomen, hands or face for 10 seconds with the eyes closed. After 10 seconds of tension, 20 seconds of relaxation should be practiced before moving to the next muscle.5.
Focusing on What Can Be Controlled Athletes should remind themselves that they are better trained; they have developed better techniques, but should not try to control things that are not in their control such as the audience or the opponent.Conclusion:- The anxiety has had a considerable impact on performance, it is important to consider other components of an athlete's functioning as well. The mental health model of Performance does this by using the Profile of Mood States. The peak performances are achieved by an individual who poses psychological states with high levels of vigor and low levels of tension, depression, anger, fatigue, and confusion.
Is one method for differentiating between successful and unsuccessful performers? It is therefore necessary to consider all aspects of an individual's psychological functioning if sport psychologies are to have a maximum impact.
Original Article Winning or Not Winning: The influence on Coach- Athlete Relationships and Goal Achievement RUI TROCADO MATA, ANTÓNIO RUI DA SILVA GOMES 1 University of Minho, School of Psychology, Portugal ABSTRACT Trocado, R. & Gomes, A.R. (2013).
Winning or Not Winning: The influence on Coach-Athlete Relationships and Goal Achievement. J. Hum.
Sport Exerc., 8(4), pp. 986-995. This study analyses the relation between sports success and athletes’ perception of coaches’ leadership, athletes’ satisfaction with coaches’ leadership, coach-athlete compatibility, and goal achievement.
Sixty-six athletes who qualified for the final Division I play-offs of a professional volleyball championship were grouped into winning (n = 21) and non- winning teams (n = 45). Leadership styles, satisfaction with leadership, coach-athlete compatibility, and goal achievement were evaluated. Analysis of variance with repeated-measures revealed that the winning teams evaluated their coaches’ vision, inspiration, technical instruction, positive feedback, and active management more positively than non-winning teams and that their satisfaction with coaches’ strategies increased over time.
A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) indicated that the winning teams’ perceived achievement of personal and team goals was greater than that of the non-winning teams. Sports success was associated with athletes’ positive evaluation of coaches’ leadership, satisfaction with coaches’ strategy, and higher perceived goal attainment. Key words: LEADERSHIP, COACHING, SATISFACTION, COMPATIBILITY, SPORTS PERFORMANCE.
1 Corresponding author. Universidade do Minho, Escola de Psicologia, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal. E-mail: rgomes@psi.uminho.pt Submitted for publication March 2013 Accepted for publication November 2013 JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE ISSN 1988-5202 © Faculty of Education.
University of Alicante doi:10.4100/jhse.2013.84.09 VOLUME 8 | ISSUE 4 | 2013 | 986Trocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE INTRODUCTION Coaches influence athletes’ sports experiences (Horn, 2008), such as athletes’ enjoyment, satisfaction, self-esteem, perceived competence, and performance. Conceptual sports leadership literature claims that coaches’ leadership is related to athletes’ psychological responses and sports performance (Chelladurai, 2007; Côté et al., 1995; Feltz et al., 1999; Horn, 2008; Jowett, 2007). A common feature of these proposals is that effective coaches generally produce positive outcomes in athletes through their leadership behaviours (Boardley et al., 2008) by influencing either athletes’ psychological responses (the psychological study of leadership) or athletic performance (the performance study of leadership).
However, in the sports literature psychological studies of leadership are more frequent than performance studies of leadership (Chelladurai, 2007; Horn, 2008). One reason for this imbalance is the relative difficulty of using performance outcome indicators for research purposes. For example, Courneya & Chelladurai (1991) have noted that most measures of sports performance, such as the percentage of wins to losses or championship classification at the end of the season, might be confounded due to external variables that coaches cannot control, such as the opponents’ winning potential, errors by officials, and individual decisions of team members.
Because of these external factors, it cannot be assumed that coaches are completely responsible for a team’s success (Mallett & Côté, 2006). These difficulties may not only explain the less evidence about the impact of leaders on the athletes and teams’ performance but also the scarce of findings about the possible influence of performance on the sport experiences of athletes and also on the way they evaluate their coaches. That is to say, not only research is limited on the influence of sport leadership on athletes’ performance but it is also limited on the possible influence of performance on the athletes’ reactions toward their coaches.
This aspect is somewhat surprising because outside of sport contexts there is evidence that leaders have an impact on the organizational performance (Day & Lord, 1988; Joyce et al., 2003; McGahan & Porter, 1997; Thomas, 1988) and may contribute to the success and survival of the organizations (Kaiser et al., 2008). In this way, Collins (2001) posit the necessity of more research about the way followers perceive leaders that achieve more success and performance. Given this need, this study analyzes whether achieving the best sport performance influence the way athletes evaluate their own performance and their coaches.
More specifically, it focuses on how winning or losing an important event can shape athletes' perceptions of their coach, and their own goal achievement. Because research data regarding the characteristics of leaders of winning teams and organizations are scarce, it would be worthwhile to determine the extent to which sports success – winning competitions or achieving the best sport performance – is related to athletes’ perception of their coaches’ leadership. If winning is not an effective way to evaluate coaches’ actions, then winning athletes should not evaluate their coaches’ leadership differently than athletes who do not win their competitions, and winning should not affect athletes’ psychological responses to their coaches’ leadership.
The current study addressed this issue by analyzing the extent to which sports success (i.e., winning a competition) was related to athletes’ evaluation of their coaches’ leadership, their satisfaction with their coaches’ leadership, their compatibility with their coach, and their achievement of personal and team goals. In this way, three hypotheses were tested. Hypothesis 1: athletes of teams with sport success will evaluate their coaches’ leadership styles more positively than athletes of teams without sport sucess.
This evaluation was based on the Multidimensional Scale of Leadership in Sports (MSLS; Gomes & Resende, 2012), which evaluates a broad range of 987 | 2013 | ISSUE 4 | VOLUME 8 © 2013 University of AlicanteTrocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE leadership features that are organized into three domains: transformational leadership (coaches’ influence on athletes’ technical, personal, and psychological characteristics), transactional leadership (coaches’ use of reinforcement and punishment to influence athletes’ behaviours), and decision-making leadership (coaches’ tendency to engage in active or passive decision-making). The MSLS integrates contemporary approaches to leadership that focus on the transformational and transactional impact of leaders as well as how they make and execute decisions (Bass, 1985). A key finding of this approach is that the effects of transformational leadership benefit followers’ psychological responses and performance more than other forms of leadership (Bass & Riggio, 2006).
Being so, in this study it was determined the extent to which sports success was related to how athletes evaluate their coaches in terms of transformational leadership, transactional leadership, and decision-making. Hypothesis 2: athletes of teams with sport success will exhibit more satisfaction with their coaches’ leadership and more coach-athlete compatibility than athletes of teams without sport success. The relation of these psychological dimensions to leadership was investigated because they are standard measures of coaches’ influence on athletes’ experiences.
More specifically, there is evidence that coaches’ actions positively affect athletes’ satisfaction with training and instruction, positive feedback, and social support (Horn, 2008). In the case of coach-athlete compatibility, it can be defined as the congruence between athletes’ and coaches’ goals, personalities, and beliefs (Williams et al., 2003), and empirical evidence indicates that athletes who perceive their coaches as more compatible tend to evaluate their coaches’ actions more favourably than athletes who regard their coaches as less compatible (Know & Williams, 1999). Thus, it would be worthwhile to analyze the extent to which these positive effects maintains when it is used as comparative criteria the sport success achieved by coaches and teams.
Hypothesis 3: athletes of teams with sport success will perceive greater personal and team goal achievement than athletes of teams without sport success. To test this hypothesis, athletes’ perception of personal and team goals achievement was evaluated to determine the extent to which successful sport results were associated with a greater perceived goal attainment. In addition to the other hypothesized relationships between sports success and athletes’ perception of their coaches’ leadership (hypothesis 1) and their psychological responses toward their coaches (hypothesis 2), we hypothesized that sports success will be also related to athletes’ perception of the achievement of personal and team goals.
If the hypothesis is confirmed this means that sports success represent a valid indicator to analyze the athletes’ perception of success in achieving personal and team goals, with obvious implications in the way they evaluate their coaches. Failure to confirm this hypothesis will indicate that using sport success to evaluate the differences in the leadership styles and in the psychological experiences of athletes may be questionable. That is to say, if there is no difference between successful and unsuccessful athletes in the perception of goal achievement, then athletes might use other information to assess the extent to which their personal and team goals were achieved, and this alternative source of information could be more relevant for evaluating coaches’ behaviour than sports success.
MATERIAL AND METHODS Participants Study participants were athletes who participated in the Division I professional volleyball championship, which is the most important volleyball competition in Portugal. Two major volleyball competitions occurred during the season: the national championship, which included only Division I teams, and the Portuguese Cup, which included nonprofessional teams at other levels of competition. The six teams that qualified for the final play-offs of the national championship participated in the present study; this also included the team VOLUME 8 | ISSUE 4 | 2013 | 988Trocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE that won the Portuguese Cup because this team also qualified for the national championship final play-offs.
The six teams (66 male athletes) were divided into two groups: the two teams who won the two major competitions (winning teams) that represent the athletes of teams with sport success (21 athletes, comprising 31.8% of the sample) and the four non-winning teams that represent the athletes of teams without sport success (45 athletes, comprising 68.2% of the sample). Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 38 years old (M = 27.2, SD = 5.04) for the winning teams and from 17 to 34 years old (M = 25.02, SD = 4.17) for the non-winning teams. Not all of the athletes were born in Portugal, but all of them spoke and read Portuguese language.
Instruments Multidimensional Scale of Leadership in Sports (MSLS; Gomes & Resende, 2012). This 36-item instrument, which evaluates coaches’ leadership behaviours, includes nine subscales, all of them with four items: (a) vision: coaches’ tendency to establish a positive and challenging future for the athletes; (b) inspiration: coaches’ encouragement of the athletes’ will to work hard in order to achieve the formulated goals (or vision) and being succeed; (c) technical instruction: coaches’ teaching methods and technical feedback to improve athletes’ skills; (d) personal respect: coaches’ tendency to treat athletes as persons and consider their feelings and needs in making decisions; (e) personal support: coaches’ tendency to develop informal and supportive relationships with athletes and to assist athletes with personal problems; (f) positive feedback: coaches’ reinforcement and recognition of athletes’ good performance and effort; (g) negative feedback: coaches’ behaviours that punish athletes’ inadequate performance; (h) active management: coaches’ promotion of athletes’ involvement in important aspects of training and competition; and (i) passive management: coaches’ avoidance or delay in bearing responsibility for decision-making when it is necessary to take critical decisions. In a previous study of futsal and soccer athletes (Gomes & Resende, 2012), confirmatory factor analysis demonstrated acceptable fit levels for the organisation of the leadership scales with second-order factors of transformational, transactional, and decision-making leadership; internal consistency was also acceptable (all α > .70).
Responses to the items were based on a 5-item Likert scale ranging from one (Never) to five (Always). For each scale, higher values indicated that coaches engaged in the behaviour more frequently. Athlete Satisfaction Questionnaire (ASQ; Riemer & Chelladurai, 1998; adapted by Gomes & Paiva, 2010).
The present study employed four subscales to assess athletes’ satisfaction with coaches’ leadership: (a) ability utilisation: athletes’ perception of the extent to which coaches used or maximised their skills and individual talents (five items); (b) strategy: athletes’ perception of coaches’ strategies and tactics during competition (6 items); (c) personal treatment: athletes’ perception of coaches’ personal treatment of each individual and that somehow affects the team indirectly (five items); and (d) training and instruction: athletes’ perception of the coaches’ training and instruction (three items). In an earlier study of handball athletes, Gomes, & Paiva (2010) observed acceptable internal consistency for all the scales (all α > .70), and a confirmatory factor analysis found acceptable levels of fit for the model of leadership with a second- order factor termed satisfaction with leadership and four correlated factors (Gomes & Resende, 2012). Responses to the items were based on a 7-item Likert scale ranging from one (Not at all satisfied) to seven (Extremely satisfied).
For each subscale, higher values indicated greater satisfaction with the coaches’ leadership style. Coach-Athlete Compatibility Measure (CACM; Gomes & Paiva, 2010). This instrument was based on the work of Kenow & Williams (1999) and Williams et al.
(2003), although the current study included five items rather than the one item originally proposed in these studies. This measure evaluated the overall compatibility between athletes and their coaches by determining the extent to which coaches’ behaviours, 989 | 2013 | ISSUE 4 | VOLUME 8 © 2013 University of AlicanteTrocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE goals, and personality/temperament were consistent with (a) athletes’ behaviours (one item), (b) athletes’ goals (one item), (c) athletes’ personalities/temperaments (two items), and (d) athletes’ beliefs/ideas (one item). A study of handball athletes (Gomes & Paiva, 2010) found that the scale exhibited acceptable internal consistency (α = .85), and a confirmatory factor analysis found acceptable levels of fit for the model that grouped the five items on the basis of the dimension of coach-athlete compatibility (Gomes & Resende, 2012).
Responses to the items were based on a 9-item Likert scale ranging from one (Not at all compatible) to nine (Highly compatible). Higher scores indicated greater compatibility between the coaches and athletes. Performance Goal Incongruence Scale (PGIS).
This measure was developed for this study being based on the work of Crocker & Graham (1995) and Pensgaard & Duda (2003). The scale evaluated the athletes’ perceived achievement of personal (three items) and team (three items) goals. More specifically, athletes responded to the instrument thinking the extent to which they had achieved their desired levels of personal and team performance at the end of the season.
Responses to the items were based on a 5-item Likert scale ranging from one (Disagree) to five (Agree). Higher scores indicated a greater perceived achievement of personal and team goals. For most of the scales used in this study, the internal consistency values were greater than .70.
However, coefficients above .60 were accepted for four of the MSLS scales (vision, personal support, negative feedback, and passive management) because these scales included only four items per scale (Cortina, 1993). Procedure The current study followed the ethical procedures outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the internal review board of Research Center of Psychology (University of Minho), and conformed to both National and European regulations on conducting research with human participants and on the management of personal data. Coaches and athletes were informed about the study’s goals and the Questionnaires’ administration procedures.
Athletes’ participation was voluntary, and their data remained confidential. Data collection occurred on two occasions: in the middle of the season (before the play-off games) and at the end of the season (after the play-off games). Fifteen athletes did not participate in the second data collection event because they had returned to their original countries.
Accounting for this attrition, the rate of participation in the study was 81.5%. Data Collection and Psychological Measures Data were collected on two separate occasions: before the national championship play-offs and after the play-offs. Because the teams winning the national championship and the Portuguese Cup were not known prior to the play-offs, the sample was only divided into two groups after the play-offs.
A minimum of three months elapsed between the two assessments. Prior to the play-offs, the athletes completed the MSLS, the ASQ, and the CACM. After the play-offs, athletes were re-administered these questionnaires and also completed the PGIS.
RESULTS Differences in Leadership, Satisfaction with Leadership and Coach-Athlete Compatibility Differences were assessed both before and after the play-offs using a 2 X 2 analysis of variance with repeated-measures with the MSLS, ASQ, and CACM as the dependent variables, time as the within- subjects factor, and group as the between-subjects factor. The multivariate tests identified four significant VOLUME 8 | ISSUE 4 | 2013 | 990Trocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE leadership dimensions: inspiration, Wilks’ λ = .90, F(1, 49) = 5.58, p < .05, η2 = .10; technical instruction, Wilks’ λ = .91, F(1, 49) = 4.70, p < .05, η2 = .09; positive feedback, Wilks’ λ = .83, F(1, 49) = 10.05, p < .01, η2 = .17; and active management, Wilks’ λ = .92, F(1, 49) = 4.49, p < .05, η2 = .08. It should also be noted marginally significant differences between groups for vision (p = .063), Wilks’ λ = .93, F(1, 49) = 3.61, p < .10, η2 = .07.
Tests of within-subjects effects found that whereas the winning teams’ perception of coaches’ vision, inspiration, technical instruction, positive feedback, and active management increased after the play- offs, the non-winning teams’ perception of these same variables decreased across the two time points (Table 1). With regard to satisfaction with leadership, the multivariate tests revealed significant values for satisfaction with strategy, Wilks’ λ = .91, F(1, 49) = 4.77, p < .05, η 2 = .09. Tests of within-subjects effects indicated that whereas the winning teams’ satisfaction with coaching strategy increased after the play-offs, the non-winning teams’ satisfaction with strategy decreased after the play-offs (Table 1).
No differences were found between the two groups regarding coach-athlete compatibility. Differences in Goal Achievement A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was performed for the two PGIS scales to compare the athletes’ perceptions of personal and team goals achievement for the two groups of teams. The two groups exhibited significant differences, Wilks’ λ = .74, F(2, 47) = 8.23, p < .01, η2 = .26.
Tests of between-subjects effects indicated that the winning teams’ perception of the achievement of personal goals, F(1, 48) = 4.95; p < .05 and team goals, F(1, 48) = 13.24; p < .001 was higher when compared with the non-winning teams. 991 | 2013 | ISSUE 4 | VOLUME 8 © 2013 University of AlicanteTrocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE Table 1. Differences between the winning teams and non-winning teams before and after the playoffs Before play-offs After play-offs Winning Non-winning Winning Non-winning Variables teams teams teams teams df F M (SD) M (SD) M (SD) M (SD) Transformational leadership MSLS: Vision 3.49 (.58) 3.79 (.66) 3.63 (.66) 3.57 (.70) (1,49) 3.61+ MSLS: Inspiration 3.55 (.49) 3.96 (.77) 3.60 (.73) 3.59 (.68) (1,49) 5.58* MSLS: Technical instruction 3.26 (.57) 3.81 (.60) 3.33 (.67) 3.54 (.57) (1,49) 4.70* MSLS: Personal respect 3.79 (.67) 3.84 (.64) 3.73 (.73) 3.66 (.60) (1,49) n.s.
MSLS: Personal support 2.36 (.46) 2.60 (.66) 2.49 (.70) 2.49 (.55) (1,49) n.s. Transactional leadership MSLS: Positive feedback 3.14 (.46) 3.42 (.71) 3.39 (.70) 3.21 (.69) (1,49) 10.05** MSLS: Negative feedback 2.22 (.71) 2.08 (.73) 2.77 (.58) 2.58 (.63) (1,49) n.s. Decision-making MSLS: Active management 2.50 (.69) 2.52 (1.02) 2.83 (.67) 2.35 (.87) (1,49) 4.49* MSLS: Passive management 2.41 (.52) 2.28 (.80) 2.22 (.66) 2.36 (.55) (1,49) n.s.
Satisfaction with leadership ASQ: Ability utilization 4.78 (1.09) 4.90 (1.30) 4.53 (1.42) 4.75 (1.25) (1,49) n.s. ASQ: Strategy 4.59 (1.17) 5.14 (.91) 4.79 (1.07) 4.79 (1.10) (1,49) 4.77* ASQ: Personal treatment 4.99 (1.26) 5.30 (1.11) 4.86 (1.44) 5.10 (1.12) (1,49) n.s. ASQ: Training and instruction 4.39 (1.23) 5.28 (1.16) 4.57 (1.32) 5.04 (1.16) (1,49) n.s.
Coach-athlete compatibility CACM: Coach-athlete compatibility 6.24 (1.22) 6.52 (1.43) 5.97 (1.53) 6.21 (1.35) (1,49) n.s. n.s. = not significant; +p < .10; *p < .05; **p < .01 VOLUME 8 | ISSUE 4 | 2013 | 992Trocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE DISCUSSION Lyle (2002) has criticized the claim that elite coaches’ performance should be evaluated based on athletes’ and teams’ performance outcomes.
However, understanding leaders’ effects on organizational performance (Kaiser et al., 2008) and the characteristics of successful leaders (Collins, 2001) is important for organizational survival in competitive and complex markets. This is also true for sports because athletes and teams compete for the same objective, and success or failure is a daily concern for both athletes and coaches. Thus, the current study was designed to analyze whether achieving sports success influence the athletes’ perceptions of coaches’ actions as well as athletes’ perceptions of personal and team goals achievement.
Regarding athletes’ evaluation of coaches’ leadership, the differences in the MSLS responses before and after the play-offs revealed that the winning teams evaluated more positively their coaches on five leadership dimensions and were more satisfied with their coaches’ strategy compared to the non-winning teams. Three of these leadership behaviours were transformational (vision, inspiration, technical instruction), and the other two represented positive dimensions of transactional leadership (positive feedback) and decision making (active management). This leadership profile – particularly in regard to transformational leadership – has been positively associated with organizational commitment (Rai & Sinha, 2000), work satisfaction and motivation (Hetland & Sandal, 2003; Kovjanic et al., 2012), and performance (DeGroot et al., 2000; Dumdum et al., 2002).
It should also be noted that these aspects of leadership are all related to task accomplishment because providing athletes with a challenging vision, technical instruction, encouraging athletes to work to achieve their goals, reinforcing athletes’ efforts, and involving athletes in decision making might promote success in sports. Conversely, the winning and non-winning teams did not exhibit significant differences in regard to the more socially oriented leadership dimensions of personal respect and personal support. Because failure to win did not appear to compromise the personal relationship between coaches and athletes, it is not surprising that the two groups did not differ in coach- athlete compatibility, and winning or not winning did not reduce athletes’ satisfaction with aspects of coaches’ leadership, such as ability utilisation, personal treatment, and training and instruction.
The only difference was that winning teams were more satisfied with coaches’ strategy than non-winning teams, a factor that might explain their sport success at the end of the season. The study results indicated that winning positively influenced athletes’ evaluation of their coaches, particularly in regard to factors related to transformational leadership and the successful management of sports tasks. It is important to note that research on other organizational contexts has found that these leadership behaviours positively affect group members’ performance and attitudes toward work (Harter et al., 2002; Judge et al., 2004).
The same results were observed for athletes’ perceptions of the achievement of personal and team goals. Winning teams evaluated more positively their personal and team goal achievement than non-winning teams. This is not surprising because by achieving the optimum sports outcome, athletes on the winning teams were more likely to realize their personal and team goals.
In addition, compared to athletes on non- winning teams, athletes on winning teams perceived that their coaches displayed a more positive and task- oriented leadership profile, which could also increase the probability of achieving personal and team goals. In conclusion, winning athletes evaluated more positively their coaches’ leadership, were more satisfied with their coaches’ strategy, and had greater perceived goal attainment than non-winning athletes; however, winning was not related to other aspects of satisfaction with leadership or coach-athlete compatibility. Because no differences were found between the two groups regarding most of the dimensions of satisfaction with coaches’ leadership and coach-athlete compatibility, future research should confirm the results of the current study by selecting additional psychological and performance measures 993 | 2013 | ISSUE 4 | VOLUME 8 © 2013 University of AlicanteTrocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE being also essential to include more teams and athletes in the sample.
This effort seems very important because it is critical to improve knowledge about the behaviour of successful coaches in order to enhance athlete and team performance. REFERENCES 1. Bass, B.M.
(1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: The Free Press.
2. Bass, B.M. & Riggio R.E.
(2006). Transformational leadership (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
3. Boardley, I.D., Kavussanu, M. & Ring, C.
(2008). Athletes’ perceptions of coaching effectiveness and athlete-related outcomes in rugby union: An investigation based on the coaching efficacy model. Sport Psychol, 22, pp.269-287 4.
Chelladurai, P. (2007). Leadership in sports.
In Tenenbaum, G., & Eklund R.C. (Eds.), Handbook of Sport Psychology (3rd ed.). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
5. Collins, J. (2001).
Good to great. New York: HarperCollins. 6.
Cortina, J.M. (1993). What is coefficient alpha?
An examination of theory and applications. J Appl Psychol, 78, pp.98-104 7. Cote, J, Salmela, J.H., Trudel, P., Baria, A.
& Russell, S. (1995). The coaching model: A grounded assessment of expert gymnastic coaches knowledge.
J Sport Exercise Psy, 17, pp.1-17. 8. Courneya, K.S.
& Chelladurai, P. (1991). A model of performance measures in baseball.
J Sport Exercise Psy, 13, pp.16-25 9. Crocker, P.R.E. & Graham, T.R.
(1995). Coping by competitive athletes with performance stress: Gender differences and relationships with affect. Sport Psychol, 9, pp.325-338 10.
Day, D.V. & Lord, R.G. (1988).
Executive leadership and organizational performance: Suggestions for a new theory and methodology. J Manage, 14, pp.453-464 11. Degroot, T., Kicker, D.S.
& Cross, C. (2000). A meta-analysis to review organisational outcomes related to charismatic leadership.
Can J Adm Sci, 17(4), pp.356-371 12. Dumdum, U.R., Lowe, K.B. & Avolio, B.J.
(2002). A meta-analysis of transformational and transactional leadership correlates of effectiveness and satisfaction: An update and extension. In Avolio, B.J., & Yammarino, F.J.
(Eds.), Transformational and charismatic leadership: The road ahead. Oxford, U.K: JAI/Elsevier. 13.
Feltz, D.L., Chase, M.A., Moritz, S.E. & Sullivan, P.J. (1999).
A conceptual model of coaching efficacy: Preliminary investigation and instrument development. J Educ Psychol, 91, pp.765-776 14. Gomes, A.R.
& Paiva, P. (2010). Liderança, compatibilidade treinador-atleta e satisfação no andebol: Percepção de atletas novatos e experientes [Leadership, coach-athlete compatibility and satisfaction in handball: Perceptions of novice and experienced athletes].
PsicoUSF, 15(2), pp.235- 248 15. Gomes, A.R. & Resende, R.
(2012). Assessing leadership styles of coaches and testing the augmentation effect in sport. Sumitted for publication.
16. Harter, J.K., Schmidt, F.L. & Hayes, T.L.
(2002). Business-unit-level relationship between employee satisfaction, employee engagement, and business outcomes: A meta-analysis. J Appl Psychol, 87, pp.268-279 17.
Hetland, H. & Sandal, G. (2003).
Transformational leadership in Norway: Outcomes and personality correlates. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 12(2), pp.147- 170. 18.
Horn, T.S. (2008). Coaching effectiveness in the sport domain.
In Horn, T.S. (Ed.), Advances in sport psychology (3rd ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
VOLUME 8 | ISSUE 4 | 2013 | 994Trocado & Gomes / Sport success and coach-athlete relationships JOURNAL OF HUMAN SPORT & EXERCISE 19. Jowett, S. (2007).
Interdependence analysis and the 3+1 Cs in the coach-athlete relationship. In Jowett, S. & Lavallee, D.
(Eds.), Social psychology in sport. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. 20.
Joyce, W.F., Nohria, N., & Roberson B. (2003). What really works.
New York: Harper Business. 21. Judge, T.A., Piccolo, R.F.
& Ilies, R. (2004).The forgotten ones? The validity of consideration and initiating structure in leadership research.
J Appl Psychol, 89, pp.36-51 22. Kaiser, R.B., Hogan, R. & Craig, S.B.
(2008). Leadership and the fate of organizations. Am Psychol, 63, pp.96-110 23.
Kenow, L.J. & Williams, J.M. (1999).
Coach-athlete compatibility and athlete’s perception and evaluative reactions to coaching behaviors. Journal of Sport Behavior, 22, pp.251-259 24. Kovjanic, S., Schuh, S.C., Jonas, K., Quaquebeke, N.V.
& Van Dick, R. (2012). How do transformational leaders foster positive employee outcomes?
A self-determination-based analysis of employees' needs as mediating links. J Organ Behav, 33(8), pp.1031-1052 25. Lyle, J.
(2002). Sports coaching concepts: A framework for coachesʼ behaviour. London: Routledge.
26. Mallett, C. & Côté, J.
(2006). Beyond winning and losing: Guidelines for evaluating high performance coaches. Sport Psychol, 20, pp.213-221 27.
Mcgahan, A.M. & Porter, M.E. (1997).
How much does industry matter, really? Strategic Manage J, 18, pp.15-30 28. Pensgaard, A.M.
& Duda, J.L. (2003). Sydney 2000: The interplay between emotions, coping, and the performance of Olympic-level athletes.
Sport Psychol, 17, pp.253-267 29. Rai, S. & Sinha, A.K.
(2000). Transformational leadership, organizational commitment, and facilitating climate. Psychological Studies, 45(1-2), pp.33-42 30.
Riemer, H.A. & Chelladurai, P. (1998).
Development of the athlete satisfaction questionnaire (ASQ). J Sport Exercise Psy, 20, pp.127-156 31. Thomas, A.
(1998). Does leadership make a difference to organizational performance? Admin Sci Quart, 33, pp.388-400 32.
Williams, J.M., Jerome, G.J., Kenow, L.J., Rogers, T., Sartain, T.A. & Darland, G. (2003).
Factor structure of the coaching behavior questionnaire and its relationships to athlete variables. Sport Psychol, 17, pp.16-34 995 | 2013 | ISSUE 4 | VOLUME 8 © 2013 University of Alicante
: Developing Talent Through a Growth Mindset Carol S. Dweck Stanford University Coaches are often frustrated and puzzled. They look back over issues, let me first answer some other questions that I am often their careers and realize that some of their most talented asked about the mindsets.
athletes—athletes who seemed to have everything-- never achieved success. Why? The answer is that these athletes didn’t have QuEsTIONs AbOuT ThE MINDsETs everything.
They didn’t have the right mindset. Which mindset is correct? Although abilities are always a product In my research, I have identified two mindsets that people can of nature and nurture, a great deal of exciting work is emerging have about their talents and abilities.
Those with a fixed mindset in support of the growth mindset. New work in psychology believe that their talents and abilities are simply fixed. They have and neuroscience is demonstrating the tremendous plasticity a certain amount and that’s that.
In this mindset athletes may of the brain—its capacity to change and even reorganize itself become so concerned with being and looking talented that they when people put serious labor into developing a set of skills. never fulfill their potential. Other groundbreaking work (for example, by Anders Ericsson) is showing that in virtually every field—sports, science, or the People with a growth mindset, on the other hand, think of talents arts—only one thing seems to distinguish the people we later call and abilities as things they can develop—as potentials that come geniuses from their other talented peers.
This one thing is called to fruition through effort, practice, and instruction. They don’t practice. believe that everyone has the same potential or that anyone can be Michael Phelps, but they understand that even Michael Phelps Are people’s mindsets related to their level of ability in the area?
wouldn’t be Michael Phelps without years of passionate and No, at least not at first. People with all levels of ability can hold dedicated practice. In the growth mindset, talent is something you either mindset, but over time those with the growth mindset build on and develop, not something you simply display to the appear to gain the advantage and begin to outperform their peers world and try to coast to success on.
with a fixed mindset. Almost every truly great athlete-- Michael Jordan, Jackie Joyner- Are mindsets fixed or can they be changed? Mindsets can be fairly Kersee, Tiger Woods, Mia Hamm, Pete Sampras-- has had a stable, but they are beliefs, and beliefs can be changed.
Later on, growth mindset. Not one of these athletes rested on their talent; I will describe workshops that have altered people’s mindsets and they constantly stretched themselves, analyzed their performance, had a real effect on their motivation and performance. and addressed their weaknesses.
In the recent Olympics, silver- How Do The Mindsets Work? The Mindset Rules medal swimmer Dara Torres (age 41) and gold-medal marathoner The two mindsets work by creating entire psychological worlds, Constantina Tomescu-Dita (age 38) defied myths about age and each world operates by different rules. through their training and dedication.
Rule #1. In a fixed mindset the cardinal rule is: Look talented at all Research has repeatedly shown that a growth mindset fosters costs. In a growth mindset, the cardinal rule is: Learn, learn, a healthier attitude toward practice and learning, a hunger for learn!
feedback, a greater ability to deal setbacks, and significantly better performance over time. How do the mindsets work and what can In our work with adolescents and college students, those with a coaches do to promote a growth mindset? Before addressing these fixed mindset say, “The main thing I want when I do my school  OLYMPIC COACH VOLUME 21 NUMBER 1U S O C work is to show how good I am at it.” When we give them a Rule #.
choice between a challenging task they can learn from and a task In a fixed mindset, the second rule is: Don’t work too hard or that will make them look smart, most of them choose to look practice too much. In a growth mindset, the rule is: Work with smart. Because they believe that their intelligence is fixed and they passion and dedication—effort is the key.
have only a certain amount, they have to look good at all times. Those with a growth mindset, on the other hand, say “It’s much Those with a fixed mindset believe that if you have natural talent, more important for me to learn things in my classes than it is to you shouldn’t need much effort. In fact, having to work hard get the best grades.” They care about grades, just as athletes care casts doubt on your ability.
I believe that this is why so many about winning the game, but they care first and foremost about enormously talented athletes never fulfill their potential. They are learning. As a group, these are the students who end up earning often the ones who have coasted along, winning with little effort, higher grades, even when they may not have had greater aptitude while the other athletes were sweating, struggling, and practicing.
originally. The fixed mindset “naturals” never learn to work, so that when they later reach their limits, they cannot cope. From Michael Our studies show that it is precisely because of their focus Lewis’ wonderful book, Moneyball, we all know the story of the on learning that growth mindset students end up with higher super-talented Billy Beane, who was a colossal failure in the major performance.
They take charge of the learning process. For leagues because he didn’t think he should have to learn or try. example, they study more deeply, manage their time better, and keep up their motivation.
If they do poorly at first, they find out Those with a growth mindset know they have to work hard, and why and fix it. they enjoy it. They understand that effort is what ignites their ability and causes it to grow over time.
We have found that mindsets play a key role in how students adjust when they are facing major transitions. Do they try to take I get letters from former child prodigies in many fields. They advantage of all the resources and instruction available, or do were led to expect that because of their talent, success would they try to act as though they don’t care or already know it all?
automatically come their way. It didn’t. In the world of Olympic In a study of students entering an elite university, we found that sports, we do not do our young athletes a favor by allowing them students with a fixed mindset preferred to hide their deficiencies, to believe that great talent alone will transport them to the medal rather than take an opportunity to remedy them—even when the stand.
deficiency put their future success at risk.  OLYMPIC COACH VOLUME 21 NUMBER 1U S O C Recently we conducted a small study of college soccer players. We a growth mindset, in which they sought and enjoyed challenges found that the more a player believed athletic ability was a result and remained highly motivated even after prolonged difficulty.
of effort and practice rather than just natural ability the better Thus coaches might do well to focus their athletes on the process that player performed over the next season. What they believed of learning and improvement and to remove the emphasis from about their coaches’ values was even more important. The athletes natural talent.
A focus on learning and improvement tells athletes who believe that their coaches prized effort and practice over not only what they did to bring about their success, but also what natural ability were even more likely to have a superior season. they can do to recover from setbacks. A focus on talent does not.
Rule #. We have also directly taught students the growth mindset. We In a fixed mindset, the third rule is: When faced with setbacks, have been developing a software program, called Brainology, in run away or conceal your deficiencies.
In a growth mindset, which students learn all about the brain and how to make it work the rule is: Embrace your mistakes and confront your better. Further, they learn that every time they stretch themselves deficiencies. and learn something new, their brain forms new connections, and over time they increase their intellectual ability.
Research has We have found over and over that a fixed mindset does shown repeatedly that teaching students the growth not give people a good way to recover from setbacks. mindset strongly enhances their motivation and After a failure, fixed-mindset students say things their achievement. like “I’d spend less time on this subject from Research has shown now on” or “I would try to cheat on the next repeatedly that teaching students Coaches can identify their fixed mindset test.” They make excuses, they blame others, athletes by asking them to agree or disagree the growth mindset strongly and they make themselves feel better by with statements like this: “You have a certain looking down on those who have done worse.
enhances their motivation and level of athletic ability, and you cannot really Everything but face the setback and learn their achievement. do much to change that;” “Your core athletic from it. ability cannot really be changed;” and “You can learn new things, but you can’t really change It was so interesting to see in the last Olympics how your basic athletic ability.” They can also ask their many champions prevailed in events that were at some athletes to complete this equation: Athletic ability is ____% point not their strong suit.
Chris Hoy, the Scottish gold medal natural talent and ____% effort/practice. They can then work on cyclist saw his specialty eliminated from the Olympics and had fostering a growth mindset in their players who place an undue to reinvent himself. He did not sit and lament his fate or blame emphasis on fixed ability.
others; he got to work. whAT AbOuT COAChEs’ MINDsETs? hOw ARE MINDsETs COMMuNICATED?
Of course, coaches themselves can have a fixed mindset. These Mindsets can be taught by the way we praise. In many studies, coaches may convey to their teams that they value natural talent we have gotten a very surprising result.
Praising children’s or above all, they may spend little time with the athletes they deem adolescents’ intelligence or talent puts them into a fixed mindset less talented, and they may be intolerant of feedback from others with all of its defensiveness and vulnerability. Instead of instilling (since they may see feedback as impugning their own ability). confidence, it tells them that we can read their intelligence or Research by Peter Heslin and his colleagues shows that business talent from their performance and that this what we value them managers with a fixed mindset have qualities like this.
However, for. After praising their intelligence or talent, we found that after workshops that teach them a growth mindset, these same students wanted a safe, easy task not a challenging one they could managers are more eager to help their employees develop and learn from. They didn’t want to risk their “gifted” label.
Then, become more receptive to feedback from others. after a series of difficult problems, they lost their confidence and enjoyment, their performance plummeted, and almost 40% of A growth mindset coach is also more likely to foster teamwork them later lied about their scores. What should we praise?
and team spirit. When a coach has a fixed mindset, players will be eager to impress the coach with their talent and will vie to be the We found that praising students’ effort or strategies (the process superstar in the coaches’ eyes. However, if athletes know that their they engaged in, the way they did something) put students into  OLYMPIC COACH VOLUME 21 NUMBER 1U S O C coach values passion, learning, and improvement, these are things effort, improvement (and teamwork), not simply natural talent, that players can work together to produce.
and present themselves as mentors and not just talent judges. CONClusION When coaching staffs have a fixed mindset, their job is simply to find the talent. When they have a growth mindset, their job At the level of the player, a growth mindset allows each individual is to inspire and promote the development of talent.
It is in this to embrace learning, to welcome challenges, mistakes, and mindset, I believe, that they will nurture a new generation full of feedback, and to understand the role of effort in creating talent Olympic athletes the likes of Michael Phelps and Nastia Liukin, athletes who love their sport and bring it to the highest level. At the organizational level, a growth mindset is fostered when coaching staffs present athletic skills as acquirable, value passion, Carol S. Dweck is Professor of Psychology at Stanford University and author of Mindset: The New Psychology of Success.
DIAGRAM Of MINDsETs by NIGEl hOlMEs  OLYMPIC COACH VOLUME 21 NUMBER 1
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 5th ASEAN Conference on Psychology, Counselling, and Humanities (ACPCH 2019) Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 5th ASEAN Conference on Psychology, Counselling, and Humanities (ACPCH 2019) Human Problems: Competitive Anxiety in Sport Performer and Various Treatments to Reduce It Umilatul Hasanah Niken Refanthira University of Muhammadiyah Malang University of Muhammadiyah Malang umilatulhasanahila@gmail.com rfnthr04@gmail.com Abstract: In the field of sports, one of the psychological factors that hinder the athlete's optimal performance is excessive anxiety. Anxiety associated with a competitive or competition situation is called competitive anxiety. Treatment is important so that athletes can reduce competition anxiety and optimize their performance in competition.
This article discusses the interventions that have been carried out by previous studies to reduce competition anxiety in athletes. The method used is systematic review. Literature criteria used interventions to reduce competition anxiety in athletes.
There are 23 works of literature in the form of articles and journals that meet the selection criteria, which were analyzed and translated descriptively. The results of the literature review showed that Self-talk, Guide Imagery, Yoga, Relaxation and Mindfulness proved effective in reducing competitive anxiety in athletes with some similarities in the subject's age criteria, the subject's sports type, and other factors. The treatments were even more effective when combined, such as a combination of relaxation and imagery, or a combination of self-talk, imagery, and relaxation.
Keywords: treatment, competitive anxiety, athletes Introduction with his appearance. For example, the athlete has a Everyone has the risk of experiencing fear of failing in the match or has the moral burden if psychological disorders at each stage of his life, such he does not win the match (Husdarta, 2010). as stress, depression and anxiety (Ifdil, B Khairul, Anxiety is an emotion that arises because of the 2015).
Anxiety is often experienced by athletes, both interpretation and assessment of the situation at hand amateur and elite sports athletes, either young or (Cox, 2007). In the context of sports, anxiety or mature athletes. In this case, even though an athlete negative emotions usually arise in response to has worked hard, trained and prepared a mature competitive pressures.
The game can indeed cause strategy, the athlete may not be able to show optimal excessive emotional pressure so that the concentration performance. In this case, the focus on physical of athletes to face the opponent will be reduced. This training and the right strategy alone cannot encourage means that the performance of the athlete decreases, an athlete to show optimal performance.
Coaches and accuracy will also decrease, thus affect the athletes must be aware that psychological aspects can performance of the athlete. Anxiety associated with a also play an important role in athlete performance. competition or competitive situation is commonly Psychology is considered as one of the key factors to referred to as competitive anxiety (Mellalieu, Hanton, achieve optimal performance and well being in sports & Fletcher, 2006).
(Dosil, 2006). Competitive anxiety consists of cognitive and In line with the description above, 80% of somatic subcomponents. The cognitive component of professional athlete victories are determined by anxiety arises due to fear of negative evaluations of psychological factors, which have a very important the social environment, fear of failure, and lack of role in helping the athletes pursue high achievements self-esteem (Martens, Vealey, & Burton, 1990).
The (Adisasmito, 2007). Jimmy Connors, a former world somatic component of anxiety is a physiological number one also stated that 95% of professional tennis response from these perceptions such as increased games are mental factors (Maksum, 2012). heart rate, respiration, and muscle tension.
Physical Anxiety is one of the psychological factors that symptoms arise due to the influence of psychological determine the athlete's motivation in the psychological symptoms, which then cause anxiety in the athletes aspects of the athlete. Competitive anxiety in athletes before competing in a game and thus prevent him to occurs before athletes compete in a game and during show his best performance (Lavallee, Kremer, Moran, matches, which affect an athlete's peak performance. & Williams, 2004).
Mahoney and Avener suggested that if an athlete Swain & Jones (Cox, 2007) states that before the wants to achieve optimal performance, he must have game starts, the level of somatic and cognitive anxiety the ability to overcome his anxiety (Satiadarma, 2000). will increase. With the start of the match, somatic The Anxiety that occurs in athletes usually interferes anxiety will decrease, but cognitive anxiety tends to Copyright © 2020 The Authors.
Published by Atlantis Press SARL. This is an open access article distributed under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/). 144Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 vary depending on the conditions of the ongoing anxiety disorders in sports that affect action in game.
High anxiety will interfere with athlete's competition, such as feeling hopeless, reckless, and performance because it makes the athlete difficult to having self-doubt. control the rhythm of the game, unable to regulate the The third aspect is somatic. It is a perceptual event timeliness of reacting, difficult to regulate muscle of physiological excitement in an individual reflecting contraction, and feel tired too quickly.
It also reduces symptoms and anxiety disorders in exercising so that it ability and accuracy of reading the opponent's game, affects actions in competition, such as heart and encourages the athlete to make decisions hastily palpitations, urination, cold sweating, and difficulty and make movements without conscious mind control sleeping. (Satiadarma, 2000). The last aspect is motoric, that is, a physical Based on the explanation above, one of the occurrence (muscles) in individuals that improperly psychological factors that hinder the athlete's optimal reflect symptoms and anxiety disorders in sports so performance is competitive anxiety.
For this reason, that it affects actions in competition, such as face and psychological treatments are important to optimize the forehead wrinkle, trembling, feeling heavy in the feet, performance of the athletes in the competition so that scratching head repeatedly, and aching muscles. The the athletes can release their optimal performance in factors that influence competitive anxiety in athletes the competition. Because excessive anxiety has include fear of failure in a match, fear of social become a major barrier to athlete performance (Cox et consequences for the quality of performance, fear of al.
1993; Ortiz 2006), so the purpose of this study is to injury or injury of an opponent, physical fear of not conduct a review of previous studies related to being able to complete their duties to compete interventions that has proven effective in reducing the properly, and demands to change something without competitive anxiety in athletes. training (Cox, 2003). Competitive Anxiety Discussions Competitive anxiety is an athlete's negative Based on the literature review, below are several emotional reaction when his self-esteem is felt treatments undertaken to reduce competitive anxiety threatened because he considers the match to be a felt by athletes that proved effective.
Not all of the formidable challenge, and will always remember his following treatments are psychological treatments. performance abilities, which have an impact on 1. Imagery.
It is a cognitive intervention technique competitive behavior (Smith, Smoll, & Schutz, 1990). where an individual uses all of his senses to create or Anxiety is interpreted in two ways, namely anxiety felt re-create experiences in his mind (Vealey & by athletes at a certain time, for example before the Greenleaf, 2001). In the field of sports, there have match (state anxiety), or anxiety felt because athletes been many studies on the effectiveness of imagery in are classified as anxious (trait anxiety) (Husdarta, reducing competitive anxiety.
Imagery was found to 2010). be effective in reducing competitive anxiety, Based on the description above, it can be especially in young athletes aged 12 to 19 years concluded that competitive anxiety is an athlete's (Bagherpour, Hashim, Saha, & Ghosh, 2012; Nguyen behavior towards negative emotional reactions, such & Brymer, 2018; VA Parnabas & Mahamood, 2011; as anxiety, worry, uneasiness, tension, and fear when V. Parnabas, Mahamood, Parnabas, 2012 & Meera his pride is threatened and considers the match as Abdullah, 2014; Quinton, Cumming, Allsop, Gray, & something dangerous that results in defeat.
Williams, 2018). Psychologically, anxiety is an unpleasant feeling and 2. Self Talk.
It is one’s talk with himself by speaking is the personality of the athlete (trait anxiety) and loudly and from within (Morris, & Andersen, 2007). subjective feelings from outside the athlete (state Several studies have shown that self-talk can anxiety). overcome competitive anxiety in athletes in the field Competitive anxiety has four measurable aspects of sports (Kanniyan, 2015; Georgakaki & (Smith et al., 1990), namely cognitive, affective, Karakasidou, 2017; Hatzigeorgiadis, Galanis, & somatic, and motoric.
Theodorakis, 2014; Khabiri, Ali Moghadam Zadeh, Cognitive is an event in the mind of an individual Kalash, Asadi, & Mehrsafar , 2018; Lotfi, Tahmasebi, that reflects symptoms and anxiety disorders in & Rabavi, 2016; Walter, Nikoleizig, & Alfermann, exercising so that it affects actions in competition, 2019). Self-talk consists of three types, namely such as being unable to concentrate, thinking about positive, negative and neutral (Hatzigeorgiadis et al., unrelated things, and negative thoughts that disturb 2014). Among these self-talk, positive self-talk is used concentration.
to reduce anxiety in athletes. In contrast, negative self- The second aspect is affective, that is, an event in talk must be avoided to improve the performance of an individual's feelings that reflects symptoms and athletes (Lotfi et al., 2016). Not only in elite athletes, 145Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 self-talk is also effective in reducing anxiety in junior Intervention Integration athletes and young athletes (Abdussalam Kanniyan, Some of the literature reviewed above related to 2015).
reducing competitive anxiety in athletes showed that 3. Relaxation is one of the methods used to overcome treatments would be even more effective if they are competitive anxiety in athletes. This type of integrated.
This has indeed received the attention of progressive muscle relaxation was found effective to researchers and practitioners for a long time with reduce anxiety in athletes (Ali, 2015; Bagherpour et evidence of the discovery of research from several al., 2012; Kaur & Singh, 2016; Navaneethan, Ph, & years ago. A study found that athletes of all ages and Soundara, 2010). Although muscle relaxation can skill levels feel greater benefits by integrating several reduce competitive anxiety in athletes, progressive criteria in overcoming their psychological problems, muscle relaxation can be even more effective if used including anxiety of competition.
in conjunction with guide imagery (Bagherpour et al., A recent study shows that mental imagery with 2012). Whereas, in other studies, it was found that documentary analysis method greatly reduces athlete's relaxation by listening to relaxing music was able to anxiety and improves athlete performance, especially control and reduce the anxiety in athletes (Elliot, if other psychological strategies such as self-talk, Polman, & Taylor, 2012). In addition to relaxation, relaxation, and goal setting are included in this Yoga has also proven effective in reducing technique (Mousavi & Meshkini, 2011).
The competitive anxiety in athletes (Kusuma & Bin, 2017; integration of the use of progressive muscle relaxation C. Smith, Hancock, Blake mortimer, & Eckert, 2007). and imagery can also reduce cognitive and somatic However, the application of yoga in the field of sports anxiety while increasing confidence in athletes psychology is very limited.
Only a few researchers (Bagherpour, Hashim, Saha, & Ghosh, 2012). have examined the effectiveness of yoga to overcome competitive anxiety in athletes. Conclusion 4.
Mindfulness. Research results show that effective It can be concluded that Self-talk, Guide Imagery, mindfulness can reduce competitive anxiety in athletes Yoga, Relaxation and Mindfulness prove effective in (Baltzell, Caraballo, Chipman, & Hayden 2014; reducing competitive anxiety in athletes, especially Gardner & Moore, 2004; Noetel, Zanden, & Lonsdale, when combined and used together, such as a 2017; Rivera, Quintana, & Rincón, 2014; Zadkhosh & combination of relaxation and imagery, or a Hemayattalab, 2019; Permadi & Nurwianti, 2018 combination of self-talk, imagery and relaxation. (Noetel et al., 2017).
Although mindfulness therapy is not intended to reduce anxiety, it can actually reduce References the level of anxiety (Gardner & Moore, 2004). The Kanniyan, A. (2015).
Competitive state anxiety: mindfulness skills of athletes are related to their Impact of positive self talk training on junior level abilities to resolve negative emotions and increase football players. Sport Mont, XIII(43-44–45), 42– focus when facing competition, thereby reducing their 49. level of competitive anxiety (Baltzell, Caraballo, Adisasmito, L.
(2007). Mental juara modal atlet Chipman, & Hayden, 2014). In addition to berprestasi.
Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada. neurofeedback, mindfulness proved even more Ali, K. (2015).
The effectiveness of progressive effective in reducing anxiety in soccer players muscle relaxation to reduce the intensity of (Zadkhosh & Hemayattalab, 2018 ). competitive sport anxiety among the elite layers A study found that mindfulness did not show a football. Research Journal of Physical Education significant change in depression and anxiety reduction, Sciences, 3(2), 4–8.
but could still cause an increase in depression mean Bagherpour, T., Hashim, H. A., Saha, S., & Ghosh, A. scores and anxiety scales at the post workshop and K.(2012).
Effects of progressive muscle relaxation follow-up time points. It is assumed that mindfulness and internal imagery on competitive state anxiety can help symptoms of depression and anxiety, but inventory–2R among taekwondo athletes. further studies with a greater number of cases and International Conference on Education and control groups are needed to provide more evidence Management Innovation, 30, 218–224.
(Chen, Tsai, Lin, Chen, & Chen, 2019). https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.2184.4161. Baltzell, A, Caraballo, N., Chipman, K., & Hayden, L.
(2014). A qualitative study of mindfulness meditation training for sport: Division I female soccer players’ experiences. Journal of Clinical Sport Psychology, 8, 221-244.
https://doi.org/10.1123/jcsp.2014-0030. Chen, J.H., Tsai, P., Lin, Y., Chen, C., & Chen, C. 146Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 (2019).
Mindfulness training enhances flow state Journal of Academic Research in Business and and mental health among baseball players in Social Sciences, 1(3), 2222–6990. Taiwan. Psychology Research and Behavior Navaneethan, B., Ph, D., & Soundara, R.
(2010). Management, 12, 15–21. Effect of progressive muscle relaxation training on Cox, R.
H. (2003). Sport psychology: Concepts and competitive anxiety of male inter-collegiate applications (sixth edit).
Australia: Mc-Graw-Hill volleyball players. International Journal of Sports International edition. Science and Engineering, 4(3), 161–164.
Elliott, Dave., Polman, Remco, & Taylor, Julie. https://doi.org/10.26524/13417. (2012).
The effects of relaxing music for anxiety Nguyen, J., & Brymer, E. (2018). Nature based guided control on competitive sport anxiety.
European imagery as an intervention for state anxiety. Journal of Sport Science , 14. Frontiers in Psychology, 9(OCT), 1–10.
doi.org/10.1080/17461391.2012.693952. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01858. Gardner, F.
L., & Moore. Z. E.
(2004). A mindfulness Noetel, M., Zanden, B. Van, & Lonsdale, C.
(2017). acceptance-commitment-based approach to athletic Mindfulness and acceptance approaches to sporting performance enhancement: Theoretical performance enhancement : a systematic review considerations. Behavior Therapy, 35, 707-723.
International Review of Sport and Exercise Georgakaki, S. K., & Karakasidou, E. (2017).
The Psychology A systematic review. International effects of motivational self-talk on competitive Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 11. anxiety and self-compassion: A brief training https://doi.org/10.1080/1750984X.2017.1387803.
program among competitive swimmers. Parnabas, V. A., & Mahamood, Y.
(2011). Anxiety Psychology, 8(5), 677–699. and imagery of green space among athletes.
3rd https://doi.org/10.4236/psych.2017.85044. ISESEE 2011 - International Symposium and Hatzigeorgiadis, A., Galanis, E., & Theodorakis, Y. Exhibition in Sustainable Energy and (2014).
Self-talk and Competitive Sport Environment, 9, 165–167. Performance. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, https://doi.org/10.1109/ISESEE.2011.5977126.
26(January), 82–95. Permadi, D., & Nurwianti, F. (2018).
Mindfulness and https://doi.org/10.1080/10413200.2013.790095 coping skills as predictors of competitive anxiety Kaur, S., & Singh, A. (2016). Comparative analysis of amongst athletes in Indonesia.
Anima Indonesian progressive muscle relaxation training and Yog Psychological Journal, 33(4), 231–240. Nidra training effect on anxiety of athletes. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.24123/aipj.v33i4.1 International Journal of Applied Research 2016; 796.
2(8): 377-379 ISSN, 2(8), 377–379. Quinton, M. L., Cumming, J., Allsop, J., Gray, R., & Khabiri, M., Ali Moghadam Zadeh, Kalash, R.
M., Williams, S. E. (2018).
Imagery meaning and Asadi, A., & Mehrsafar, A. H. (2018).
The effect content in golf: Effects on performance, anxiety, of positive self-talk intervention on and confidence. International Journal of Sport and psychophysiological responses of competitive Exercise Psychology, 16(4), 382–397. anxiety and self-confidence in elite athletes.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1612197X.2016.1242150. Neuropsychology, 3 No 4(August), 93–102. Rivera, O., Quintana, M., & Rincón, M.
E. (2014). Kusuma, D.
W. Y., & Bin, W. (2017).
Effect of yoga Effects of mindfulness on sport , exercise and program on mental health : competitive anxiety in physical activity : A systematic review . Online semarang badminton athletes. Jurnal Kesehatan Open Science in Mindfulness., 77(June 2011), 1–7.
Masyarakat, 13(1), 121–130. Smith, C., Hancock, H., Blake mortimer, J., & Eckert, https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.15294/ K.(2007). A randomised comparative trial of yoga kemas.v13i1.9862.
and relaxation to reduce stress and anxiety. Lavallee, D., Kremer, J., Moran, A. P., & Williams, Complementary Therapies in Medicine Journal, M.
(2004). Sport psychology: Contemporary 15(June), 77–83. themes.
New York: palgrave macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctim.2006.05.001. Lotfi, G., Tahmasebi, F., & Rabavi, A.
(2016). The Smith, R. E., Smoll, F.
L., & Schutz, R. W. (1990).
impact of instructional and motivational self-talk Measurement and correlates of sport-specific on cognitive anxiety , somatic anxiety , and cognitive and somatic trait anxiety: The sport learning of soccershoot skill in beginner players. anxiety scale. Anxiety Research, 2(4), 263–280.
International Journal of Advanced Biotechnology https://doi.org/10.1080/08917779008248733. and Research (IJBR, 7(4–07), 543–549. Walter, N., Nikoleizig, L., & Alfermann, D.
(2019). Mousavi, S. H., & Meshkini, A.
(2011). The effect of Effects of self-talk training on competitive anxiety, mental imagery upon the reduction of athletes self-efficacy, volitional skills, and performance: anxiety during sport performance. International An intervention study with junior sub-elite athletes 147Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 395 NadjaWalter.
Sport Journal, 1(june), 1–20. athletic performance enhancement of young https://doi.org/10.3390/sports7060148. football players.
8(11) . Zadkhosh, S. M., & Hemayattalab, R.
(2019). The https://doi.org/10.22089/spsyj.2019.3167.1325 effects of mindfulness on anxiety decrease and 148
